S/PV.8645

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8645th meeting

Thursday, 24 October 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Matjila. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(South Africa)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Moriko
Ms. Morrison González
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Almunayekh
Mr. Duclos
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Allen
Mr. Barkin

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolutions 2139
(2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2401
(2018) and 2449 (2018) (S/2019/820)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-33336 (E)
*1933336*

S/PV.8645

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

the United Nations and international humanitarian law.
Civilians and civilian infrastructure must be protected.
Safe, rapid and unimpeded humanitarian access must be
allowed so that United Nations and other humanitarian
organizations can carry out their critical work.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258
(2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2401 (2018) and
2449 (2018) (S/2019/820)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Ursula
Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator;
Mr. Mohamed Khaled Khiari, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Middle East, Asia and the Pacific; and
Ms. Agnès Marcaillou, Director of the United Nations
Mine Action Service in the Department of Peace
Operations.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/820, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191
(2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2401
(2018) and 2449 (2018).
I now give the floor to Ms. Mueller.
Ms. Mueller: The humanitarian situation in Syria
has seen some significant changes since I briefed the
Council in September (see S/PV.8622). My briefing
today will focus on three operational areas: first, the
deeply concerning and rapidly unfolding situation in
north-eastern Syria; secondly, the continuing crisis in
north-western Syria; and thirdly, an update on Rukban.
I will also give an outlook for the coming weeks.
The Secretary-General has expressed his grave
concerns about the escalation of the conflict in the northeast and emphasized that any military operation must
fully respect international law, including the Charter of
2/28

24/10/2019

Since the beginning of military operations by
the Turkish armed forces and allied non-State armed
groups in north-eastern Syria earlier this month, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights has received concerning reports
of civilian casualties and damage to critical civilian
infrastructure. The military operation has severely
impacted the humanitarian situation. The United
Nations has received assurances from the Government
of Turkey that every effort is being made to ensure the
protection of civilians and the infrastructure on which
they rely.
The hostilities have triggered large-scale population
movements. In the past two weeks, almost 180,000
people, including nearly 80,000 children, have fled
south from the border areas between Turkey and Syria.
People must be allowed to seek safety and move freely.
Most are sheltering with friends and family, while
others are in displacement camps or collective shelters.
Given the fact that fighting has subsided in some areas
in recent days, some of those displaced have started to
return. More than 10,000 people have fled to Iraq since
the start of the military operations in the north-east.
The United Nations remains deeply concerned about
the prospects of further hostilities along the TurkishSyrian border and the impact on civilians, including
further displacements.
The latest surge in hostilities in north-eastern Syria
compounds an already dire humanitarian situation.
Of the 3 million people in the north-east, 1.8 million
were already in need of some form of humanitarian
assistance even before the recent developments. About
710,000 people have been displaced. Prior to the
escalation, the United Nations and its partners were
reaching 1.25 million people on average every month
with lifesaving assistance such as food, shelter, water,
sanitation, hygiene and health care.
Humanitarian actors continue to deliver, despite
facing serious challenges on the ground, including
hostilities and an unpredictable security environment.
Many organizations work cross-border from Iraq. They
have had to evacuate or relocate international staff. Some
have had to temporarily limit or suspend operations
19-33336

24/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East

due to the deteriorating security situation and concerns
about access because of new parties gaining control of
the areas where they operate. Organizations operating
cross-border from Iraq nevertheless continue to provide
humanitarian assistance, including trauma care, support
to health services and sustaining water supplies. While
national staff continue to work tirelessly to assist those
in need, their capacity is stretched.
To meet immediate needs, the United Nations has,
since 9 October, provided food to more than 286,000
people across Hasakah and Raqqa governorates as
well as 10 tons of medicine to Qamishli national
hospital. Winter supplies are being provided to the
most vulnerable.
Safe water, sanitation and hygiene efforts continue
and the polio campaign is ongoing, with the support of
the United Nations Children’s Fund. The United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, together with the
International Organization for Migration, is supporting
people arriving in Iraq with shelter, core relief items
and protection services. There have also been efforts
to ensure that stocks are in place to scale up as needed.
The World Food Programme is ensuring that there is
food on hand for approximately 500,000 people for one
month. In Qamishli, the World Health Organization is
pre-positioned 314,000 medical treatments, including
trauma kits that will be distributed to medical facilities
in the area.
Following the United Nations engagement with the
Government of Turkey, a technical team comprising
Syrian Arab Red Crescent and local water and
electricity department technicians was able to access
the Allouk water station, which provides water to over
400,000 people across Hasakah, and to temporarily
restore the water flow after it was put out of service
in the hostilities. They also restored electricity in Ras
Al-Ayn. These are significant achievements but no
substitute for sustained services, which can be ensured
only if the parties take all feasible precautions to avoid
civilian harm and ultimately put an end to the hostilities.
Continued access to the facilities will be necessary to
keep them functioning in the coming days and weeks.
Hundreds of thousands of civilians depend on them.
As the situation evolves, a critical challenge facing
humanitarian actors is the need to scale operations from
within Syria. To achieve this, we will need all parties
to facilitate safe, rapid and unimpeded humanitarian
access via land and air routes to transport humanitarian

S/PV. 8645

supplies along with an expansion of humanitarian
capacity in the north-east. United Nations leadership
on the ground is working with all relevant parties to
achieve this. The Syria Humanitarian Fund, supported
by 16 donors, is planning a $15-million allocation for
the north-east. Replenishing the Fund will be critical.
Keeping our focus on north-eastern Syria, I should
like to say a few words about Al-Hol camp. We have
provided regular updates on the situation in the camp,
where approximately 68,600 people reside, 94 per cent
of them women and children, and 55 per cent of the
children are under 12 years of age. Their situation
is desperate. As the Secretary-General has noted,
Member States bear primary responsibility for their
own nationals, and policies and actions that lead to
statelessness should be avoided.
Humanitarian organizations are monitoring how
the evolving situation throughout the north-east might
impact the civilian population in the camp. Despite a
reduced presence, humanitarian actors continue to
provide critical humanitarian services. However, more
support is needed to ensure that adequate protection
and humanitarian assistance can be provided over the
coming weeks and months.
I should now like to turn to the situation in the
north-west. Approximately 3 million people live in
extremely difficult conditions in the Idlib de-escalation
area in north-western Syria. We must also ensure that
the situation there receives the attention and priority it
deserves. Approximately 2.1 million people depend on
humanitarian aid and 1.6 million are displaced, many
having been forced to move multiple times in search
of safety.
The hostilities in the north-west have subsided
following the announcement of a ceasefire on 30 August,
but worrying signs of insecurity remain. There have,
however, been recent reports of an uptick in hostilities.
Between 18 and 20 October, the highest number of
attacks since the start of the ceasefire agreement was
reported, mostly affecting the southern parts of Idlib.
We remain extremely concerned about the impact a
further escalation of fighting might have on civilians,
including further mass displacement for those forced to
flee and the communities receiving them.
More than 400,000 people were already displaced
between May and September and are now sheltering
in camps and informal sites in Idlib and Aleppo
governorates. Most are in densely populated areas in

19-333363/28

S/PV.8645

The situation in the Middle East

the north, close to the Turkish border. Some people
are still in the open air, without adequate shelter, and
many will struggle to survive in colder temperatures.
Although the academic year began in September, many
school-age children are deprived of education because
of overcrowded learning facilities in the receiving
communities, the heavy damage sustained by schools,
the use of schools to house displaced people, and the
lack of learning supplies and materials.
Humanitarian organizations have scaled up crossborder operations from Turkey to meet rising needs in
Idlib. Recent months have seen the highest number of
trucks passing through the United Nations Monitoring
Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic cross-border
operations in Bab Al-Hawa and Bab Al-Salam since
their inception in 2014. Food aid has nearly doubled in
2019, from reaching 560,000 civilians in the month of
January to reaching 1.1 million in September through
this cross-border operation. Tens of thousands more
have received other services and support, such as
winter clothing, household items, clean water, shelter,
emergency nutrition and protection services.
The Under-Secretary-General and Emergency
Relief Coordinator visited the border region between
Turkey and Syria earlier this month to assess the relief
operation. He noted that the human cost of failing to
renew the Security Council’s decision to authorize
United Nations and partner cross-border operations
would be immense. If United Nations cross-border
deliveries were to be halted, civilian suffering would
increase, potentially leading to greater displacement,
including to neighbouring countries. The United
Nations does not have an alternative method of delivery
that could match the timeliness or reach, and it therefore
remains critical that resolution 2165 (2014) be extended
for another year.
I would now like to speak about Rukban. The
situation for people in this camp on the Syrian-Jordanian
border remains critical. Following the mission that
delivered aid to 15,000 people in early September,
a second joint mission by the United Nations and the
Syrian Arab Red Crescent in late September provided
additional aid and supported the voluntary departure
of 329 people to collective shelters in Homs. Another
mission to provide transport to those who want to
leave is planned to depart shortly, pending security
guarantees by all parties.
4/28

24/10/2019

Meanwhile, the United Nations and the Syrian Arab
Red Crescent strive to continue assisting those most
in need inside the camp. One woman and her 7-yearold child who required urgent surgery were evacuated
to Homs on 22 October to ensure that they received
care. As the cold months approach, many in Rukban
continue to request support to leave. Since late March,
some 18,300 people have left Rukban, but thousands
remain in the area and need support until alternatives
are found.
In the face of these difficult operational challenges,
the United Nations and its partners continue to deliver
aid to millions across Syria. Through the first half of
this year, the United Nations and other humanitarian
organizations reached about 6.3 million people in
need on average each month. In the past two months,
humanitarian agencies have provided assistance,
including food, to more than 4 million people in need.
More than 1.3 million health and medical treatments
were provided to people throughout the country during
the same period.
Despite these efforts and after months of
intensified needs, stocks are running low and gaps
have emerged and remain to be addressed. People in
north-western and north-eastern Syria are dependent
on aid organizations to meet their basic needs. Without
further funding, the availability of aid will be reduced.
The 2019 humanitarian response plan for Syria is
funded at 45 per cent, or $1.48 billion, 10 months into
the year. Donors have been generous, but more support
is urgently needed; without it, partners will not be able
to scale up their operations and respond to new and
existing needs.
While millions of people in Syria need humanitarian
assistance, their primary need is to be spared hostilities
and to have political solutions that end the violence,
allowing people to begin to rebuild their lives in safety
and in dignity.
I will conclude this briefing by reiterating our three
key points: protect civilians and civilian infrastructure;
ensure safe, rapid and unimpeded humanitarian access
to all civilians in need, including across borders; and
cease hostilities and de-escalate the situation in northeastern and north-western Syria.
The President: I thank Ms. Mueller for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Khiari.
19-33336

24/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Khiari: As we have heard it said many times
before at the United Nations, the security situation in
Syria remains extremely volatile. Nevertheless, over
the past weeks we have seen an encouraging surge of
diplomatic activity on the north-east, though some
uncertainties remain.
On 17 October, Turkey and the United States
announced an agreement on a 120-hour pause in
Turkey’s operations in order to “allow the withdrawal
of the Kurdish People’s Protection Units (YPG) from
the safe zone”. On Tuesday 22 October, the Presidents
of Turkey and the Russian Federation reiterated their
“commitment to the preservation of the political unity
and territorial integrity of Syria and the protection
of the national security of Turkey”. They decided to
preserve the status quo in the current Operation Peace
Spring area, covering Tel Abyad and Ras Al-Ayn with a
depth of 32 kilometres. They also decided that Russian
military police and Syrian border guards would enter
areas east and west of Tel Abyad and Ras Al-Ayn in
order to facilitate the removal of YPG elements and
their weapons to the depth of 30 kilometres from the
Turkish-Syrian border.
The United Nations takes note of these agreements
and welcomes any effort to de-escalate the situation, in
line with the Charter of the United Nations, and to protect
civilians in accordance with international humanitarian
law. The United Nations also takes note of Turkey’s
announcement that, at this stage, there is no further
need to conduct a new operation outside the present
operation area. The memorandum of understanding of
22 October between Turkey and Russia also indicates
that joint efforts will be launched to facilitate the
return of refugees in a safe and voluntary manner. The
President of Turkey has previously stated that the main
aim of Turkey’s operation is to facilitate the return of
Syrian refugees. He has emphasized that up to 2 million
refugees could be resettled in the area.
I would like to reiterate our concern about the
humanitarian impact of military operations in northern
Syria since Turkey and allied Syrian opposition groups
began Operation Peace Spring on 9 October. While
violence has subsided since 20 October, when the
Syrian Democratic Forces withdrew from Ras Al-Ayn,
the situation remains in flux. Civilians in north-eastern
Syria continue to express concerns amid continued
uncertainty as to what may lie ahead. Many are
reminded of what occurred previously in Afrin and fear
further displacement from major cities and towns and

S/PV. 8645

the disruption of humanitarian access. Many civilians
also fear the potential consequences of a possible return
of Government forces. This includes fear of arbitrary
detention, violent political retribution and imposed
conscription. We cannot stress enough that civilians,
including captured fighters, must be protected
under international human rights and international
humanitarian law. It is crucial that the Security Council
and all Member States represented in this Chamber
do everything in their power to protect civilians and
civilian infrastructure, ensure food and unimpeded
humanitarian access and help the parties resolve their
security concerns through peaceful means.
We recognize the generosity of Turkey and other
neighbouring countries in hosting so many refugees
fleeing Syria’s devastating conflict. We urge the
international community to provide strengthened
support to Syria’s neighbouring countries in shouldering
this burden. It is also important to stress that the return
of refugees must be voluntary, safe, dignified and wellinformed.
Ms. Ursula Mueller of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs made reference
to the approximately 70,000 civilians currently
sheltering in the Al-Hol and Al-Roj camps. Most have
been exposed to violence and trauma under the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant. They are now living in
extremely difficult conditions, where they face a range
of challenges and an uncertain and disconcerting fate.
This includes the risk of being denied repatriation,
rehabilitation and reintegration or a fair trial. All
children, including those suspected of being associated
with armed groups, are entitled to special care and
protection under international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, including the Convention
on the Rights of the Child. They must be treated first
and foremost as victims. Solutions for foreign nationals
need to be urgently found. We call on all Member States
to take all measures necessary to ensure that their
nationals are repatriated for the purposes of prosecution,
rehabilitation and/or reintegration, as appropriate and
in line with international law and standards.
I would also like to briefly update the Council
on the situation in the greater Idlib area. Following
the announcement of a ceasefire in late August,
there was a marked reduction in air strikes, although
heavy, ground-based artillery shelling continued to
be reported. Unfortunately, air strikes are reported
to have increased again since 12 October. There have

19-333365/28

S/PV.8645

The situation in the Middle East

also been reports of helicopter attacks and the use
of barrel bombs. We count on all parties, especially
Turkey and the Russian Federation as guarantors of the
de-escalation agreement, to press all parties to the full
implementation of the September 2018 memorandum
of understanding. As the Secretary-General has said
many times, any large-scale military offensive in Idlib
would come at an unacceptable cost in terms of loss of
human lives and suffering.
We appreciate the Council’s full support in helping
us continue to chart a political path forward regarding the
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). The launch
of the Syrian-led and Syrian-owned Constitutional
Committee will be facilitated by the United Nations in
Geneva later this month.
Resolution 2254 (2015) calls for a nation-wide
ceasefire, reaffirms the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria and stresses that
the only sustainable solution to the current conflict in
Syria is through an inclusive and Syrian-led political
process that meets the legitimate aspirations of the
Syrian people.
The need to implement resolution 2254 (2015)
has been reaffirmed by the Council repeatedly, most
recently in its presidential statement S/PRST/2019/12 of
8 October. What is now most urgently needed is decisive
action for a consolidation of the ceasefires in northeast and north-west Syria, the protection of civilians
throughout the country and full support to ensure that
the political track remains on course.
The President: I thank Mr. Khiari for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Marcaillou.
Ms. Marcaillou (spoke in French): I am honoured
and pleased to be present among members to brief the
Security Council today on an unusual angle for the
Council on the situation in Syria. Allow me to thank the
Council for the opportunity to share information that
the United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS) can
contribute to its deliberations.
(spoke in English)
I want to begin by affirming the full commitment of
the United Nations Mine Action Service to alleviating the
suffering of the people of Syria, where a humanitarian
crisis is further exacerbated by the contamination of
explosive ordnance. In Syria, mine action is considered
by all stakeholders to be an immediate and essential
6/28

24/10/2019

requirement to respond adequately to humanitarian
needs in the country. While the full scale of
contamination is not known, preliminary findings for
the 2020 Humanitarian Needs Overview indicate that
2,563 communities are contaminated with explosive
ordnance, affecting some 11.5 million people.
That is a dramatic increase from the 2019 figures,
when 10.2 million people were estimated to be at risk
in 1,980 communities. So far, the year 2019 recorded
an average of 184 explosive incidents a day. The impact
of explosive hazards on communities is immediate
and devastating and the extensive use of improvised
explosive devices further compounds the complexity
of the threat. Most times, explosive hazard incidents
result in serious injury and/or death, leading to longterm physical and psychological trauma for survivors
and their families.
Based on available data, for each known explosive
accident, an average of 1.5 people are killed and two
people are physically injured, with approximately one
in three survivors suffering the amputation of at least
one limb. The number of casualties from explosive
hazards is increasingly putting pressure on an already
weakened and struggling health sector.
In addition, we must not forget the overwhelming
number of civilians suffering from eight years
of psychotrauma inflicted by explosions and the
consequences that that kind of trauma will have, for
instance, on children’s learning ability as well as on
individuals’ behaviour, including community as well as
gender-based violence.
The explosive ordnance contamination affects
agricultural land, roads, homes and critical civilian
infrastructure, such as schools and health centres,
but also water and electricity plants in need of repair.
The contamination severely impacts the lives and
livelihoods of the population and further amplifies the
social and economic crisis.
Internally displaced persons fleeing violence
are among the most vulnerable, as are those who are
farming, herding and removing rubble — activities
reported to be among the most risk-prone activities in
Syria. Available reports show that about 50 per cent
of accidents take place in rural areas and one out of
every four accidents occurs in the immediate vicinity
of residential buildings.
19-33336

24/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East

By way of information, the truffle season is just
starting in the Aleppo governorate. That provides
one of the main incomes of communities in need. It
is extremely difficult to prevent people looking for an
income and a way of surviving from accessing rural
areas although they are contaminated. That is the
reality that we the United Nations see nearly every day
when we are operating in the country.
While men and boys are considered to be more
exposed to the direct immediate threat of explosive
incidents, women and girls are also affected by the
indirect impact linked to limitations in freedom
of movement and the exacerbation of underlying
vulnerabilities. Moreover, the death and injuries of men
and boys now compel women to increasingly take on
their husbands’ former activities, thereby increasing
their exposure to the threat of explosives.
During my mission to Syria earlier this month, all
members of the Damascus-based humanitarian country
team and the mine action sub-sector affirmed that
humanitarian access is impeded by the contamination
of a wide variety of explosive ordnance.
During my visit to Aleppo, I personally witnessed
the level of destruction and contamination of areas
where people come back to live when, together with
my colleagues from the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and UNICEF, based in Aleppo,
we also visited damaged and destroyed schools, where
children had been recently killed and wounded by
explosive ordnance when they had just run back to
school to play.
UNMAS has been supporting the humanitarian
mine action sector in Syria since 2016 at the request of
the Resident Humanitarian Coordinator at the time and
in line with resolution 2165 (2014). In October 2018,
UNMAS opened its Damascus office, and in January
2019, we were ready with Syria-specific material and
gender and age-tailored curricula to complement the
explosive-hazard-risk education of UNICEF.
Since then, UNMAS has been working towards
the expansion of humanitarian mine action activities
across Syria. The objective of UNMAS is to reduce the
impact of explosive hazards on the civilian population,
including by providing overall coordination of the
humanitarian mine action sector to address the most
urgent needs more safely and more effectively.

S/PV. 8645

Since January 2019, UNMAS in Damascus has
trained 70 risk-education facilitators, who have since
been deployed to rural Damascus. To date, they have
reached out to some 18,000 people in 60 communities;
current plans are to conduct outreach in southern
governorates before December. That number is
insignificant compared to the 11.5 million people in
need, but it is a start, and we intend to use all means
and tools at our disposal to reach a greater number of
Syrians throughout the country. In addition, this month
UNMAS has also started its risk-education activities in
Hama governorate, where an estimated 46 communities
severely affected by explosive hazards will be reached
by the end of the year. Training trainers and national
staff working in United Nations local outposts will also
contribute to expanding our outreach.
In support to the United Nations country team,
UNMAS has provided train-the-trainers sessions for 32
agency staff in 2019, enabling them to deliver explosive
hazards-risk awareness briefings to their colleagues
working to provide humanitarian aid and relief in
locations where explosive hazards impact their safety.
The United Nations staff who were trained are based
in different regional sub-offices, including in northeastern Syria.
Earlier this year, UNMAS launched a one-month
awareness campaign on social media and through text
messaging, reaching all subscribers of the two Syrian
telecommunication companies. That allowed us to
reach out to over 55 million people with brief messages
on risk-education awareness.
The launch of the Mine Action subsector on
9 October in Damascus, during my visit, was well
attended by the humanitarian sector, comprising
humanitarian civil society operators and United Nations
entities. Their statements at that meeting evidenced the
sector’s interest and need to benefit from the platform
in order to enhance coordination, exchange information
and support the prioritization of tasks.
Pursuant to resolution 2449 (2018), 365 communities
in Aleppo, Idlib and northern Hama governorates were
surveyed and more than 370 hazardous items were
identified and marked through collective efforts by
the Mine Action subcluster between January and July.
In addition, some 677,000 people received direct risk
education in 73 subdistricts ranked from highly severe to
catastrophic in accordance with the protection severity
scale. Risk-education materials have been distributed

19-333367/28

S/PV.8645

The situation in the Middle East

to over 280,000 at-risk individuals and more than 100
schools. Approximately 3,800 survivors of explosive
hazards have received victim assistance services,
varying from physical rehabilitation, continued medical
support and psychological support.
In the absence of an UNMAS presence in northeastern Syria, UNMAS has made available standardized
risk-awareness materials to be distributed to affected
populations as part of the ongoing emergency
humanitarian response. UNMAS continues to stand
ready to support United Nations inter-agency missions,
including assessment missions. With the evacuation
by international mine action non-governmental
organizations earlier this month, owing to recent
military developments in the country, there are
currently no humanitarian mine action operations in
north-eastern Syria. On behalf of the humanitarian
mine action sector, I would like to stress the importance
of continuity and of the resumption of humanitarian
mine action in that area of the country.
UNMAS works closely with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, in Syria and
in neighbouring countries that host Syrian refugees on
the integration of mine action into national returnee
response plans. The aim is to achieve consistent and
coherent messaging on explosive hazard-risk education
from the area of departure to the area of resettlement
when the conditions are met for voluntary, dignified
and safe return.
Since 2016, the humanitarian response plan for Syria
has increasingly prioritized mine action, risk education,
victim assistance and explosive hazard survey and
clearance. As clearance of explosive hazards is the only
means of definitively removing the threat, plans for the
identification of explosive contamination and surveys,
as well marking, fencing off and removal, are currently
under discussion. The Government of Syria has agreed
that UNMAS should now consider reinforcing the
implementation of its activities with the assistance of
international mine action operators. The registration of
the operators will be done by the Government of Syria.
In the absence of national humanitarian mine action
capacity, the Government has also agreed that UNMAS
will undertake to accredit, coordinate and assess the
work of such operators. The humanitarian response
plan for Syria, the humanitarian needs overview and
strict adherence to the humanitarian principles of
impartiality, neutrality, independence and humanity
will continue to frame UNMAS activities.
8/28

24/10/2019

The President: I thank Ms. Marcaillou for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait): I will deliver this
statement on behalf of the Syria humanitarian
co-penholders: Belgium, Germany and Kuwait.
At the outset, we would like to express our
appreciation to Assistant Secretary-General Ursula
Mueller for her comprehensive briefing on the
humanitarian situation in Syria. Our thanks also
go to Assistant Secretary-General for Middle East,
Asia and the Pacific Khaled Khiari and Mine Action
Service Director Agnès Marcaillou for their briefings.
We also reiterate our appreciation and support to the
humanitarian workers for their efforts to alleviate the
human suffering in Syria during these challenging times.
We have all been following the developments
in north-eastern Syria over the past two weeks. The
effects of the Turkish military operation are deeply
concerning. The operation is having a destabilizing
impact on the region and poses a risk to the fight against
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). It has
led to the deterioration of an already dire humanitarian
situation. Since military operations began in the northeast, there have been reports of civilian casualties and
more than 180,000 civilians, including 80,000 children,
have been displaced. Civilian infrastructure has also
been impacted. For many of those fleeing, this is not
the first time that they have been displaced. Many
have been traumatized by previous displacement and
by living under ISIL rule. We underscore that civilians
and civilian infrastructure must always be protected.
We echo the Secretary-General’s statement that any
military operation must fully respect international
law, including the Charter of the United Nations and
international humanitarian law. We urge maximum
restraint and call on all parties to resolve their concerns
through peaceful and diplomatic means.
The north-west, specifically Idlib governorate, has
seen a decrease in airstrikes. Nevertheless, civilian
casualties continue and have seen an uptick in recent
days. We once again call for de-escalation and remind
all parties of their obligations to protect civilians
and civilian infrastructure, including hospitals, in
accordance with international humanitarian law. We
stress that counter-terrorism operations do not absolve
19-33336

24/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East

parties of their obligations under international law,
including international humanitarian law.
Following the recent violence in the northern part
of Syria, we cannot but condemn the attacks that are
impacting civilians and civilian infrastructure. We
are also concerned by the threat posed to the civilian
population by unexploded ordnance, explosive
remnants of war and landmines. Any humanitarian mine
clearance activities must be based on an independent
needs assessment in the field. Humanitarian demining
should be aimed at avoiding the suffering of civilians.
We reaffirm the need for all parties to abide by the
principles of proportionality, precaution and distinction.
The violence must stop.
There has been an increase in humanitarian needs
in Syria as a result of military operations in the northwest and north-east of the country in recent weeks
and months. We underscore the need for humanitarian
assistance to be delivered in a timely, safe, sustained
and unfettered manner to all those in need, and for
the United Nations and its humanitarian partners
to be allowed to continue to carry out their crucial
work in northern Syria. To that end, the cross-border
operations that were renewed under resolution 2449
(2018) have been a lifeline for millions of people in
Syria, specifically in the north-west of the country. The
cross-border modality contributes almost 40 per cent of
all humanitarian assistance in Syria. In his latest report
(S/2019/820), the Secretary-General writes with regard
to the cross-border operation:
“Without this operation, we would see increased
numbers of civilian deaths, greater prevalence of
disease and even greater suffering being inflicted
on a population who cannot be reached at this scale,
in such a timely and direct manner, through any
other means.” (S/2019/820, para. 44)
As a co-penholder on the humanitarian situation in
Syria, we share the Secretary-General’s assessment
that it is all the more critical to ensure that cross-border
operations continue through a further renewal of the
resolution on cross-border operations before the end of
the year.
The situation also remains worrisome in other parts
of Syria. There are still 68,000 residents in Al-Hol
camp, 90 per cent of whom are women and children.
Another staggering statistic is that 50 per cent of the
children in the camp are under the age of 12. We call for
continued and full humanitarian access to the camp and

S/PV. 8645

specifically for protection measures to be addressed,
especially for women and children. In Rukban, we
welcome the recent joint United Nations-Syrian Arab
Red Crescent missions to deliver food and nutritional
items. We continue to call for a durable and lasting
solution there.
We are also concerned by the tensions and
security situation in the south-west, as outlined in the
Secretary-General’s report. We underscore the need
for humanitarian assistance to be delivered throughout
Syria in a timely, safe, sustained and unimpeded manner
to all those in need and for humanitarian partners to
be allowed access. We stress the need for all parties
to respect international humanitarian law, including
the protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure
throughout Syria.
We cannot fail to underscore the importance of
accountability. The Syrian conflict has seen some
of the most egregious violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
That is why we support the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Those Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. We
also welcome the start of work of the board of inquiry
established by the Secretary-General. It is important to
carry out a quick and thorough investigation of all of the
incidents that have taken place, in particular the attacks
on facilities communicated under the deconfliction
mechanism. With regard to the return of refugees, our
position remains unchanged. All returns must be safe,
voluntary, dignified and well-informed.
In conclusion, as we commemorate United Nations
Day today to mark the entry into force of the Charter
of the United Nations — a document that embodies the
hopes, dreams and aspirations of we the peoples — let
us not forget the hopes, dreams and aspirations of the
people of Syria, who have suffered for far too long
from this conflict. We hope that the Constitutional
Committee, the establishment of which was recently
agreed upon and the work of which will be launched
at the end of the month, will be the first step towards
realizing a comprehensive political process, in line
with the resolution 2254 (2015).
Mr. Barkin (United States of America): We wish to
thank Assistant Secretary-General Mueller, Assistant

19-333369/28

S/PV.8645

The situation in the Middle East

Secretary-General Khiari and Ms. Marcaillou for their
sobering briefings.
The United States welcomes yesterday’s
announcement that Turkey would halt its offensive
actions in north-eastern Syria and agree to a permanent
ceasefire. As a result, the sanctions imposed by the
United States Treasury on 14 October have been lifted.
Unfortunately, as noted in the briefings, the events of
the past week have resulted in the displacement of as
many as 180,000 people in a country in which more than
11 million people already depend on international aid.
Nearly 10,000 have become refugees in northern Iraq.
The United States remains committed to ensuring
the security and stability of Syria. That is precisely why
last week, Vice-President Mike Pence and Secretary of
State Mike Pompeo travelled to Ankara, where, after
intense deliberations, Turkey committed to a five-day
pause of its operations in north-eastern Syria to enable
the withdrawal of the Kurdish People’s Protection Units
from the Turkish border.
The joint statement made on 17 October paved the
way for a permanent ceasefire. We are hopeful, based
on assurances from the Turkish authorities and the
Syrian Democratic Forces, that the permanent ceasefire
will be honoured, civilian lives will be protected and
the hard-fought territorial defeat of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) will be preserved. That is a
solution that will save lives and contribute to long-term
stability in the region.
As President Trump has made clear, Turkey must
protect civilians in north-eastern Syria. We also expect
Turkey to abide by its commitments to preventing ISIS
from regaining a foothold in Syria and to ensure the
secure, humane detention of ISIS fighters. We remain
deeply troubled by reports that Turkish-supported
opposition forces have deliberately targeted civilians. If
verified, those actions may constitute war crimes, and
we urge our Turkish partners to immediately investigate
those incidents and hold accountable any individuals or
entities involved. Turkey is responsible for ensuring
that its forces and any Turkish-supported entities act in
accordance with the law of armed conflict.
While much of our attention over the past week
has been focused on north-eastern Syria, we cannot
lose sight of the fact that we may be on the precipice
of the largest individual humanitarian catastrophe
since the conflict began — one that is being driven
by the Al-Assad regime and its allies in north-western
10/28

24/10/2019

Syria. The United States is closely monitoring reports
of the recent uptick in air strikes and shelling in Idlib
province, where more than 400,000 people have been
displaced since April. Any military escalation in Idlib
province is reckless and poses a grave threat to regional
stability, 3 million civilian lives and the United
Nations ability to deliver humanitarian assistance to a
vulnerable population.
The United States once again calls on the Al-Assad
regime and its allies to cease military operations in Idlib
and uphold the Turkish-Russian ceasefire agreement
of September 2018. The United States fully expects
attacks on hospitals and other civilian infrastructure to
cease. We fully expect all parties to support the board
of inquiry’s work, and we fully expect the Security
Council’s authorization of both life-saving crossborder aid and regular humanitarian aid to reach every
single Syrian in need, regardless of their location in
the country. In order to facilitate aid distribution, the
United Nations and its implementing partners must
have the freedom of movement required to implement
cross-border aid deliveries through all agreed border
crossings, in line with resolution 2449 (2018).
Our commitment to supporting the most vulnerable
can be seen in the fact that the United States remains
the largest donor of humanitarian aid in Syria. We will
not waver in that commitment, but we must also stress
that no single donor can address all of Syria’s needs. We
urge others to contribute additional funding to support
stabilization programming and humanitarian assistance.
Looking to the future, the Council cannot forget
that resolution 2254 (2015) demands that all parties
immediately cease attacks against civilian targets,
support efforts to achieve a ceasefire, provide unhindered
humanitarian access and request that the United Nations
convene the parties to engage in formal negotiations
on the political process. We are now mere days from
the first meeting of the Constitutional Committee. It is
more vital than ever to ensure that this political process
moves forward. The Council must spare no effort to
support Special Envoy Pedersen’s work to convene the
Constitutional Committee so that the people of Syria
may at last find peace within reach.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Assistant Secretaries-General
Khaled Khiari and Ursula Mueller for their briefings.
We are also grateful to Ms. Agnès Marcaillou, Director
19-33336

24/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East

of the United Nations Mine Action Service, for her
report on the work that is under way in Syria in that area.
On 22 October, the Russian Federation and
the Republic of Turkey signed a memorandum of
understanding on the situation in north-eastern
Syria. We and our Turkish colleagues have already
circulated it, so its content is well known, but we would
nevertheless like to highlight some key provisions in it
that are designed to stabilize the situation. In drafting
it, we assumed that in the interests of maintaining calm,
Syrians and Turks, as neighbours, must work together
and take each other’s interests into account. We should
point out that like the Syrians, our Iranian partners
welcomed this agreement.
As we have said repeatedly, we understand Turkey’s
desire to take steps to ensure its national security.
However, it is important to realize that the problems
in north-eastern Syria did not emerge yesterday. The
reason for the destabilization of the region east of the
Euphrates is its illegal occupation and the dangerous
experiment in demographic engineering that has been
conducted there in an attempt to pit the Kurdish and
Arab populations against each other.
The Russian-Turkish memorandum, which is of key
significance for the stabilization of Syria — including
on the humanitarian front, which is what we are
discussing today — very clearly affirms respect for
Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and rejects
all separatist tendencies on its territory. Arrangements
have been made to end the active military phase of the
Turkish operation and to deploy Syrian border guards
to the border with Turkey. We have long stressed
that it is impossible to address the aspirations of the
Kurds, who are an integral part of Syria’s multi-ethnic
society, without restoring Syrian Government control
throughout its national territory and borders. We are
ready to continue to assist the Syrian authorities and
the Kurds in establishing a broad dialogue on the most
pressing issues. At the same time, pursuant to the
memorandum and with the consent of Damascus, we
will help to implement the Adana accord in the current
circumstances and in the interests of resolving both
Turkey and Syria’s border security concerns. Russia’s
military police are already on the Syrian side of the
border with Turkey. After the withdrawal of the Kurdish
self-defence groups from the area in accordance with
the established timetable, we and the Turkish units will
begin patrolling the 10-kilometre zone together.

S/PV. 8645

We assume that Syria will eventually be free
from the illegal foreign military presence. I reiterate
that robust and long-term stabilization and the overall
resolution of the humanitarian problems in Syria can be
achieved only in conditions that respect its sovereignty
and territorial integrity.
We share the concerns that have been expressed
about the growing threats of terrorism. Another
important element in the memorandum is ensuring that
the fight against counter-terrorism continues and that
the terrorists are prevented from taking advantage of
the current situation to intensify their criminal attacks
and facilitate the escape of those who are being held in
prisons in north-eastern Syria. We urge those who have
maintained and created those prisons not to shift onto
others others the responsibility of preventingjihadists
of all stripes end from scattering throughout the region.
We also caution against dividing them into good
and bad terrorists. Whatever these groups’ names — the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Jabhat Al-Nusra,
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, and so forth — they all preach
the same ideology of terror, murder and violence. We
once again warn against flirting with any jihadists for
narrow individual ends, providing them with political
cover, financial and material support or, worse, by
portraying them as so-called moderate radicals. We are
seeing such attempts in Idlib, for example, and we will
stamp them out. Speaking of the Idlib de-escalation
zone, we note that the situation there remains uneasy.
The ceasefire instituted on 31 August is holding, but
militants are still violating it regularly and firing on
Syrian Government forces’ positions. Civilians and
civilian infrastructure are suffering and Syrian soldiers
are dying, while civilians’ grievances are mounting.
They are protesting against the fighters’ proliferating
presence, forced recruitment, the deteriorating
humanitarian situation and being threatened with
being shot if they try to leave the de-escalation zone.
The extremists are using violence to disperse peaceful
demonstrations and opening fire on protesters. The
situation inside Idlib will clearly only get worse
and more intense as long as terrorists control the
de-escalation zone.
As guarantor countries of the Astana process,
Russia and Turkey reaffirmed their willingness to
continue working together with Iran in the quest for
a political settlement to the Syrian conflict. We will
support the work of the Constitutional Committee,
which the members of the Astana group have been

19-3333611/28

S/PV.8645

The situation in the Middle East

working diligently to set up in the past few weeks. Our
view is that the situation on the ground should not be an
obstacle to the long-awaited launch of the Committee,
with the assistance of the United Nations, which should
happen as soon as next week.
The Russian-Turkish memorandum also establishes
the importance of resolving the problem of refugees.
Together with the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic, Russia is taking measures to prepare for the
return of refugees and internally displaced persons
(IDPs). Hundreds of thousands of Syrians have already
returned home. We urge international organizations,
including the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and other humanitarian
bodies to step up their efforts to provide shelter for
returning refugees, activities that unfortunately have
often been artificially delayed.
With the assistance of the Russian Centre for the
Reconciliation of Opposing Sides in the Syrian Arab
Republic and the Syrian Government, together with
the United Nations and the International Committee of
the Red Cross, efforts are continuing to resettle people
from the Rukban camp. We hope that the problem of
refugees and internally displaced persons there will be
resolved as soon as possible. As for the Al-Hol camp, the
situation there continues to be disastrous, owing to the
limited access to it for humanitarian agencies and the
funding shortages, and it has all got even worse since a
significant number of refugees have been moved there
from other camps in the north-east. Half of the people
there are women and children, and we know that there
are jihadists there and they are disseminating jihadist
ideology. It is high time to consider handing over all the
illegally occupied territory to the Syrian authorities,
which would help to resolve the IDP problem.
As Ms. Marcaillou pointed out, mine clearance
continues to be a pressing issue. We welcome the
start of work on it by the United Nations Mine Action
Service in Syria. Russia is involved in the demining
efforts in Syria both in a national capacity and through
its contribution to the Service. In that connection, we
urge all countries that are genuinely concerned about
Syria’s humanitarian welfare to join these and other
humanitarian efforts, and to deliver humanitarian
assistance to all Syrians without discrimination,
politicization or preconditions. That includes not only
post-conflict reconstruction projects in the country, but
also, importantly, the lifting of unilateral sanctions in
the interests of normalizing Syrians’ lives.
12/28

24/10/2019

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Ms. Mueller, Mr. Khiari
and Ms. Marcaillou for their briefings.
The situation in north-eastern Syria is a major
concern. A few days ago, the Council expressed its
deep concern about the growing terrorist threat and
the deterioration in the humanitarian situation in
the north-east. For France, those concerns remain
valid. The European Union has clearly expressed its
condemnation of Turkey’s unilateral military action,
as what is happening in north-eastern Syria is serious.
The gains made after several years of effective fighting
against Da’esh, carried out together with the Syrian
Democratic Forces, are in jeopardy. The threats posed
by the spread of terrorists and the strengthening of
underground Da’esh cells is real. Responding to them
is our priority. That is why France has called for the
holding of a ministerial meeting of the members of the
Coalition against Da’esh in the near future.
The impact of the offensive on the humanitarian
situation is significant. France will do everything
possible in its power to maintain its assistance. The
President of the Republic has decided to allocate
€10 million in emergency aid to meet needs. France
also underscores the decisive role being played by
non-governmental organizations that are already
present in the north-east.
The European Union will withhold funding for
stabilization and development efforts if the necessary
conditions for the return of refugees are not met.
In that regard, we take note of the memorandum
of understanding reached by Turkey and Russia on
Tuesday. Our priority is that the truce be extended
and that a solution to the crisis be found through
diplomatic means. To that end, the President of France
has expressed his willingness to engage in a frank and
exacting discussion with Turkey, in cooperation with
his European partners.
No matter what, the truce must be supported by
progress in three areas: pursuing the struggle against
terrorism, the protection of civilians and the rapid
resumption of the political process. All must respect
international humanitarian law. It is non-negotiable.
The protection of civilians must be a top priority. We
condemn attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure,
in particular humanitarian and medical infrastructure.
The intensification of fighting in the north-west
in recent days is unacceptable. Every effort must be
19-33336

24/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East

made to ensure that the ceasefire in Idlib is respected.
The fight against terrorism is a crucial issue, which
no one disputes. It cannot be cited, however, to justify
violations of international humanitarian law. Those who
commit terrorist acts will have to face justice. We call
on all parties to cooperate with the various mechanisms
established by the United Nations to combat impunity.
We must spare no effort to ensure safe and
unhindered humanitarian access throughout Syria.
I reiterate the vital and irreplaceable need for crossborder humanitarian aid. We call on the Council to show
unity and to shoulder its responsibility in preserving
that critical gain through the renewal of resolution 2165
(2014). There is no alternative to providing assistance
to the millions of people in need of it.
In this difficult situation, we must remain ready
to act in support of the Syrian political process, which
remains the only path to peace. Resolution 2254 (2015)
remains our road map. All of its provisions must be
implemented. The Council welcomed the announcement
of the agreement on the Constitutional Committee.
It must meet in Geneva to begin its work as soon as
possible. We support the efforts of Geir Pedersen. This
is the first step towards a genuine inter-Syrian process.
The launch of the Constitutional Committee is a
starting point, but progress must be made in parallel
on the other aspects of the political process, which
means creating a safe and neutral environment and
silencing the weapons throughout Syria. It also requires
confidence-building measures, in particular the release
of detained and abducted persons. Light must be shed
on forced disappearances.
Such an environment is imperative to holding of free
elections, monitored by the United Nations, in which all
Syrians, including those who had to flee because of the
war, must be able to participate. All those factors are
key to achieving a credible political transition. Until
that transition is definitively under way, France, like
its European Union partners, will not contribute to
financing the reconstruction. The situation in Syria is
serious. There are many challenges, but France is more
determined than ever to work with its partners to build
peace in Syria.
Ms. Morrison González (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for today’s
briefings and, as always, we shall begin by thanking
the humanitarian actors on the ground, in particular
the Syrian humanitarian organizations, for continuing

S/PV. 8645

to provide assistance in an increasingly complex and
uncertain environment.
Today, as we consider the various and unthinkable
humanitarian challenges in the Syrian Arab Republic,
we are filled with a deep sense of concern. It has often
been stated here that the highest price of the conflict
has been paid by Syrian civilians. As other speakers
said earlier, it is the men, women, children and young
people whose protection is becoming increasingly
difficult; who carry the weight of a deeply despondent
country; and whose futures sometimes seem to slip
from their hands owing to the growing threats posed to
their well-being and development.
Throughout Syria, stories of human suffering and
adversity are piling up. In that regard, we ask ourselves
whether any kind of hope remains for the Syrian people,
so many of whom have been denied the possibility of
building their own future through education and the
enjoyment of a normal life. Our answer is “yes” and
that, despite their many trials, the people will persevere
in their resilience and that the country will be reborn.
As long as the uncertainty and insecurity that
unceasingly lead to massive internal displacement
continue, they will not be able to do so. They will not
be able to do so without the conditions necessary for
moving the political process forward. And they will
definitely not be able to do so under crossfire. The
resurgence of terrorism also poses an enormous threat
to the future not only of Syria, but that of the entire
region and beyond.
Military solutions leave only material destruction,
human displacement and physical and emotional
damage in their wake. Inclusive dialogue and broad
political agreement, therefore, are the only viable and
sustainable option. That is where Security Council
must focus its attention more than ever before. We
reiterate the need for a cessation of hostilities at the
national level that will bring respite to the population,
build confidence and energize a broad political process
in line with resolution 2254 (2015), while emphasizing
the work of the Constitutional Committee as a starting
point for other major transitions.
Secondly, we call for comprehensive and robust
humanitarian action contributing to the protection of
millions of vulnerable people, including internally
displaced persons and refugees. To that end, we call
for safe and unhindered access throughout Syria, the
protection of humanitarian actors and the respect of all

19-3333613/28

S/PV.8645

The situation in the Middle East

parties for the provisions of international law, including
international humanitarian law.
In conclusion, I note the situation in the northeastern part of the Syrian Arab Republic and the plans
to create a so-called safe zone, entailing the subsequent
relocation of refugees. In that regard, we urge the parties
to safeguard, above all, the dignity and security of all
persons. If such an arrangement becomes a reality, it
must under no circumstances violate the rights and
freedoms of the civilian population or undermine the
provision of humanitarian assistance.
We are steadfastly determined to use all diplomatic
means possible to ensure that every return is voluntary,
safe and dignified. Non-compliance with those
internationally accepted principles would remain an
indelible stain on the history not only of all the parties
involved, but of the entire international community,
including all of us here today.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Assistant Secretary-General Mueller, Assistant
Secretary-General Khiari and Agnès Marcaillou,
Director of the United Nations Mine Action Service
(UNMAS).
The Syrian process has dragged on for many years.
The humanitarian dimension is interlinked with the
quest for a political settlement and the exigencies of
counter-terrorism, so a holistic approach is necessary.
Resolving the Syrian issue through the political track
is the most effective means of easing the humanitarian
situation in the country, and rooting out terrorist forces is
a precondition for restoring peace and bringing order to
the lives of the Syrian people. Turkey recently mounted
a unilateral military operation that exacerbated the
complexity and fragility of the situation in north-east
Syria, leading to greater challenges in the fight against
terrorism and worsening the country’s humanitarian
situation, all of which could negatively impact the
reaching of a political settlement.
Going forward, I wish to propose the following.
First, there is a need to resolve the issue by political
and diplomatic means, so that peace and stability can
soon prevail throughout the entire territory of Syria.
China has consistently been against the use of force in
international relations. Any effort by any country to
address its concerns must be in line with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
the basic norms governing international relations.
14/28

24/10/2019

It is imperative to respect in good faith Syria’s
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity and to consider seriously and take on board
the views and positions of the Syrian Government. On
22 October, the Russian Federation and Turkey signed
a memorandum of understanding on the issue of northeast Syria, which we hope will help facilitate a negotiated
solution through dialogue between the parties.
There is no viable alternative to a political
solution to bring Syria out of the crisis. The Syrian
Constitutional Committee will hold its first meeting
in Geneva towards the end of October. We hope that it
will get off to a good start and produce positive results.
China supports the United Nations and in particular
Special Envoy Pedersen in continuing with their good
offices, upholding the principle that this be a Syrian-led
and Syrian-owned process and implementing resolution
2254 (2015) to help bring about a political solution that
addresses the concerns of all parties.
Secondly, there is a need to ramp up humanitarian
assistance to the entire Syrian territory, lift the
economic sanctions imposed on the country and
facilitate the return of refugees and displaced persons.
The underfunding of the humanitarian response plan
for Syria is worrying. The economic sanctions have
led to a deterioration in the Syrian people’s living
conditions. The presence of numerous Syrian refugees
places economic and social pressures on neighbouring
countries and constitutes a destabilizing factor for
the region.
As a consequence of the military operation that
began on 9 October, close to 180,000 people have
been displaced in the north-east. The international
community should provide United Nations and other
relevant agencies with sufficient resources so that they
can provide humanitarian supplies for people in need
throughout Syria, including food, drinking water and
medical services for those in the north-east.
The parties concerned should help to improve
Syria’s economics situation and facilitate the safe and
voluntary return of Syrian refugees. China commends
UNMAS for working actively and conducting riskeducation and awareness-raising programmes recently
through bilateral channels. China provided Syria with
100 buses and assisted in the repairing of two schools.
We will continue to do everything we can to help.
Thirdly, it is necessary to consolidate the gains
made in the fight against terrorism and to continue to
19-33336

24/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East

combat terrorism by applying uniform standards in
accordance with the relevant Council resolutions and
international law. Counter-terrorism is pivotal to peace
and security for Syria, the Middle East and the world
as a whole. All parties must attach the importance to
this matter. It is necessary to refrain from taking any
action that jeopardizes the gains of counter-terrorism,
to address jointly the risk of spillover or relocation
of terrorists, to remain vigilant, guard against an
opportunistic resurgence of Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant forces, and effectively manage the
resettlement of foreign terrorists fighters and their
families. The Secretariat should keep a close watch on
developments on the counter-terrorism front and the
relocation of terrorists, report to the Council on same
in a timely manner and study in earnest the issue of
bringing terrorists to justice.
Terrorist forces remain entrenched in most parts
of Idlib, and the international community should be
committed to the quest for a holistic solution to the
counter-terrorism process and humanitarian issues
in Idlib.
Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the convening of this meeting and thank
the eminent briefers for their presentations.
Peru continues to follow with deep concern the
continuing conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic and
the serious deterioration of the humanitarian situation
there. Women and children, as is often the case in
savage conflicts such as the one that brings us together
this afternoon, are the most affected. The north-eastern
part of the country remains the focus of attention.
According to United Nations estimates, in just a few
days 180,000 cases of displacement were recorded, in
addition to the civilian deaths and injuries reported.
We commend the efforts under way by the United
Nations and other humanitarian agencies to assist these
people, who are experiencing conditions of extreme
vulnerability. We also appreciate the efforts made at
the highest levels of Government by the United States
and the Russian Federation along with the authorities
of Turkey aimed at preventing any further deterioration
and to establish a ceasefire that we hope will prove to
be permanent.
The principle of the peaceful resolution of disputes,
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, is, in
this context, particular apt and relevant. At the same
time, we note that any reduction of tensions or other

S/PV. 8645

arrangements, as well as the presence of foreign forces,
should always be temporary in nature and should not
trigger a de facto partition of the country.
We believe also that any initiative aimed at
ensuring the return to Syria of the millions of refugees
and internally displaced persons should be carried
out under internationally accepted parameters that
would guarantee, as has been said, that they take place
in a dignified, secure and voluntary manner. The
oversight work of the United Nations is therefore of
critical importance.
The emphasis placed on unfolding events in the
northeast part of Syria should not detract in any way
from the urgent need to tackle the humanitarian crises
looming in other parts of Syrian territory, and, as
noted by the Assistant Secretary-General, we deem it
imperative to continue pursuing efforts to ensure that
we can provide, without interruption, basic necessities
for the 68,000 internally displaced persons who
have taken shelter at the Al-Hol centre and for the
approximately 12,000 persons who are still languishing
in Rukban camp.
The presence here of the Director of UNMAS
also impels us to stress once again the importance of
continuing to mobilize the international community’s
support for humanitarian demining and the clearing of
improvised explosive devices in Syria, which continue
to wreak havoc among the population and hamper the
delivery of aid and assistance.
Faced with the intensification of violence in
recent weeks and the devastating consequences for the
population, we cannot but recall the urgent need to make
headway towards a political solution based on resolution
2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex). We therefore look forward to the holding of the
first meeting of the Constitutional Committee, which
we hope will help lead to Syrian reconciliation.
The Council must, inter alia, keep a close eye on
events on the ground with a view to maintaining the
ceasefire in Idlib and in the north-east of the country.
Any effort to bring about lasting peace will depend to
a large extent on preventing all these situations from
deteriorating into fresh human tragedies.
Mr. Moriko (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the holding of this meeting and
congratulates Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs; Mr. Mohamed

19-3333615/28

S/PV.8645

The situation in the Middle East

Khaled Khiari, Assistant Secretary-General for the
Middle East, Asia and the Pacific; and Ms. Agnès
Marcaillou, Director of the United Nations Mine
Action Service, Department of Peace Operations, for
their detailed briefings on recent developments in the
humanitarian situation in Syria.
The escalation of hostilities on 29 April in Idlib
governorate and the Turkish military offensive
launched on 9 October in north-east Syria are real
sources of concern for Côte d’Ivoire in terms of
their humanitarian consequences. According to the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/820), more than
1,000 civilians have been killed since the escalation of
hostilities in Idlib governorate began, while 400,000
people have been forced to flee to the Turkish border.
Once a place of refuge for thousands of Syrians fleeing
the fighting in their country, the Turkish-Syrian
border has become, since the outbreak of the Turkish
military offensive, a high-risk area that has reignited
the concern of the international community about
the already very worrisome humanitarian situation
in the country. According to estimates by the United
Nations Children’s fund, to date nearly 165,000 people,
including 80,000 children, are being affected by the
military escalation in north-east Syria, not to mention
the impact of the clashes on sanitation infrastructure,
including a water treatment station that serves the
drinking-water needs of approximately 400,000 people
in the area of Hasakah.
My delegation resolutely condemns the attacks on
civilian populations and infrastructure and reminds
those leading the offensive that conducting military
operations does not exempt them from their obligations
under international humanitarian law, which include
the protection of civilians and educational and
health infrastructure, as well as the provision of
humanitarian assistance.
Furthermore, Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the
unilateral truce decreed by the Russian Federation and
Government forces in Idlib governorate on 31 August.
We also welcome the fact that United States and
Russian mediation efforts led to Turkey’s decision to
suspend its offensive against Kurdish forces in northeast Syria. My country encourages the continuation of
dialogue with both Turkey and Kurdish forces and urges
all actors in the Syrian crisis to take further action
to de-escalate. We also urge all actors to establish a
permanent ceasefire, which is essential to meeting the
humanitarian challenges in the region and increasing
16/28

24/10/2019

the likelihood of achieving a successful outcome at the
meeting scheduled for 30 October in Geneva with a
view to setting in motion the Constitutional Committee.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the continued provision
of cross-border humanitarian assistance, which has
helped to relieve thousands of people affected by the
conflict and, in turn, reduce the risk of a humanitarian
disaster. In that regard, we would like to remind the
belligerents of the urgent need to ensure safe, prompt,
unhindered and sustainable humanitarian access for
people in distress. In that connection, my delegation
sincerely hopes that the upcoming negotiations among
the members of the Council will lead to the renewal for
a one-year period of the mandate of the United Nations
Monitoring Mechanism, which ensures the provision of
cross-border humanitarian aid and is set to expire on
10 January 2020.
Côte d’Ivoire also notes with regret the low level of
funding for the humanitarian response plan for Syria,
of which, as of the end of September, only 35 per cent
of the needs outlined therein had been provided. We
therefore call on States and organizations that have
committed themselves to supporting Syria and the
region to honour their promises in order to allow for the
continued provision of aid to people.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire once again urges the
international community to maintain its humanitarian
assistance efforts in Syria and reiterates its support
for the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General in his
efforts to find a peaceful and lasting solution to the
crisis. We hope that the talks scheduled to take place
among the Syrian parties in Geneva on 30 October will
build the broad political perspective that is necessary to
that end so as to bring peace, stability and development
back to the entire region.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): My delegation thanks
Assistant Secretary-General Mueller, Assistant
Secretary-General Khiari and Director Marcaillou for
their briefings.
The humanitarian situation in Syria remains
alarming. I believe that everyone in the Chamber is fully
aware of that. Humanitarian concerns are continuing
to grow as nearly 180,000 people have been displaced
and civilian casualties have been reported since the
escalation of hostilities began in north-east Syria.
Humanitarian concerns are also continuing to grow
because thousands of civilians have been killed since
the escalation of hostilities began in late April in north19-33336

24/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East

west Syria. And humanitarian concerns are continuing
to grow as camps are overcrowded and humanitarian
assistance is overstretched. Those concerns are real
and need to be addressed immediately. Indonesia
appreciates all efforts from the relevant parties to assist
with the situation on the ground and ease the suffering
of civilians. My delegation also appreciates the relevant
agreements that have been reached with the aim to
de-escalate conflict and cease military operations. We
sincerely hope that those agreements can be respected
and fully implemented. In that context, I would like to
focus on three elements.
First, the hostilities must end permanently. It is
essential to take all appropriate steps to protect the
civilian population, including those people that are in
internally displaced persons camps. All parties need
to ensure that their activities are based on respect for
international law and international humanitarian law.
All parties need to ensure that the ceasefire agreements
will not only be on paper but also, and most important,
truly felt by the people on the ground. In addition,
protecting civilian infrastructure remains crucial. We
note in that regard that the United Nations Headquarters
board of inquiry commenced its work on 30 September,
with the mandate to investigate a number of specific
incidents in which there was destruction of, or damage
to, facilities on the United Nations deconfliction list
and United Nations-supported facilities in north-west
Syria since the signing of the Idlib memorandum.
With regard to the activities of the United Nations
Mine Action Service (UNMAS), we note that, for its
part, UNMAS has played an important role to protect
civilians and limit the threat of mines, explosive
remnants and improvised explosive devices in Syria.
Secondly, we cannot overemphasize the need for
all parties to facilitate immediate, safe, unimpeded and
sustained humanitarian access to the areas requested,
and in particular to populations in need. During this
challenging moment, humanitarian access is indeed
crucial. We commend the United Nations and its
humanitarian workers who are working tirelessly to
deliver life-saving humanitarian assistance.
Thirdly, my delegation wishes to stress that the
hostilities must not disrupt the progress on the political
process. Indonesia is pleased to note that the launching
of the Syrian-led and Syrian-owned Constitutional
Committee is still on schedule. The launching and the
process that will follow need to remain on track. The
international community needs to redouble its efforts

S/PV. 8645

in supporting the work of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Geir Pedersen.
As reported by the Secretary-General, Syria
remains one of the greatest humanitarian crises of our
time, and we have the obligation to ensure that this
crisis comes to an end. It is not going to be an easy
process, but it is indeed doable.
As we celebrate United Nations Day today, it is my
delegation’s fervent hope that we will spare no effort in
strengthening our collective work to support the peace
process in Syria based on the spirit of the 74-yearold Charter of the United Nations — the Charter that
continues to be valid and that will continue to be our
collective guiding principle, in particular in saving
succeeding generations and uniting our strength to
maintain peace and security.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): You have just reminded
me, Mr. President, that the representative of Kuwait
already spoke on behalf of the three co-penholders on
the humanitarian situation in Syria. I promise to keep
my remarks very brief, but I would like to add a couple
of points.
We are of course extremely worried about the
humanitarian situation. I also want to add — since
others have mentioned it — that Germany is the secondlargest donor of humanitarian aid to Syria.
The first of the two points that I want to mention
has to do with the worrisome reports we just read about
the war crimes that have been committed during the
Turkish offensive. Civilians have been targeted, and I
can only subscribe to what has been said before about
the culprits being brought to justice. Perhaps our
Turkish friend can say something about what Turkey is
planning in that respect.
I also want to pick up on Idlib. I heard the report from
Assistant Secretary-General Mohamed Khaled Khiari
with regard to the increased air strikes and barrel bombs
reported in Idlib. That is extremely worrisome. Members
will remember that last month the three co-penholders
tried to get the Security Council’s agreement on a draft
resolution (S/2019/756) again linking and counterterrorism measures to international humanitarian law.
Members will remember that we were not successful
because Russia and China vetoed that draft resolution
(see S/PV.8623). In their statements today, to which I
listened very carefully, there was a lot about counterterrorism but nothing explicitly addressing respect for

19-3333617/28

S/PV.8645

The situation in the Middle East

international humanitarian law. Quite to the contrary,
we are receiving very well documented reports
about targeted strikes against hospitals and civilian
infrastructure. Germany participated in a Russianorganized meeting over lunch on the humanitarian
situation with an expert from Russia. We asked about
matters including the report in The New York Times
on 13 October. He did not know anything about it, so
we brought a copy of that article and handed it over to
Ambassador Nebenzia to study.
We have all said that there is no alternative to a
political solution. We all agree on that. But what do we
need for a political solution? The Council just returned
from a trip to South Sudan. We all listened to what civil
society had to say: they said that, for reconciliation
to happen and peace to be achieved in South Sudan,
there needs to be accountability. There needs to be the
installation of a court in South Sudan, which has in
fact been agreed upon by the by the Council. Similar
measures are also needed in Syria.
In another side event a few weeks ago here, we
heard from a witness who succeeded in escaping
from an Al-Assad prison about the torture that he had
to endure — 200,000 people remain in such prisons.
There will be no reconciliation and no future for that
country if there is no accountability for the crimes
that have been committed. Therefore, again, I would
appeal for support in that regard. Since our Russian
friends are so interested in the reconstruction of the
country, I urge them to support the efforts in the Fifth
Committee to give the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 the means
that it needs to work on accountability and finally
restore peace to Syria.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): Let me thank all our
briefers — Assistant Secretary-General Ursula Mueller,
Assistant Secretary-General Mohamed Khaled Khiari
and Director Agnès Marcaillou. First of all, in the
context of recent developments, let me reiterate that
there is no military solution to the conflict in Syria, and
any sustainable solution to the conflict will requires
a genuine political transition. Allow me also to echo
Ms. Mueller’s words in stressing that the Syrian people
deserves and expects a political solution finally to
bring an end to the violence and let them live their lives
in peace and safety.
18/28

24/10/2019

We remain deeply concerned by the negative impact
of recent developments on the humanitarian, political
and security situation in the region, especially taking
into consideration possible impacts of a Turkish military
operation. I will focus on those three dimensions of the
consequences of a Turkish military operation.
First, regarding the humanitarian impact, the
current situation in Syria already has dramatic
consequences for civilians, as highlighted by previous
speakers. Many civilians are trapped in the conflict.
The safety of thousands of civilians, including children
and humanitarian personnel, is under threat. There
have already been reports of civilian deaths and
injuries, including among children. Let me stress that,
according to civil society organizations operating in
the area, thousands of children are spread across three
camps in the north-east. Those children — almost
half of them under the age of 5 and the majority under
12 — rely completely and exclusively on humanitarian
aid. Any interruption to camp services, which are
already overstretched, would put their lives at risk.
Let me again to reiterate, as we have stressed
on a number of occasions in this Chamber, that all
parties must fully comply with their obligations under
international law and international humanitarian law,
including the principle of the protection of civilians,
which means, among other things, the protection of
civilian infrastructure and avoiding the use of explosive
weapons in populated areas. It is also an obligation
under international law to ensure safe and unhindered
access to humanitarian aid, as well as the free and
unhindered movement of civilians fleeing violence.
Let us also recall that summary executions, which
are reported to have happened after the incursion
started, are serious violations of international human
rights law and international humanitarian law that
may amount to war crimes. All reports of such alleged
violations should be investigated and the perpetrators
must be brought to justice.
Secondly, let me turn to the political impact. We
remain concerned about the potential impact of recent
military operations on the political process under the
auspices of the United Nations, since they have the
potential to undermine the progress achieved so far by
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria,
Mr. Pedersen, especially his work on the Constitutional
Committee. Poland underlines its commitment to the
unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Syrian
19-33336

24/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East

State, which can be assured only through a genuine
political transition in keeping with resolution 2254
(2015) and the 2012 Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex) negotiated by the Syrian parties within the
United Nations-led Geneva process.
We take note of the agreement reached by Turkey
and Russia in Sochi and hope that its provisions will
translate into long-term de-escalation and the tangible
stabilization of the situation in north-east Syria. We
underline that the parties bear responsibility for the
safety of the civilian population in the area, including
the Kurds, in accordance with their obligations under
international law, including international humanitarian
law and human rights law.
We also wish to stress that Turkey remains a key
partner for the European Union, a NATO ally and a
critically important actor in the Syrian crisis and the
region, including as a crucial member of the global
coalition. We expect Turkey to act responsibly and
with a long-term perspective in the context of the
Syrian conflict.
Thirdly, let me turn to the security impact. Last
but not least, we are concerned that prolonged military
escalation in north-east Syria might contribute to
the further destabilization of the broader region,
already in immense turmoil. We are receiving very
disturbing reports of the escape of an unknown number
of fighters of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS) from prisons in the area. That undermines the
progress achieved by the global coalition and creates an
environment conducive to the resurgence of ISIS.
Let me now turn to the issue of mines. It goes
without saying that we commend the United Nations
Mine Action Service for its efforts aimed at alleviating
this problem in Syria. Sadly, explosive remnants of war
were recorded as the leading cause of child casualties
in Syria during the second half of 2018, accounting for
almost 500 reported deaths and injuries, which were
completely unnecessary. Explosive weapons continue
to be used indiscriminately and systematically in
populated urban and rural areas, particularly affecting
internally displaced persons and those voluntarily
returning to unsafe areas. Clearing contamination is
therefore essential and constitutes a first step towards
ensuring the safe return of a civilian population, who is
suffering the most as a result of this devastating conflict.
In conclusion, I want to recall Poland’s position on
the safe return of Syrian refugees who have fled their

S/PV. 8645

homes. A durable solution for Syria should ensure the
security of a sustainable, dignified and voluntary return
of Syrians to their country of origin, in accordance with
international law and the principle of non-refoulement.
Finally, we fully support the renewal of resolution 2449
(2018), allowing for cross-border delivery of assistance,
because, in our view, it is necessary so that all these
people in Syria can simply survive.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me, like others,
thank our briefers today.
The United Kingdom welcomes the fact that the
United States-brokered ceasefire is holding in northeast Syria and that the fighting appears to be over. We
note the agreement announced on Tuesday by President
Vladimir Putin and President Recep Erdoğan that
this ceasefire is now permanent and the subsequent
announcement by the Turkish Ministry of Defence that
they see no need for further operations. In that context,
let me say that we call on Turkey — as we do all actors
in the Syrian conflict — to comply with the obligations
towards civilians under international humanitarian
law. We will be looking very closely at the details and
implementation of the agreements announced, including
their impact on governance and the local population.
The security situation in the north-east remains
volatile. Military developments have led to 180,000
people displaced, 80,000 of whom are children and
over 10,000 of whom have fled to Iraq. A number of
international aid workers have felt compelled to leave,
which has had a serious impact on operations. It is
essential that humanitarian actors have unrestricted
access to areas where people continue to be in need.
We hope that these displaced people will soon be able
to return to their homes safely and that damage caused
to critical infrastructure is swiftly repaired.
On 16 October, the Council agreed press elements
expressing our collective concern about the impact of
recent developments on the humanitarian situation and
the possible resurgence of Da’esh. The Sochi agreement
has not alleviated our concern. It is imperative that the
Council be kept informed of the humanitarian situation,
including in internally displaced persons camps, as well
as on the threat posed by Da’esh. We note the return of
regime forces to areas of north-east Syria following the
agreement between the Syrian Democratic Forces and
Damascus. Given the appalling record of the regime’s
security forces elsewhere, the behaviour of those forces
is something we will monitor very closely.

19-3333619/28

S/PV.8645

The situation in the Middle East

We continue to support the rights of Syrian refugees
to return to their homes when it is considered safe to
do so, but we would have serious concerns about any
attempt to force refugees to return to Syria against their
will. Any returns must be voluntary and in line with
the principles of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. Any attempt at deliberate
demographic change would be unacceptable.
The United Kingdom is one of the largest donors
to the humanitarian needs of Syrians, and we do so
throughout Syria and its neighbours. There is no
politicization in our provision of life-saving support.
But, as we and our European Union partners have
previously made clear, we will not provide stabilization
or development assistance in areas where the rights of
local populations are ignored.
All of those concerns mean that the United
Nations has a much more important role to play in
north-east Syria, particularly given the difficulties
being faced by other humanitarian agencies. To allow
humanitarian agencies to prepare, plan and respond, we
would welcome clarity about how the United Nations
plans to scale up its response. Assistant SecretaryGeneral Mueller made clear — and it was echoed by
the humanitarian co-penholders — the need for the
renewal of the cross-border aid resolution 2449 (2018).
I would also like to acknowledge Ms. Marcaillou’s
assessment and depiction of the scale of the challenge;
as the United Nations Mine Action Service seeks to
step up its efforts, we will need — and we expect — to
see the regime cooperating fully and allowing access.
We cannot let events elsewhere in Syria distract
us from the dire humanitarian situation that persists
in Idlib. We were extremely concerned to learn of the
resumption of air strikes and shelling last week. Let us
remember that over 1,000 civilians have been killed
since the beginning of May, including more than 500
women and children, and over 688,000 people have
been forced to leave their homes. We therefore urge all
parties to respect the ceasefire agreed on 31 August.
We look forward to the board of inquiry’s investigation
into the appalling attacks in Idlib and its subsequent
update to the Security Council.
The United Kingdom would once again like
to welcome the first meeting of the Constitutional
Committee next week — a momentous occasion.
Mr. Pederson has the United Kingdom’s full backing.
A political process in line with resolution 2254 (2015)
20/28

24/10/2019

is crucial for peace in Syria. The Syrian people have
suffered through nine years of conflict and, as events
in Idlib and the north-east testify, that suffering is not
over. The Constitutional Committee is an opportunity
for Syrians from all sides to sit down to grapple with
the real issues that have caused the conflict. It is an
important signal, but it must be more than that — it
must be the start of real, genuine change. That will
require serious engagement and commitment from all
participants to succeed. Unless the regime realizes
that its actions have been a fundamental reason for the
conflict, nothing will be achieved. We call on the regime
representatives to demonstrate that understanding at
the upcoming first meeting.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, on behalf of my delegation,
I would like to express our thanks to Ms. Mueller,
Mr. Khiari and Ms. Marcaillou for their respective
detailed and useful briefings.
The overall outlook for the humanitarian and
security situation in Syria, widely described in the
statements of the representatives that took the floor
before me, means we cannot help but voice our concern
for the safety of the civilian population. Humanitarian
needs have increased significantly, while the statistics
after eight and a half years of war continue to be alarming.
There are currently more than 6 million internally
displaced persons and approximately 6 million refugees
being hosted in neighbouring countries and in Europe.
Throughout the country, the death toll exceeds 370,000,
one third of whom are civilians.
Faced with this appalling situation, the Government
of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea encourages the
United Nations and its partners to spare no effort to
provide a scaled-up collective response that will help
to prevent further deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in Syria. To mitigate the humanitarian impact,
it is also incumbent upon the Security Council to ensure
that humanitarian partners can continue to provide aid
to people in need wherever access is possible. We must
continue to support displaced persons in communal
shelters and host communities, as well as those
internally displaced persons in camps and informal
settlements such as Rukban and Al-Hol.
The international community has unanimously
expressed its concern regarding the humanitarian
situation in Syria. My Government commends the
negotiations between the United States and Turkish
19-33336

24/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Administrations, which have led to a ceasefire that
should allow, as agreed, oversight of the withdrawal of
Kurdish forces from the border between Turkey and the
Syrian Arab Republic.
In that connection, we also wish to welcome
the signing of the memorandum of understanding
between Russia and Turkey on the normalization of
the situation in north-east Syria and, in line with
the recent statements by the Secretary-General, we
commend initiatives aimed at reducing the escalation
of the situation. We believe that that agreement is a
step towards maintaining stability in the region. The
Government of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
hopes that such agreements will help to ease Turkey’s
concern over its security and the terrorist threat and
that the parties honour their commitments, including
the withdrawal of arms, forces and equipment from
Kurdish units.
Finally, I would like to emphasize that the latest
Russian-Turkish agreement is fully in line with
Equatorial Guinea’s position, which has always
supported negotiations between the parties, inclusive
dialogue and a peaceful approach to resolving
any dispute.
We believe that we are now making decisive progress
in the resumption of the peace negotiations in Geneva
within the framework of the Constitutional Committee.
Only an inclusive and credible political process will be
able to provide a lasting solution to the conflict in Syria
in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).
The President: I will now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of South Africa.
I thank Ms. Ursula Mueller, Ms. Agnès Marcaillou
and Mr. Khaled Khiari for their briefings.
South Africa voices its deep concern about
the dire humanitarian situation in Syria. While the
previous briefing by the then Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Mr. Lowcock, in September (see
S/PV.8619) focused on the upsurge in violence in northwest Syria, the new front in Syria’s complex war is
exacerbating an already fragile humanitarian situation.
According to the most recent Secretary-General’s
report (S/2019/820), more than 1,000 civilians have
been killed since late April, with 209 killed between
1 August and 22 September. Since the beginning of
May this year, more than 630,000 people have been

S/PV. 8645

displaced, some not for the first time, with many
seeking shelter in the open.
In north-east Syria, more than 180,000 civilians,
including 80,000 children, have now been displaced due
to the increased military operations since 9 October.
With regard to the damaged Allouk water system, we
welcome and applaud the United Nations efforts in
repairing that infrastructure, which supports 400,000
people in the region, and call on all parties to ensure
that the additional necessary repairs to return the water
system to full operation can be completed without delay.
The humanitarian situation has worsened further
following the withdrawal of some international
humanitarian
agencies
and
non-governmental
organizations from north-east Syria. Their withdrawal
and suspensions of operations have added further
challenges and complications for those civilians in the
area requiring assistance to meet their basic needs.
These combined events have exacerbated a
humanitarian crisis that has already been declared one
of the world’s worst. Last month the Security Council
failed to adopt a resolution that addressed the dire
humanitarian situation in Idlib. Such lack of Council
unity is not the message that we want to convey to the
Syrian men, women and children who have lost their
lives, sustained severe injuries and endured multiple
displacements due to the dismal conditions in which
they live. We are the international body that has been
entrusted with peace and security. Yet, because of
our internal rivalries, we are failing to discharge our
responsibility. At the very least, we should be able to
agree on humanitarian assistance.
Let us be clear: Syria is at a delicate stage. There is
a glimmer of hope and prospects on the political front
given the positive developments with regard to the
official launch of the Constitutional Committee by the
end of this month. The Council should be galvanizing
all its energies towards that political process and invest
everything possible for a fully inclusive Syrian-led
political process.
However, the developments in north-east Syria in
recent days have also aggravated the fragile situation
we are talking about. The Council must endeavour to
rally around a common position to assist the process
and implement its mandate to maintain international
peace and security. The brief elements of presidential
statement S/PRST/2019/12, which we adopted last week,
are a start. It may not say much but at least it shows that

19-3333621/28

S/PV.8645

The situation in the Middle East

we can agree on some common ground. South Africa
would be willing to work with the penholders and
interested delegations on this matter to seek consensus.
In conclusion, it must be emphasized that it is
crucial that there be utmost restraint and a de-escalation
of hostilities, as well as the recognition of Syria’s
territorial integrity and sovereignty, and that all parties
comply with international law.
South Africa wishes to reiterate that the situation
in Syria must be resolved through negotiations and
dialogue and calls on all parties to make every effort
towards the full implementation of resolution 2254
(2015). South Africa has noted the memorandum of
understanding signed between Turkey and the Russian
Federation on 22 October. My delegation hopes that
the memorandum together with the previously agreed
ceasefire between Turkey and the United States of
America on 17 October, along with the continuous and
steadfast efforts of Special Envoy Pedersen, all work
together towards achieving long-term peace, stability
and prosperity for Syria and its people.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I have long noted and been aware of the
fact that my friend, the German representative, has
a predisposition towards inviting me to engage in
dialogue during Security Council meetings. I cannot
deny him that pleasure. I wish to make this an interactive
dialogue. He does not need to give me the article from
The New York Times. I have seen it. It is just another
fake that has emerged and has long been refuted by our
Defence Ministry. It is clear that it is a cheap fake.
I would also like to provide something, that is,
the text of my briefing at a press conference that I
held for journalists. I do not recall the exact date but
I believe that it was on 16 or 18 September. During
the briefing I described the fake news, the fraudulent
information and the fabrications being used as part of
the de-confliction process by so-called credible United
Nations sources in Idlib. Unfortunately, as a result, it is
being used by United Nations representatives. I think
that the commission that was mentioned today should
above all see to it that they ascertain how organizations
22/28

24/10/2019

and bodies of the United Nations became complicit in
this shady scheme.
On the basis of the aforementioned fake information
our humanitarian champions deliberately patched
together an unacceptable draft resolution (S/2019/756),
which we, as was mentioned by the representative of
Germany, vetoed along with China. I believe that
the draft resolution was presented for the following
purpose — so that they might later have the pleasure
of mentioning that fact at Council meetings. It seems
that this was the reason for putting the draft resolution
before the Council.
My German friend is perfectly aware of the fact
that the fate of the draft resolution was known even
prior to its submission. I warned him about that from
the very outset. We constantly hear instructions from
others as to what we need to do and what we should
not do. I want to ask him what Germany itself is doing
to stabilize the situation in Syria beyond lecturing
others and constantly insisting on new conditions.
When will it deign to consider the needs of the Syrian
people? We are not lecturing or competing with anyone,
we are simply taking action.
The President: The representative of China has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
representative of Germany commented on my statement
just now, so I would like to respond by making two points.
First, before he comments on others’ statements, he
should first understand the content of those statements.
If he is confused about them, it might not be appropriate
to make such comments. I emphasized in my statement
that we should consolidate the results that have recently
been achieved in countering terrorism, continue to act in
accordance with Council resolutions and international
law — let me emphasize, international law — unify
standards and combat all forms of terrorism. I have a
personal background in international law. It is common
sense that international law includes international
humanitarian law and everyone should understand that.
I also want to highlight the fact that China has its own
principles and positions that it bases its statements on,
and it is not anyone else’s place to lecture or comment
on them.
Secondly, how China votes in the Council, including
on resolutions drafted by the humanitarian penholders,
depends on the merits of the case. Our position is based
on our consideration for international peace and security
19-33336

24/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East

and for the sovereignty, territorial integrity, security
considerations and humanitarian needs of the country
concerned. It is also based on China’s principles and
positions, which we have steadfastly adhered to. We
regard to how we vote, do not have to look to others to
help make our decisions, and it is not Germany’s place
to worry about that.
The President: The representative of Germany has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I will be brief. I am not
predisposed to get into discussions with our Russian
colleague, but I am predisposed to defend international
humanitarian law and human rights, and I am doing that
in implementation of the Charter of the United Nations
and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It may
not be for me to criticize Chinese positions, but it is
for me to uphold international law and international
humanitarian law, and the term “international
humanitarian law” was not mentioned in either the
Russian or the Chinese statement.
The President: I wish to remind representatives
that I have no intention of going beyond 6 p.m. I
will suspend the meeting at exactly 6 p.m. whether
or not anyone is speaking. Members’ cooperation
is appreciated.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the work that you and your friendly
delegation have been doing during your membership
of the Security Council and your presidency of it
this month.
On 9 October the Turkish regime began a new
chapter in its aggression against my country, in
flagrant violation of international law, the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the outcome documents
of the Astana meetings and the Sochi memorandum,
all of which stress the importance of respecting Syria’s
territorial integrity and sovereignty. The Turkish
aggression has resulted in the occupation of Syrian
territory and the killing and injuring of hundreds of
martyrs and civilians, including women, children
and public servants. It has also displaced hundreds
of thousands of people and done significant material
damage to schools, hospitals and vital infrastructure

S/PV. 8645

such as dams and power and water plants. It seems
that the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs considers all of that an illusion undeserving
of attention, which shows that its humanitarian claims
are empty.
It is unfortunate that neither Ms. Mueller nor
Mr. Khiari condemned the Turkish aggression, referring
to it as the Turkish military operation in north-eastern
Syria as if it were in north-eastern Venus, Mars or
Mercury, not a country that is a founding member of
this Organization and is sovereign under international
law. As they always do, the Turkish regime and its
partners in the aggression against my country have
tried to legitimize it and whitewash the facts. To justify
its aggression, the Turkish regime included in its letter
addressed to the President of the Council (S/2019/804) a
number of lies that fool no one. It claimed, for instance,
that the aggression is intended to facilitate the return of
displaced persons, preserve the territorial integrity of
the Syrian Arab Republic and combat terrorism. It even
gave its aggression the name “Operation Peace Spring”
and called the area it seeks to occupy a “safe zone”,
in an illustration of the schizophrenia of the Turkish
regime, which only a few years ago announced a zeroproblem approach to its neighbours. That has ended up
as an approach of zero principles, zero friends and zero
good-neighbourliness.
It is not that surprising that in its aggression against
my country the Turkish regime invoked Article 51 of
the Charter of the United Nations, since that echoes the
approach taken by its NATO allies. They have invoked
that article to justify direct military intervention,
invasion and the undermining of the sovereignty,
security and stability of a number of States Members
of the United Nations. That was the case when the
so-called international coalition was established, an
illegitimate coalition whose crimes and puppet militias
paved the way for the current Turkish aggression. It is
strange that this magical article should be invoked by
some to justify waging wars and military aggression
on countries that are members of the United Nations
without any consideration for the actual mandate of
the Security Council, which is the maintenance of
international peace and security. We all remember what
happened in Yugoslavia, Iraq and Libya. Perhaps the
Council ought to hold a meeting with representatives
of the Office of Legal Affairs in our Organization to
clarify this important article of the Charter, debunk
the myths and misconceptions surrounding it and

19-3333623/28

S/PV.8645

The situation in the Middle East

distinguish between legitimate self-defence, on the one
hand, and war, invasion and aggression on the other, all
of which are condemned by the Charter.
My Government condemns the Turkish aggression
in the strongest terms and categorically rejects the
Turkish regime’s attempts to justify its actions on
pretexts of self-defence or counter-terrorism. This
regime has violated the Adana security agreement
concluded between both our countries in 1998. It has
recruited, supported, trained and armed thousands
of terrorists, including foreign terrorist fighters from
more than 100 countries, according to United Nations
reports. Those terrorists were welcomed by Turkish
intelligence officials at Turkish airports with a view to
facilitating their infiltration of the shared border with
my country. Their crimes were pre-planned. For years,
they were provided with political, military and media
support before they were recently integrated into the
invading forces in their aggression against the northeast of my country.
Turkey’s aggression has today been condemned
by the representatives of several European countries.
They referred to that aggression as unilateral Turkish
action, or as the Turkish operation, at best. However,
that condemnation does not in any way absolve those
countries of being accountable for their own actions in
creating the current situation. They laid out on a golden
platter all of the justification Erdoğan needed to carry
out his aggression and played a key role in supporting
and sponsoring the illegitimate separatist militias in
north-eastern Syria. They also played a major role in
instigating the emergence and exacerbation of the threat
posed by terrorist organizations currently operating in
and around Idlib.
The former United States Special Presidential
Envoy for the Global Coalition Against Da’esh, Mr. Brett
McGurk, confirmed that Turkey had allowed 40,000
Da’esh operatives from 110 countries to join its terrorist
ranks, refusing to close its shared border with Syria.
Those were McGurk’s words and that is the reality. Did
those countries not realize what was happening? What
did they do to dissuade the terrorists from coming to
my country? They did nothing — nothing but lament
international humanitarian law. We must combat
terrorism with international humanitarian law. We must
not send terrorists back to their places of departure in
Europe; rather, we must accommodate Da’esh terrorists
in 10-star hotels and ask the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs to provide them with food
24/28

24/10/2019

from the best restaurants in Paris. By this, we would
have implemented the international humanitarian law.
It is regrettable that some continue to demonstrate
their usual traits of hypocrisy and double standards.
They commend the Turkish regime for its so-called
generosity in hosting Syrian refugees and its crossborder humanitarian action. They choose to ignore
the fact that Erdoğan would not have welcomed a
single Syrian citizen were it not for his plans to use
Syrians as tools for achieving his expansionist agenda
in the region, to fulfil his illusions of establishing the
“Ottoman Sultanate of Erdoğan” and to use them as a
means of blackmailing Europe. He has repeatedly issued
threats against Europe, even if that means hundreds of
Syrians drowning in death boats belonging to Turkish
smugglers in the Aegean and Mediterranean Seas.
Erdoğan would not have facilitated any United
Nations cross-border action were it not for his desire to
cover up the smuggling of tens of thousands of foreign
terrorist, arms shipments and looting oil, antiquities,
wheat and Syrian factories and produce across the
border. Those were the real outcomes of resolutions
2449 (2018) and 2165 (2014). Was the Council aware
of all of that? Of course it was aware, but the hostile
actions of some Governments against Syria prompted an
allegiance with the devil at the expense of international
law, ethics and human values, resulting in the bloodshed
of the Syrian people.
The Ottoman Empire first occupied Syria in 1516.
The same Empire fell at the gates of Damascus in 1916.
I ask the Council to take note of that coincidence. In
1516, the Ottoman Empire occupied Syria; in 1916, more
than 100 years ago, the Ottoman Empire ceased to exist
at the gates of Damascus — not Vienna. Our neighbour,
Turkey, must understand that we share common history,
geography and interests — not hostile relations.
My delegation sent an official letter to the Council
yesterday containing the detailed response of the
Syrian Government to the information contained
in the sixty-third report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of resolutions related to the
humanitarian situation in Syria (S/2019/820). In view
of the time constraints, I will simply reiterate that
improving the humanitarian situation significantly in
my country will require full respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic by
countering external political, military and economic
interference in the domestic affairs of my country. It will
19-33336

24/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East

also require ensuring the full withdrawal of all foreign
forces that are acting illegitimately in the Syrian Arab
Republic. They are violating the sovereignty of my
country, thereby supporting terrorism and obstructing
our efforts and those of our allies to improve the
humanitarian situation, as is the case in Rukban camp in
the occupied area of Al-Tanf — an area that no one has
mentioned today. Not one speaker has mentioned the
fact that Al-Tanf, which is Syrian territory, is currently
occupied by United States forces. We also reiterate the
importance of lifting the unilateral coercive measures
under which the Syrian people are suffering. It is
equally important to ensure full cooperation with the
Syrian Government in supporting its efforts to combat
terrorism and make progress in the humanitarian and
development fields. Not to do so would be fishing in
troubled waters.
Finally, I wish to refer to our recent interaction
with Ms. Marcaillou, who was recently in Damascus,
as she mentioned in her briefing. She attended
important meetings with my colleagues in the Ministry
for Foreign Affairs, and we informed her that we had
developed a two-pronged national mine action strategy.
We also clarified that a significant and important
part of our demining work is being carried out by the
Syrian Government and our Russian allies. We further
explained that an Armenian mission, specialized in the
field of demining, is undertaking commendable efforts
in this field. We informed her that we are continuing
to cooperate with the Aga Khan Development Network
to remove mines in the Salamiyah area. We also told
her that the European Union (EU) claims to fund 30
humanitarian projects in Syria, but that it has not
allocated any funding to demining projects. We told
Ms. Marcaillou all that in Damascus. The EU rejects
funding the efforts of the United Nations Mine
Action Service to remove mines in Syria. Is demining
not a humanitarian activity? If demining is not a
humanitarian activity but a political one, then I ask:
Why did Ms. Marcaillou brief the Council today on the
humanitarian situation in Syria?
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): Over the past two weeks,
developments in the north-east of Syria have been the
subject of lengthy discussions. Various views have been
expressed, which is fine. We are all entitled to hold our
own views. But we are not entitled to our own facts. I
therefore view today’s meeting as a platform for me to

S/PV. 8645

set the record straight with regard to Operation Peace
Spring and the ensuing developments.
Operation Peace Spring was a limited cross-border
counter-terrorism operation to fight such terrorist
organizations as the Kurdish Workers Party (PKK), the
Democratic Union Party (PYD), the Kurdish People’s
Protection Units (YPG) and Da’esh. I therefore flatly
reject and strongly condemn any representation of
our counter-terrorism operations as an offensive or
aggression. We all very well know, condemn and fight
Da’esh, which is responsible for many inhuman actions,
violence and terrorism. Turkey has been at the forefront
of the fight against Da’esh. As an active member of the
Global Coalition against Da’esh since its inception,
Turkey has fought against Da’esh in Syria more than
any other country and paid the heaviest price. Turkey is
the only country that engaged in hand to hand combat
against Da’esh in Syria.
However, there is a deliberate effort to conceal
or forget the realities about the PKK/YPG, so let me
remind the Council about this group with a few facts.
As widely recognized and according to the United
States Intelligence Community’s 2018 Worldwide
Threat Assessment, the PYD/YPG is the Syrian militia
of the PKK. This fact was also recently recognized by
the President of the United States. And the PKK, as
we should all know by now, is designated as a terrorist
group by the European Union (EU), NATO and the
United States. However, some Member States have
provided heavy weapons, ammunition and training to
PKK/YPG under the assumption that it was acceptable
to use a terrorist organization against another terrorist
organization, in this case pitting the PKK against Da’esh.
Unsurprisingly, those weapons have been used to
target Turkey and civilians in Syria, about which we
have repeatedly warned the countries providing such
weapons, but to no avail. Perhaps a few Turkish and
Syrian civilian souls were seen as acceptable collateral
damage in the fight against terrorism and against Da’esh.
Yet the PKK/YPG did not stop there. They released
Da’esh terrorists so that they could conduct terrorist
activities in Turkey or north-west Syria. According to
Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch, the
PKK/YPG has changed the demographics of the region
by expelling local Arab, Kurdish and Turkmen people
from their own lands. Hundreds of thousands of Syrian
Kurds have fled their homes for safety in Turkey and
northern Iraq as a result of the oppression by the PKK/

19-3333625/28

S/PV.8645

The situation in the Middle East

YPG. Those who are opposed to the extremist ideology
of the PKK/YPG either go missing or are killed.
In a very short time, the area controlled by PKK/
YPG became a testing ground for a new totalitarian
terrorist State, so the idea of supporting one terrorist
organization to eliminate another failed once again.
Perhaps that was why the States Members of the United
Nations initially committed to prevent and combat
terrorism in all of its forms and manifestations.
From the very first day, the objectives of Operation
Peace Spring have been clear: to eliminate the longstanding existential terrorist threat along our border
with Syria, enforce Syria’s territorial integrity and
unity, protect the local population and create an
environment conducive to the voluntary, safe and
dignified return of Syrians to their homes. The
Operation was conducted in full compliance with
international law and international humanitarian law. It
only targeted terrorists and their hideouts, weapons and
vehicles. We took all necessary measures to prevent any
harm to civilians and damage to civilian infrastructure.
These are some of the reasons why the legitimate
representatives of the Syrian people — the National
Coalition of Syrian Revolutionary and Opposition
Forces, the interim Government, tribal leaders and
representatives of minorities, including the Syrian
Christian communities — supported the Operation.
On 17 October, we agreed with the United States
on future joint steps to address the legitimate security
concerns of Turkey, including enforcement of a safe
zone by the Turkish Armed Forces, the withdrawal of
YPG and the reappropriation of their heavy weaponry.
On the night of 22 October, the United States side
confirmed that the withdrawals of the YPG from
the safe zone was completed. In response, Turkey
declared that there was no further need to conduct a
new operation outside of the Operation Peace Spring
area because, on the same day, President Erdoğan
and President Putin agreed on a memorandum of
understanding. Accordingly, the established status
quo in the current Operation Peace Spring area, whose
width is 32 kilometres, will be preserved. Russian
military police and Syrian border guards will facilitate
the removal of YPG elements and their weapons to a
distance no less than 30 kilometres from our borders
outside the Operation Peace Spring area.
Following the removal of YPG/PKK, we will have
joint Russian/Turkish patrols in the west and east of the
26/28

24/10/2019

Operation Peace Spring area at 10 kilometres from our
border, except Qamishli city. All PKK/YPG elements
and their weapons will also be removed from Manbij
and Tell Rifaat. A joint monitoring and verification
mechanism will be established to oversee and coordinate
the implementation of the memorandum.
Following the successful conclusion of those
diplomatic efforts, Turkey decided to permanently
halt Operation Peace Spring on 22 October. We would
like to thank both our American and Russian friends
for acknowledging our legitimate security concerns
and accepting to work with us against PKK/YPG. Our
common efforts have prevented the establishment of a
terrorist State in northern Syria. This may not be good
news for some, but it is a very important step in the
political process towards re-establishing peace and
security in Syria.
There are now a number of issues on which we must
all focus. One of them is the future of detained Da’esh
terrorists. We have already announced that we will take
over the custody of Da’esh elements and their family
members held in detention facilities and camps in the
current Operation Peace Spring area. We are ready
to work with the countries of origin and international
organizations for the rehabilitation of spouses and
children who have not participated in crimes. But we
all know that the only sustainable solution remains the
repatriation of all foreign terrorist fighters and their
families to their countries of origin. It is time to have
a frank discussion about this issue. Stripping people of
their nationalities and dumping them elsewhere is not
the way to fight against terror. It is the way to wash
one’s hands of the situation.
The second issue I would like to raise is the
importance of ensuring the flow of humanitarian
assistance in coordination with the United Nations. The
first cross-border humanitarian assistance convoy from
Turkey reached Tel Abyad on 15 October. There is now
a continuous flow of humanitarian-assistance items
and services, including food, sanitation, shelter and
health care. We will increase humanitarian operations
in the light of the needs on the ground. We will
continue to cooperate with the United Nations and other
humanitarian organizations in addressing humanitarian
needs. An office dedicated to coordinating the delivery
of cross-border assistance into the region has already
been established in Akçakale, on the Turkish side of
the border.
19-33336

24/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Following Under-Secretary-General Lowcock’s
visit to the border provinces two weeks ago, we
established a great direct communication channel
on humanitarian issues between the United Nations
and the Turkish Foreign Minister. The first positive
outcome was the reparation of a water-treatment system
servicing more than 400,000 people.
The deconfliction mechanism, already in place with
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) in order to protect civilian infrastructure and
humanitarian personnel in north-west Syria, has also
been expanded to cover the north-east. So far, OCHA
has shared the coordinates of 425 civilian locations
and convoys with the Turkish authorities. Any report
of damage to the civilian infrastructure receives due
attention by our authorities.
Thirdly, we must also focus on how to help displaced
people. Following the two previous operations in Syria,
more than 365,000 people returned voluntarily to their
homes and lands. We will pursue the same model in
north-eastern Syria. We will make every effort to ensure
that those who choose to return to their homeland fully
enjoy their basic rights. I repeat that all returns will be
voluntary, safe and dignified, in close cooperation with
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
I must also underline that we are surprised by the
statements of some European States on the idea of a
safe zone. Those countries, which close their borders
with barbed-wire fences to protect against the flow of
refugees, were willing to create a refugee camp outside
their borders. Yes, we are still waiting for them to
honour their obligations arising from the 2016 TurkeyEU refugee agreement.
Let me put one thing on the record. Turkey reserves
its right to self-defence against terrorist elements that
may have remained in the Operation Peace Spring
area. Our fight against terrorism will always be in
accordance with international humanitarian law. In this
context, I agree with some of the previous speakers that
any military operation, including counter-terrorism
operations, should be conducted in line with international
law and international humanitarian law. This point has
been emphasized by the Secretary-General many times.
Any violation of international humanitarian law should
be investigated, and perpetrators held accountable. Of
course, that is true for every operation conducted by
anybody, including our American and other friends. We

S/PV. 8645

should also keep in mind that this is true not only for
the operations in Syria, but everywhere.
As President Erdoğan has emphasized on multiple
occasions, Turkey cannot and will not tolerate any
terrorist activity at its borders. Terrorist organizations
may take different names or forms, and they may adopt
different strategies, but our vigilance in the face of
terrorism will remain the same. Our commitment will
never be shaken for a moment, and we expect the same
from the international community.
It is time for everyone to recover from the selfimposed amnesia about the PKK/PYD/YPG, which
does not represent the Kurds in Syria, Turkey, Iraq
or Iran. It is a terrorist organization with a separatist
agenda in Syria. We will never allow this agenda
to prevail.
Turkey has never had second thoughts about the
future of our southern neighbour. We have always
supported a United Nations-sponsored, Syrian-led and
Syrian-owned political solution in line with resolution
2254 (2015). We have also agreed and emphasized the
work to be done in the context of the political process
that will resume in Geneva on 29 October, in line with
the United States and Russian agreements. We must all
work for the success of this process. For our part, we
will do so in full and close cooperation and coordination
with the United Nations.
When our Syrian brothers and sisters needed shelter,
the Turkish people never hesitated to open their doors
and hearths. Four million Syrians are living in Turkey,
including 300,000 Syrian Kurds. In some countries,
the mere idea of hosting Syrians was met with hatred
and unveiled all forms of xenophobia and racism. In
Turkey, on the other hand, we have shared our schools
and hospitals. We have shared our present, and we are
ready to share our future. And we will never accept
outrageous allegations or lectures that unfairly target
Turkey and the Turkish people. Unfortunately, in our
world today, shame is in retreat, and double standards
are on the rise.
The foregoing are the facts and the real background
of the recent developments in Syria.
With regard to the previous speaker’s statement, I
would like to say a few words. I do not deem the regime’s
representative to be my legitimate counterpart. I will
therefore not dignify his delusional accusations with
a response. A regime that has massacred and tortured

19-3333627/28

S/PV.8645

The situation in the Middle East

the Syrian people for more than eight years lost its
legitimacy long ago and should not have the right to
sit behind the Syrian nameplate in this Chamber. His
mere presence is an insult to the millions of Syrians

28/28

24/10/2019

who have suffered countless crimes at the hands of this
regime. The facts about the situation in Syria speak for
themselves, and whole world knows who is lying.
The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.

19-33336
