S/PV.7808

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7808th meeting

Thursday, 10 November 2016, 10.55 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Seck . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Senegal)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Kandeel
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Bessho
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Walbridge
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Gasso Matoses
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mrs. Carrión
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations
Police Commissioners

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-37500 (E)
*1637500*

S/PV.7808

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The meeting was called to order at 10.55 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
Police Commissioners
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: Mr. Hervé Ladsous, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations; Mr. Bruce
Munyambo, Police Commissioner of the United Nations
Mission in the Republic of South Sudan; Ms. Priscilla
Makotose, Police Commissioner of the African
Union/United Nations Hybrid operation in Darfur;
Mr. Georges-Pierre Monchotte, Police Commissioner
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti;
and Mr. Issoufou Yacouba, Police Commissioner
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
The intention is for this meeting to be as interactive
as possible, along the lines of the briefing held last
November (see S/PV.7558) and our dialogues with the
Force Commanders. We look forward to questions from
Council members to the Commissioners and from the
Commissioners to the Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, and the Senegalese presidency for
this fresh opportunity for dialogue with police officials
as part of the annual week for United Nations police
in New York — a week that is always, and perhaps
even more so this year, an opportunity to discuss all
the challenges our police forces face and what must
be done to improve our tools. This meeting comes two
years after the very important adoption of resolution
2185 (2014), which was the first of its kind in the history
of the Security Council, as it was the first time that the
Council recognized the central role of Blue Helmets in
peacekeeping operations.
Today, we have chosen what we have found
useful in the current context in our various theatres of
operations — four aspects represented by the presence
2/29

10/11/2016

of four of our Police Commissioners on the ground:
the protection of civilians; the integration of a gender
perspective; building police capacities; and personnel
security, behaviour and discipline. I will therefore be
very brief, since the Council is here to listen to them
rather than me.
First, with regard to the protection of civilians, it
is clear that we are dealing with enormous challenges
on the ground. We see it every day in South Sudan,
and Commissioner Munyambo will be discussing that.
I would like to remind the Council, as I have done
before, that the protection of civilians we have been
managing in South Sudan is not something we should
be cutting back on, since the 200,000 displaced persons
in the camps owe the fact that they are still alive to
the United Nations, and to the United Nations police
in particular. Were it not for that, many of them would
not be here. At the same time, however, that creates
an enormous organization problem when it comes to
running the camps in South Sudan’s current chaotic
environment. Regardless, that compels us to consider
how to improve the situation on the protection front
and what tools, techniques and talents we need in order
to optimize the joint functioning of the civilian and
military components.
Secondly, we have the issue of ensuring full
gender integration. That is extremely important to us,
and Commissioner Makotose will be discussing it,
for the reasons we are well aware of — first, because
women, like children, are particularly at risk in most
of the situations on the ground, and we have to take
that into account — and also because we need to have
more women in posts. We have in fact reached a level
where 20 per cent of our individual police officers are
women, in accordance with the goal established by the
Secretary-General, but we have to do better, just as
we have to do much better with female formed police
units. I have seen them on the ground in Liberia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Haiti, and that is
responding to a genuine need, but women make up only
7 per cent of formed police units. That is not enough,
because we need them not only for conducting dialogue
but also for sharing information on the ground, which
women are especially equipped to do.
Thirdly, capacity-building is crucial to enabling us
to support political processes, redeployment and the
re-establishment of the Government on the ground.
Those who have heard this before will have to forgive
me for quoting myself yet again, but, as we say in
16-37500

10/11/2016

United Nations peacekeeping operations

French, in many situations good behaviour starts with
a healthy fear of the police. When the people see police
out there, they say there you are, the Government is
back and functioning. And that is all about the rule of
law. We will be hearing from Commissioner Monchotte,
who sees that routinely in Haiti. By the way, the Office
of Internal Oversight Services recently carried out an
assessment that recommended making efforts to better
align the goals mandated for our police officers and to
improve the level of resources available to them. I think
that is the case in Haiti, where there is no question that
we need to create a post for a deputy chief of police,
among other things. We have to monitor things carefully
in order to ensure that all these demands are properly
aligned within a realistic time frame.
Fourthly, there is the security of our personnel,
especially in areas where that is an issue, such as in
Mali, about which Commissioner Yacouba will be
sharing his experiences of operating in an area where
the threats come on a daily basis. We are unfortunately
seeing victims of this all too often, and the human costs
for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali are far too high. That is
all because we are dealing there on the ground with a
terrible combination of criminal networks, extremist
groups and political stakeholders who are not always
very transparent about what they are doing. Those
are four illustrations of what we have to deal with,
and while they are to some extent dictated by current
events, any issue can be tackled within the framework
they represent.
I would like to take a moment to emphasize the
importance of taking better account of the constraints
that our police are dealing with on the ground in terms
of their welfare. We continue to see considerable
disparities between the working conditions of various
types of personnel, even when they are doing pretty
much the same jobs. Some are treated very differently
from others, and that cannot help having an impact on
morale and therefore to some extent on performance,
particularly for those serving in very problematic areas,
such as Libya and Somalia. We therefore have to revisit
our approach to mission subsistence allowances and
allowances for service in dangerous conditions. That
is a real issue; we are working on it, and the SecretaryGeneral has been made aware of it.
I have one last comment on conduct and discipline.
As the Council knows, our police officers spare no
effort to implement resolution 2272 (2016), which

S/PV.7808

the Council adopted in March, and all the measures
discussed in the Secretary-General’s report on sexual
conduct (A/70/729), an area where the police have a
specific role to play regarding punishment as well as
prevention and, especially, assistance to victims.
In conclusion, the Secretary-General will shortly
be issuing his second report on United Nations policing,
and in that context, we will be relying the support of
the Security Council more than ever to enable us to
implement the report’s recommendations as effectively
and efficiently as possible. I would also like to take this
opportunity to thank and pay tribute to our policemen
and -women for their untiring efforts in the field to save
lives and contribute to stability — sadly, work that is
not without considerable risk but which they do with
commendable courage and determination.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Ladsous for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Munyambo.
Mr. Munyambo: One year ago, when the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) last briefed
the Security Council on its policing contribution (see
S/PV.7558), South Sudan found itself at a crossroads.
The 2015 Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in
South Sudan had been signed only a few months earlier.
Regrettably, despite the initial progress on ending the
fighting and starting the complex task of implementing
the Agreement, the July outbreak of fighting in Juba
between the Sudan People’s Liberation Army and the
Sudan People’s Liberation Army in Opposition dealt a
major setback to that progress. During the year, UNMISS
has faced some very significant challenges in its work
of protecting civilians and engaging communities in
South Sudan. Today I would like to focus on the unique
experiences of the United Nations police (UNPOL) in
South Sudan by outlining the challenges we continue to
face and the priorities we have identified for creating
the conditions necessary for peace in a very complex
peacekeeping context.
The protection of civilians is at the core of the
UNMISS mandate. Since the beginning of this conflict,
in 2013, close to 2.6 million people have been forced
to flee their homes, including more than 1.6 million
internally displaced persons (IDPs). Some 200,000
of these IDPs have sought refuge in United Nations
protection-of-civilian sites. New clashes of a varied
nature in multiple locations since July have left even
greater numbers of people displaced. Sadly, more than

16-375003/29

S/PV.7808

United Nations peacekeeping operations

16,000 children have reportedly been recruited by
armed actors. UNMISS has received several reports of
serious human rights violations and abuses, including
reports of the rape and gang rape of women and girls,
particularly in Juba and Wau, perpetrated by armed
men in uniform.
In this context, UNPOL is in the forefront of the
Mission’s efforts to protect civilians in the UNMISS
protection-of-civilians sites in Juba, Bentiu, Malakal,
Bor and Wau, and those that are vulnerable outside our
sites. UNPOL operations include maintaining order
and a protective environment in those sites through
a permanent presence, regular cordon and search
operations for contraband, including weapons, access
control, and crowd control. These operations have
necessitated the establishment of holding facilities in
Malakal, Bentiu and Juba, which, in the absence of an
executive mandate and Government cooperation, has
presented unique challenges for UNMISS, with some
people subjected to long-term detention for as long as
up to two years.
A key enabling factor underpinning all UNPOL
activities in South Sudan is community engagement.
For example, in Juba, UNPOL conducts joint patrols
with the UNMISS force and other Mission components
outside the protection-of-civilians sites in order to
extend protection through a forward-leaning posture
and presence. This enables greater interaction with the
communities and has had positive effects in building
trust among the population and gathering information
that enhances policing. A recent innovative measure
is the establishment of a 200-metre weapon-free zone
around the protection-of-civilians sites in Juba, where
the Mission conducts confidence-building patrols and
regular search operations to get rid of weapons and
prevent armed elements from entering into the sites.
Despite our best efforts to proactively engage the
communities both within and outside the protection-ofcivilians sites, the security context in South Sudan is
placing significant demands on UNPOL. We are working
systematically to increase police numbers so as to
expeditiously reach the mandated ceiling. Importantly,
we are also working closely with the Secretariat and
Member States to attract police officers with the
requisite skill sets. In the current context, we need highly
skilled officers in the areas of information-gathering
and analysis, crime prevention and specialized issues
such as combating sexual-violence-related crimes.
4/29

10/11/2016

Another priority for UNMISS is to improve
UNPOL’s ability to address the potential future
crises that could result from South Sudan’s political
situation. During 2016, UNMISS experienced several
major crises, beginning with the attack on the Malakal
protection-of-civilians site in February, followed by the
violence in Wau in June, and the heavy fighting in Juba
in July. These crises placed unprecedented demands on
UNPOL. In Wau, 32 individual police officers, together
with their military and civilian colleagues, successfully
managed to receive and protect more than 20,000 IDPs
who within a few days had assembled outside the
UNMISS base. Recognizing the scale of the escalating
situation, the Mission reinforced our police presence in
Wau with 60 formed police units from Bentiu. The fact
that less than 100 United Nations police personnel have
been able to maintain order in the Wau protection-ofcivilians site, which now houses close to 25,000 IDPs,
speaks to the professionalism, dedication and hard work
of our police officers.
The crises in Malakal and Juba, where the
protection-of-civilians sites and UNMISS premises
were either directly attacked or caught in heavy
crossfire, tested UNPOL. One lesson I have derived
from these experiences is the importance of ensuring
that all police officers have not only the relevant skill
sets but also the right mindset to respond quickly
and appropriately to a crisis situation. This requires
strong leadership, regular scenario-based training with
other Mission counterparts, and accountability. Since
July, UNMISS has taken several steps to improve the
ability of the force and UNPOL to respond robustly
when fighting erupts. We have adopted a new standard
operating procedure mandating formed police units to
respond both inside and outside protection-of-civilians
sites. We are regularly conducting joint scenario-based
training with the Force and the Department of Safety
and Security.
Despite our attention to improving performance,
much more can be done, in close partnership with the
Secretariat and Member States. Allow me to outline
three priorities for UNPOL that would help it better to
respond to the significant challenges I have presented
here today.
First, in order to improve UNPOL’s operational
capacity, we are trying to attract more officers who are
trained to respond to protection needs, in addition to
formed police units with contingent-owned equipment,
including vehicles suitable for the terrain and security
16-37500

10/11/2016

United Nations peacekeeping operations

threats, and sniffer dogs to assist with weapon searches.
This will significantly enhance UNMISS management
of protection-of-civilians sites, including crowd
management, access control, patrols and 24-hour police
post activities.
The second priority is aimed at enhancing
community outreach inside and outside protection-ofcivilians sites. With improved operational capacity, more
officers can be dedicated to enhancing communities’
ability to identify and respond to threats. If the security
situation improves and more IDPs express an interest
in returning to their homes, UNPOL will resume its
pre-crisis plans to conduct confidence- and trustbuilding patrols in identified areas for returnees.
Both of these areas will also be enhanced by the
third priority, which is to sensitize the local police force
to identify and respond to human rights violations.
UNPOL recognizes that the national authorities have
primary responsibility for the protection of civilians,
to investigate violations and to ensure that perpetrators
are held to account. Their role could be enhanced by
a strengthened national police presence in key areas
affected by the conflict, as stipulated by the peace
agreement, as well as working in a collaborative and
coordinated manner with UNMISS.
In conclusion, as we meet here today, South Sudan
finds itself yet again at a crossroads where the peace
process is very fragile. It is our sincere hope that the
collective efforts of the United Nations, the African
Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
and the rest of the international community will assist
South Sudan in returning to an inclusive peace process,
which is a prerequisite for creating a peaceful, safe and
secure environment in the country.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Munyambo for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Makotose.
Ms. Makotose: In 2016, the situation in Darfur
was characterized by three factors. First, despite the
continuing negotiations, the Government and the armed
movements have yet to reach a comprehensive political
solution to the conflict.
Secondly, the conflict between Government forces
and the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid began
with intense clashes during the first half of the year,
followed by continued intermittent fighting in Jebel
Marra. More than 80,000 civilians were confirmed

S/PV.7808

displaced as a result, while an additional 117,000 have
not been verified due to a denial of access to conflict
areas.
Thirdly, while the mediation efforts of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) in the more proactive role of State
Governments contributed to a decrease in the overall
number of intercommunal clashes, the root causes
remained largely unaddressed. Incidents of violence
against the civilian population, including internally
displaced persons (IDPs), continued to be commonplace.
UNAMID and humanitarian actors continued to face
challenges in implementing their mandates.
In line with the strategic priorities of the Mission,
the police component prioritizes its resources and
activities to support the physical protection of civilians,
thereby creating a protective environment through
the development of community-oriented policing. As
illustrated in the police-to-task review in April and
the special report of the Secretary-General and the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission (see
S/2016/510), gender-sensitive policing is essential
to fulfil those tasks. Currently, UNAMID has the
greatest number of female police officers among all
United Nations peacekeeping missions. Two hundred
and sixty-seven, or 19 per cent, of UNAMID’s
individual police officers are women. Women hold 17
key positions. Four are professional or higher ranking
positions, including my own. Thirteen female officers
also hold commanding and supervisory positions at
Headquarters. Female officers are encouraged to apply
for senior positions, and special consideration is given
in granting them extensions to their tour of duty.
That is not only important with regard to gender
balancing but also contributes to the effective
implementation of mandated tasks. Female officers
participate in all activities, including patrols,
family and child protection, gender-awareness and
community-oriented policing. They also act as role
models, inspiring Darfuri women and girls to advocate
for and defend their rights. In particular, female officers
contribute to greater and wider access to vulnerable
groups. Interaction with communities is critical for
information gathering and analysis and enhances
early warning. UNAMID police collate information
on security and receive reports of criminal incidents
including sexual and gender-based violence and other
human rights violations. The information is verified
and shared with other Mission components, the police

16-375005/29

S/PV.7808

United Nations peacekeeping operations

of the host State and the local population in line with
the do-no-harm principle. Furthermore, UNAMID
police, in collaboration with the military, conduct
targeted patrols that focus on areas in which violations
perpetrated against women and children occur most
frequently, such as water points, firewood-collection
areas and markets.
To effectively meet the security needs of IDPs,
primarily focusing on women and children at risk,
UNAMID police have fully embraced gender sensitivity
policing practices. Notably, UNAMID has ensured that
UNAMID women police officers are deployed at every
team site. UNAMID police also support the recruitment
and training of women in both the Government of the
Sudanese police force and the community policing
volunteers among IDPs. The current strength of the
Sudanese police in Darfur stands at approximately
14,000, 4 per cent of whom are women. Gender balance
is critical to building confidence in communities and
encouraging victims to report abuses to Sudanese
police officers of their choosing. Given that women
are disproportionately affected by sexual and genderbased violence and conflict-related sexual violence, an
increased female police presence across Darfur will
ensure more access to justice for the victims.
Through outreach initiatives in communities,
UNAMID police encourages Darfuri women, including
IDPs, to enlist in the police force. In parallel, UNAMID
police’s interactions with the senior leadership of the
Government of the Sudanese police force focus on
increasing the number of women and transforming it
into an increasingly representative police force. More
specifically, the UNAMID Police Women’s Network
supported the establishment of seven family- and
child-protection units in the Government of Sudan’s
police force across the five States. While continuing
sensitization on gender mainstreaming and sexual
and gender-based violence, they also work towards
empowering female officers in the Sudanese police by
supporting the founding and operationalization of the
Sudanese Police Women’s Network.
UNAMID police have also strengthened communityoriented policing practices through the recruitment
and training of 3,529 community policing volunteers,
29 per cent of whom are women. As part of the
operationalization of the United Nations police gender
toolkit, UNAMID has developed a guideline on gender
mainstreaming, as well as a community policing
framework to guide the selection and qualification
6/29

10/11/2016

process of community policing volunteers. The
community policing volunteer system has contributed
increasingly to the safety and security in IDP camps
through their joint efforts with UNAMID police and
in some cases with the Sudanese police. That has
contributed to a reduction of crime and enhanced the
sense of security in communities. Information sharing
with the Government of the Sudan’s police has improved
and helped speed up investigations. It has also assisted
in improving trust and promoting partnership between
communities and the Sudanese police on security
coordination matters.
UNAMID police fully adhere to and implement the
Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse. That extends to addressing other
forms of misconduct through preventative measures.
The conduct of United Nations police personnel is key
to ensuring that our efforts are sustainable and not in
vain. More specifically, I have issued a directive to
ensure that all members of the police component are
to be briefed on the United Nations policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse.
As role models, police commanders and team
leaders are trained to strictly comply with the SecretaryGeneral’s directives on sexual exploitation and abuse.
A communication strategy has been developed and is
being implemented to ensure that information materials
on sexual exploitation and abuse are available at all
team sites. Furthermore, UNAMID police play a vital
role in facilitating the outreach of the Conduct and
Discipline Team of the Mission to increase awareness
of sexual exploitation and abuse and other forms of
misconduct, as well as available reporting mechanisms.
UNAMID police have also actively participated in
the Mission’s task force on sexual exploitation and
abuse and contributed to improved reporting and
swift investigations by the Immediate Response Team.
UNAMID police have recorded no substantial case of
sexual exploitation and abuse. As the only female Police
Commissioner out of all United Nations peacekeeping
missions, I have been and remain fully committed to
that important and ongoing effort.
Finally, allow me to reiterate, Sir, our commitment
to Member States and the people in Darfur. As we all
know, there are many challenges that UNAMID police
face in implementing its mandate. However, United
Nations police officers are the daily interface between
Darfuris, the United Nations and the African Union.
I appeal for the continued support from the Security
16-37500

10/11/2016

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Council in our endeavour and would like to express
my sincere gratitude for the opportunity to present our
gender mainstreaming efforts to you.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Makotose for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Monchotte.
Mr. Monchotte: Before I begin today, I would
like to thank the Security Council for this opportunity
to speak on how the police component of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
helps develop the policing capacities of the Haitian
National Police (HNP).
On behalf of all MINUSTAH police personnel and
colleagues, let me also express gratitude to the Security
Council and the police-contributing countries for their
continued support for Haiti’s ongoing stabilization
efforts and their solidarity with the people of Haiti,
following the tragic loss of life and destruction inflicted
by Hurricane Matthew.
In 2004, when MINUSTAH was established with a
mandate to contribute to the restructuring and reform of
the HNP and to create a secure and stable environment,
the HNP was only nine years old and had an inadequate
budget. The security situation in Haiti was a cause for
concern, with only approximately 6,300 insufficiently
equipped and trained police officers, who were not able
to maintain law and order. The majority of the HNP’s
facilities were damaged or destroyed during the fighting
and looting experienced in the early months of 2004.
Key branches of the HNP and other institutions were
dysfunctional or did not exist, including the General
Inspectorate and the National Police Academy. Armed
gangs competed for control over areas in Port-auPrince. High homicide and kidnapping rates aggravated
social instability, and the population’s confidence in the
HNP was very low.
Originally, MINUSTAH was authorized to have
6,700 military and 1,622 police personnel. Changing
political and security circumstances and the capacitybuilding requirements of the HNP resulted in the
progressive reversal of the military-to-police ratio, with
the police component currently having an authorized
strength of 2,601 police personnel while the military
component has an authorized strength of 2,370 troops.
Following the earthquake in January 2010,
MINUSTAH, including its police component, redirected
significant amounts of resources to supporting the

S/PV.7808

emergency and recovery efforts of Haiti. For 18 months,
capacity-building activities were partially suspended.
Throughout MINUSTAH’s existence, the police
component carefully tailored its assistance in key
policing areas to the priorities of the Ministry of
Justice and Public Security and the HNP, specifically
professionalizing the HNP, strengthening its operational
capacity, developing its institutional capacity and
reinforcing the national and international institutional
relationships of the HNP. This approach resulted in
the sustained development and implementation of
several five-year plans, namely, the HNP Reform Plan,
covering 2006 to 2011, and the HNP Development Plan
2012-2016, which will expire next month. In June, the
HNP initiated the development of a strategic plan for
the period 2017-2021, and its adoption is expected in the
coming months. The plan sets a direction for long-term
HNP institution-building goals to create an effective
response capacity for addressing the variety of threats
Haiti faces.
The co-location of MINUSTAH police officers,
together with close coordination with national and
international partners that have generously contributed
to training, logistical support and the reconstruction of
facilities, has resulted in visible progress in a number
of areas, such as an increase in the police-to-population
ratio, strengthened human-resources management,
improved practices related to strategic planning and
community-oriented policing through training at all
police levels, augmented capacity of the judicial police
and increased prevention of crime and violence.
Allow me to elaborate with a few examples. The
HNP’s presence throughout the country has expanded
through the construction and reconstruction of police
facilities and an increasing quantity and quality of
officers deployed nationwide. At present, the HNP has
an overall strength of about 13,100 officers, of whom
9 per cent are women, meaning a police-to-population
ratio of around 1.3 officers per 1,000 inhabitants. This
ratio has increased from 0.6 per thousand citizens,
which was the level in 2004, and will gradually increase
with the graduation of the twenty-seventh and twentyeighth classes of recruits scheduled for February and
November 2017, respectively. With these graduating
classes, the HNP will reach a minimum force of around
15,000 officers.
The recruitment and training system has been
strengthened, including through the implementation

16-375007/29

S/PV.7808

United Nations peacekeeping operations

of a seven-month curriculum deployed in 2009, which
is in line with international policing and human-rights
standards. The system replaced the four-month training
programme that had been used since 1995.
With respect to improving capacities, the HNP
has made tremendous efforts to implement a vetting
process and strengthen the General Inspectorate, which
is responsible for the competence and integrity of
HNP officers and removes those who have committed
crimes or are involved in human-rights violations or
corruption. Moreover, the HNP has increasingly been
able to tackle the kidnapping phenomenon and reduce
the number of homicides by dismantling existing or
emerging criminal groups, even though the adoption
of a national crime-prevention strategy to ensure
sustainability is still awaiting adoption. The HNP has
also assumed greater responsibility and leadership in
securing recent elections.
Since 2004, the HNP has increased its capacity to
maintain law and order, including through augmented
territorial coverage, good crowd-control practices
and anti-kidnapping and anti-narcotics operations.
Nevertheless, challenges remain. They include, but are
not limited to, capacities to maintain and repair assets,
police intelligence and organized crime, firearms
control, institutional policies, budget execution and
strategic planning, as well as civil protection and
community-oriented policing. The promotion and
implementation of justice and corrections reforms
in parallel to police reform is essential to ensuring
access to justice, inclusiveness and, ultimately,
sustainable development. The recent Office of Internal
Oversight Services evaluation recognized the positive
impact MINUSTAH police have had on strengthening
PNH capacities, matching mandated tasks with available
resources and time frames and taking into account
external constraints, all of which were highlighted as
indispensable elements for success.
It is critical for Haiti’s long-term stability that
capacity-building of the PNH remain a priority for
the international community until the PNH can
provide security for all Haitians. Efforts should follow
a comprehensive rule-of-law strategy and lessons
reflected in the Strategic Guidance Framework for
International Police Peacekeeping. They should also be
based on community engagement and build on security
sector reform principles and human rights norms.
8/29

10/11/2016

In the meantime, MINUSTAH needs the sustained
support of police-contributing countries to attain
qualified male and female individual police officers
and formed police units, including as much as possible
francophone and, of course, when possible, Haitian
Creole skills.
Once again, I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this briefing and affording me an opportunity
to address the Security Council today.
(spoke in French)
I thank the Council for its attention and once again
express my gratitude for the efforts carried out those
contributing to Haiti.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Monchotte for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Yacouba.
Mr. Yacouba (spoke in French): I would first like
to express my gratitude for this opportunity to address
the Security Council on various security aspects of
the police of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
For reasons relating to the complexity and
mulitdimensional nature of the crisis in Mali, the
implementation process for the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation faces some serious challenges.
Alliances between armed groups that are signatories
to the agreement and/or non-signatory groups, as well
as terrorist and criminal networks, are formed and
disbanded at the will and in the interests of various
players. That results in systematic attacks against
MINUSMA and Malian and Operation Barkhane forces,
which demonstrate the determination of those groups to
hamper the implementation of the Agreement.
Recurring armed rebellions in the north of Mali
have lead to the emergence of organized crime, putting
the authority of the State to the test. The security
situation in the subregion, exacerbated by the Libyan
crisis, appears to hold little promise, as demonstrated
by the recent terrorist attacks in the Niger, Burkina
Faso and Nigeria. A short while ago, terrorist acts were
concentrated in the north but have now spread to the
centre and, more recently, towards the south of the
country. We can count at least eight terrorist groups
that are officially active, without mentioning the
possibility of emerging cells in surrounding countries,
which would also have an impact on Mali.
16-37500

10/11/2016

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The figures speak for themselves: from January
2014 to 10 October 2016, 1,013 attacks were recorded
against MINUSMA, non-governmental organizations,
Mali’s defence and security forces and the Malian
population. During the same period, 210 incidents
of rocket and mortar fire were reported against
MINUSMA and Malian forces. In the past month, 66
attacks were perpetrated against MINUSMA, Malian
forces and the civilian population in the regions of Gao,
Mopti, Ménaka, Timbuktu and Kidal.
Resolution 2295 (2016) provides for responses that
address not only the threats linked to organized crime
in the Sahel region and its links with terrorism, but
also the implementation of security measures set out
in the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation, namely,
the establishment of reformed defence and security
institutions. In that context, Mali must play an active
role in the framework of subregional organizations,
particularly the Group of Five for the Sahel and the
Joint Military Staff Committee. In that connection, the
support of partners such as the European Union through
the European Union Training Mission and European
Union Capacity Building Mission is essential.
A national strategy for the prevention of violent
radicalism and combating organized crime and terrorism
is currently being developed by the Malian authorities
with the support of the United Nations system and some
technical partners. Furthermore, Mali has established
a national centre for strategic studies on the subject.
It is crucial that the legal framework be adopted in
line with international legal instruments relating to
terrorism and organized crime. The comprehensive
strategic vision must take into account all aspects of the
phenomenon as well as cooperation and coordination
mechanisms between the relevant State and non-State
entities in order to prevent threats linked to terrorism at
the national, regional and international levels.
Awaiting the adoption of this strategy and so as to
mitigate the impact of terrorist activities, MINUSMA
has taken some palliative measures. I refer to the setting
up of a cell against transnational organized crime; the
establishment of a task force on terrorism with a view to
developing synergic action and an integrated approach
among all United Nations entities; the training of a
weapons and intelligence team to deal with improvised
explosive devices; and the establishment of a police
laboratory to provide technical and scientific support
and expertise to the judiciary counter-terrorism centre
in Mali. That will be strengthened by the standing

S/PV.7808

up of legal identity units in all investigative judiciary
institutions in order to establish a centralized, viable
and fully operational system for criminal data. In
spite of all of those efforts, it is unfortunate that the
specialised judiciary investigation brigade is still
not operational.
Mindful that intelligence is the first line of
defence against terrorism and organized crime, and
pursuant to the current mandate, MINUSMA police
have established an intelligence gathering and analysis
plan. Forty-nine projects to strengthen the capacity of
Mali’s defence and security forces have been carried
out. Nearly 14,000 personnel were trained in various
technical fields. In addition, 302 civil servants
serving in specialized units, including 36 women,
received specific training. Those services benefit from
multifaceted support through the comprehensive and
coordinated approach of various MINUSMA sections,
including the rule of law and security institutions.
The implementation of resolution 2295 (2016)
has been fraught with challenges, particularly in
security sector reform, where work has been delayed.
The idea of territorial police is too contentious and
requires clarification. In the meantime, introducing
a neighbourhood policing approach should improve
confidence between the Malian security forces and the
people. One of the major challenges to the implementation
of the mandate and the support of the Malian security
forces lies in the deployment of specialized and Frenchspeaking individual police officers. That requires the
support of contributing States. Incidentally, such a
commitment was undertaken by the representatives of
States that participated in the Chiefs of Police Summit.
Formed police units play an important role in protecting
populations and United Nations personnel and entities
through patrols and various operational activities. It
is important to note that, in response to the security
context, the number of armoured vehicles went from 6
to 10.
I would be remiss were I not to conclude by recalling
that of MINUSMA police and other stakeholders support
the reform of the Malian security forces. However, the
plethora of terrorist attacks and other potential threats,
as well as strains on human resources and logistics, are
of utmost concern as we carry out our mandate. That
is why the MINUSMA police continues to play its role
through a comprehensive and integrated approach with
a view to maintaining peace in Mali and the subregion.

16-375009/29

S/PV.7808

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Yacouba for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the Council.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): Allow me to first thank
the President for convening such an important meeting.
It is an important follow-up to the implementation of
resolution 2185 (2014), which Malaysia fully supports.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Ladsous for his
overview and add my voice in welcoming the Police
Commissioners of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) and the United Nations Mission in
the Republic of South Sudan (UNМISS) to the Council,
and in thanking them for their respective briefings, to
which we have carefully listened.
It is clear that the majority of United Nations peace
operations today are complex and multidimensional,
with missions undertaking significantly more tasks that
range from assisting political processes, establishing
transitional authorities, distributing humanitarian
aid and relief and reintegrating former combatants to
preventing violations of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law, and protecting
civilians, among others.
The report of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) proposed
a number of recommendations addressed both to
contributing countries and the Secretariat to ensure
that United Nations peacekeeping remains relevant
and able to meet the increasingly complex demands of
peacekeeping. We welcome the initial steps taken by
the Secretariat to implement those recommendations.
At the same time, we are of the view that there remains
room for improvement, including at the mandate design
and planning stages. Clear policy guidance and the
provision of adequate training would help to ensure the
credibility and proficiency of all United Nations police
personnel in carrying out the entrusted mandate.
The protection of civilians has become a core
component of numerous ongoing peacekeeping
missions, for example in South Sudan, the Sudan, Mali
and the Central African Republic. Civilian protection
is the cross-cutting issue that needs to be addressed by
military, civilian and policing components, acting in
concert with the political components of the missions.
10/29

10/11/2016

In situations where the protection of civilians form
part of a mission’s mandate, Malaysia stresses the need
for clear mandates on the protection of civilians and
for agreed benchmarks, processes and procedures for
their implementation. We are of the view that a shared
understanding of what it takes to keep the peace and
protect civilians in outbreaks of violence is key.
We agree with Commissioner Makotose of
UNAMID that the United Nations police has and should
continue to play an important role in combating sexual
and gender-based violence, and in protecting women
and girls from such violence. We therefore believe
that there is scope to ensure greater female leadership,
gender diversity and training within peacekeeping
missions, in line with the United Nations Global Effort
initiative. We also believe that police personnel need
to be fully equipped with the necessary training prior
to their deployment, as highlighted by the briefers. We
encourage police contributing countries and regional
organizations that have established peacekeeping
training centres to offer and assist in providing training
to United Nations police, including through specialized
training. Malaysia intends to do its part through our
Malaysian Peacekeeping Training Centre.
Finally, I wish to place on record our utmost
appreciation and respect for the commitment, bravery
and sacrifice of all United Nations police in the field in
discharging the mandates and responsibilities entrusted
to them by the United Nations. We have two questions
for the briefers.
The first is for Commissioner Munyambo
of UNMISS. Can the Commissioner provide an
elaboration on the role played by United Nations police
in supporting the UNMISS protection of civilians
mandate during the outbreak of violence in Juba and
other areas last July?
Our second question is for Commissioner Monchotte
of MINUSTAH. We have followed the development of
the Haitian National Police (HNP) since joining the
Council and we commend MINUSTAH police for its
supporting role in training and supporting capacitybuilding for the National Police. Can the Commissioner
elaborate on the state of readiness of the HNP to assume
more substantial responsibility for safety and security
in the country, including in countering organized
criminal gangs?
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Senegal for having organized our debate
16-37500

10/11/2016

United Nations peacekeeping operations

today on the role of police. I would also like to thank
Mr. Ladsous and the heads of police components with
us today for their briefings.
Allow me to address the general approach of
improving United Nations police performance. In
convening the Chiefs of Police Summit in June for the
first time, the United Nations took an important step
in that direction, as was the distribution this year of
the conclusions on the external review of the functions,
structure and capacity of the United Nations police. We
must all prioritize the United Nations police’s ability to
guarantee better protection of civilians and improve the
performance of staff deployed in missions. It is in that
spirit that I would like to focus on three aspects that we
believe to be most important.
First, training is a precondition for a long-term
improvement of police capacity, beginning with force
generation when we send individual police officers and
formed police units that are vetted and well trained,
including on the linguistic front, a point to which I
will return. Secondly, United Nations police support
for capacity-building of the host country’s police
remains critical. It requires sharing best practices and
establishing a full criminal chain in the host country,
including the police, the judiciary and penitentiary
administration.
The ability to clearly assess the effectiveness of
the police is essential to improving its performance.
We must take all experience at all levels into account.
There is also a need to assess good coordination
with the police component with other components
of peacekeeping operations, including the military
component and the human rights division, which will
ensure that the police are part of the comprehensive
strategy of the operation. I know that the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the Police Division are
working on the matter of assessment, and we eagerly
await those results.
Thirdly, developing neighbourhood police activities
within peacekeeping operations should contribute to
fostering long-term stability. Within peacekeeping
operations, police can help to progressively rebuild
confidence between populations and State institutions
by keeeping criminals off the streets. Of course, to that
end police detachments cannot remain on the sidelines,
but must instead be held accountable to the communities
they serve. Through its neighbourhood policing
activities, the police component of peace operations

S/PV.7808

naturally forges close links with police forces and local
gendarmerie. Such cooperation can take on various
forms, such as mentoring or joint patrolling, and is
therefore crucial to bolstering national capacity.
Allow me now to touch upon three challenges
that were addressed in the briefings that we heard this
morning from the Police Commissioners.
First, I wish to talk about linguistic challenges.
In order to be effective, police forces should be able
to become part of local communities, particularly
in missions involving the protection of civilians. For
that reason, it is essential to deploy police officers
and gendarmes who speak the language and know the
culture of the host country in order to foster, facilitate
and ensure smooth relations with the population.
The Paris Ministerial Conference on Peacekeeping
in Francophone Environments, which took place in
October, identified approaches to be adopted in the area
of training. France will of course participate in training
efforts regarding the French language through police
training activities.
On that topic, I would like to pose a question to
each of the Police Commissioners present. The actions
undertaken by peacekeeping operations, which include
capacity-building in host countries, are of course key to
long-term stability. However, daily contact with local
forces and the population requires full knowledge of
the language of the country. I am therefore wondering
if the Police Commissioners of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti,
the United Nations Mission in the Republic of South
Sudan and even the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur might provide us with
additional information on the challenges their police
officers face in the area of language? What measures
do they think should be undertaken to address that
challenge? Should such measures be taken during force
generation, training or during the deployment of a
mission?
I will now move on to the second challenge, that
of gender. We endorse efforts aimed at deploying more
female police officers, who can greatly contribute to
the performance of police components, in particular by
fostering better interaction with vulnerable populations
and with victims of human rights violations, as well as
by participating in investigations into particular types
of violence, including sexual violence. We must combat

16-3750011/29

S/PV.7808

United Nations peacekeeping operations

10/11/2016

sexual abuse and exploitation by ensuring that all receive
equal treatment before the law. Protecting victims and
identifying and punishing perpetrators requires greater
communication between United Nations agencies and
organizations, on the one hand, and civil, military
and judicial authorities in the countries involved in
peacekeeping missions, on the other.

budgets and the required legal framework for police
work. Furthermore, building operational capacity also
requires a wide range of managerial and administrative
roles in the police force. Police contingents must also
be given due social and political protection, as well as
incentives and recognition for their work in protecting
the population and enforcing the law.

The third and last challenge that we believe to be key
is the use of modern technology by police components,
which involve the activities of the police in general, as
well as, for example, the gathering of evidence. That
requires police officers within peacekeeping operations
to be properly equipped, and better cooperation with
international organizations, access to databases and the
use of modern techniques for investigation. All such
measures allow the police force to better protect people
and to prevent violations of human rights.

However, United Nations reports on peacekeeping
operations point to the fact that United Nations police
are not always in a position to develop or reform police
institutions, as reflected, among other things, in the
fact that the United Nations police recruitment model
does not meet the requirements for the institutional
development of host States. Such reports recommend that
the recruitment of United Nations police officers must
be based on the mandate agreed by the Security Council,
which means that those missions with stabilization
and protection mandates must recruit numerous police
officers accompanied by protection officers. Those
contingents that are geared towards reforming the
police institutions of host States must recruit fewer
numbers of specialized personnel that enjoy backing
of civilian staff who work in institutional development.
However, it would seem that all recruitment models
continue to be based on the legacy of huge contingents
inherited from the models of peacekeeping operations.
As a result, host States do not receive the support they
need to reform their institutions.

Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank you, Sir,
for convening this debate. We thank the briefers, the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Hervé Ladsous, and the Police Commissioners of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, the African
Union/United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur,
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali. We also acknowledge
the extraordinary work carried out by each of those
missions and welcome the various official groups that
are present today in the Chamber.
This debate highlights the importance of police
components in United Nations peacekeeping operations
in achieving stability on the ground, generally
following armed conflict, and in developing and
creating capacities to strengthen police services in
host States. Host States must take ownership of their
own peace processes and rebuild their institutional and
social fabrics, which is an important objective.
With respect to developing police services, we must
bear in mind that a national police force that enjoys
legitimacy within society is a key element to sustaining
peace in societies that have been divided by conflict.
Likewise, we believe that the creation or reform of
solid police institutions is a complex undertaking
that requires continued efforts over time. The process
goes beyond police training, which is key, to include
the development of relevant institutions that are able
to provide political support, guidance, oversight,
12/29

One of the key components in the process of
recruitment is linked to gender equality. We are
convinced that women, given their fundamental role
in society, are the best agents to protect women and
children from abuse and to heal the deep wounds caused
by divisions in a society. Likewise, it is also critical
to train police forces using personnel or contingents
from the host State, who should not have a history of
or links to abuse or violence perpetrated against the
civil population. They should also have the ability to
effectively lead and discharge their mission.
Furthermore, Venezuela fully supports the need
for an ongoing dialogue between the Security Council
and the countries that contribute contingents related
to all aspects of activities in peacekeeping operations,
especially in the planning stages and in the drafting of
mandates, pursuant to Article 44 of the Charter of the
United Nations.
In conclusion, we wish to reiterate the importance
of the role of police contingents in United Nations
16-37500

10/11/2016

United Nations peacekeeping operations

peacekeeping operations. However, it is necessary that
the Security Council bear in mind that United Nations
police officers are an integral part of those operations.
As such, the Council must respect the prerogatives of
the General Assembly, especially the mandate of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Ladsous and the four Police
Commissioners who have joined us here today. I wish
to thank all Police Commissioners serving around the
world, as well as the 13,000 United Nations police.
In listening to the briefings, I was quite struck by
how much each of the four Commissioners, who in turn
represent the other Commissioners, have in common,
but also by how very different each of their appeals
to us are. Specifically, I noted just how unique each
mission is and how we cannot take a solution that works
for one mission and apply it to another.
Commissioner Munyambo described the hugely
important task that peacekeepers in South Sudan are
performing by protecting the protection-of-civilians
sites — 200,000 people living at sites were never
envisaged when the mandate was created in the first
place. Now, suddenly, the police in South Sudan have
had to adjust and take on that task.
Commissioner Makotose, as the sole female
United Nations Police Commissioner — who works
in the Darfur mission, where sexual violence is, sadly,
quite widespread as a weapon of war — described
the impact of having women occupy 19 per cent of
the individual police officer slots as part of African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and
how that changes the way the communities interact
with the Operation and the way women and children
come forward. She also described something that we
maybe are less conscious of, that is, the extent to which
the women who serve in these missions, in, relatively
speaking, a higher ratio than what we are used to seeing,
serve as role models for young girls in the communities
where they serve. That is incredibly important.
Commissioner Monchotte has worked in a Haiti
Mission that has experienced incredible ups and downs
over the years, and the most devastating moment, of
course, was the 2010 earthquake, where so many United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
officers, including the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, lost their lives serving the people
of Haiti. Yet against that backdrop, MINUSTAH and

S/PV.7808

the police have steadily gone about their business,
taking a country that, as we know, had 6,700 equipped
and trained police when MINUSTAH deployed, which
will have next year up to 15,000 trained and equipped
police. I also imagine they will have a different depth
of training than had been available before MINUSTAH
arrived in Haiti.
Commissioner Yacouba in Mali, by far the most
dangerous, deadliest mission in the whole world, has
made an appeal to us for support for intelligence-based
policing. As we noted in the meeting that the Senegal
delegation organized last week (see S/PV.7802) on
asymmetrical threats, this is an extremely important
appeal. That is because that in so many of the
missions that exist now in very complex and warlike
environments, the peacekeepers and the police are
often blind to the threats out there and do not have the
information and intelligence they need. I hope that we
as a Council heed his appeal.
The challenge, as we as a Council talk about
United Nations police, is that their mandate is unlike
the mandate of any other police force. Therefore, the
backgrounds the Commissioners and their officers have
are very different in national settings. We as a Council
expect United Nations police not just to support host
Governments in maintaining law and order, but, as we
have heard, to help restore the rule of law in places
where armed groups act with impunity. We also expect
United Nations police to kind of act as development
advisers, working with Governments to rebuild national
police forces, as we have seen work in Haiti.
Therefore, this year’s external review of the United
Nations Police Division, along with an evaluation of
United Nations police from the United Nations Office of
Internal Oversight Services, were together an important
and comprehensive assessment of how Member States
and the Secretariat together can improve a mission
with few precedents to draw upon. I think others have
already and will discuss all the challenges they are
facing, drawing upon in their testimonies today. I just
want to focus on two: the training and capabilities that
United Nations police bring to their deployment, or the
lack thereof in some cases, and the Security Council’s
lack of strategic guidance for them when we send them
into the field.
First, briefly on training and capabilities, one key
problem that as Commissioners they must deal with
every day is the perpetual mismatch between supply

16-3750013/29

S/PV.7808

United Nations peacekeeping operations

and demand for United Nations police. The United
Nations Police Division at Headquarters is under
pressure to find enough United Nations police to match
the Council’s requests — the figure that we put in our
mandates. But unlike militaries, which may have units
stationed in barracks waiting for a new contingency in
each of our countries, police departments in all of our
countries are using their officers to conduct everyday
law enforcement. There is not generally a standing pool
of officers waiting to get the call. A police department
sending a formed police unit, especially to the United
Nations, loses 140 to 160 officers to patrol their streets.
That is why the United States is really and truly grateful
to police-contributing countries for their commitments.
But for the Police Division finding any new police
experts or formed police units for peacekeeping
missions is an extremely time-consuming task. The
result is that the Police Division, I think it is fair to
say, often focuses more on meeting their numbers,
getting police contingents to 100 per cent of authorized
strength, rather than being able to afford to look at
whether the officers have the training and skills to
actually meet the particular mission’s goals.
In that regard, I would quote the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan Police Commissioner who issued
an appeal here today for more officers, as he put it, with
the skill set and the mindset suited to the environments
where the police are being deployed. Predeployment
assessments are done by the Police Division, as we
know, but those assessments may not align with the
skills that United Nations missions actually need. We
hear that from the Police Commissioners whenever we
travel in the field.
One of the things the external review showed
is that the Police Division tests for three basic
skills — linguistic capacity for a particular mission,
firearm proficiency and driving competency. Those
are very important skills, but they are not necessarily
tailored for any specific sui generis set of circumstances
like the very varied circumstances we have heard about
today. It turns out that approximately 55 per cent of
candidates put forward to serve with United Nations as
police fail even that three-pronged test.
But what peacekeeping missions and Police
Commissioners really need to know is whether a police
contingent can handle far more complex tasks, like
responding to a terrorist attack in a town centre in
Mali or explaining to new police recruits how to treat
suspects in an interrogation, such as in the Central
14/29

10/11/2016

African Republic. And the Secretariat is not in a
position to provide that training to police units that do
not already have it. That is a real issue. The issues are
so daunting and so systemic that it is tempting to be
intimidated and to just go on with our business as we
have been doing, but let me offer one place to start.
United Nations Member States and the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) need to go beyond
the basic proficiency test and increase focus on which
skills each Mission needs, not just meeting numerical
targets for force strength. The Police Division and the
broader Secretariat should not expect contingents that
pass the basic United Nations assessment test — again,
linguistic, firearms and driving — to be ready to tackle
the tasks in police mandates.
That is common sense but it has not happened
enough, in part because the pool of eligible recruits
in each of our countries is not large enough. So we
Member States must bring intentionality to expanding
our national pools of recruits to include officers with
relevant skills. I know that we have already seen a
number of countries placing a real emphasis on trying
to recruit women nationally so that DPKO has more
women police officers from whom to recruit. But if we
ask the Secretariat and the Police Division to do more,
that alone will not work unless the Member States that
comprise the United Nations set about actually looking
at the skills that are needed and recruiting such people.
That brings me to my second and final point,
which involves mandates. We States members of the
Security Council need to be more strategic about
how we deploy United Nations police. In theory — I
stress theory — United Nations police should be able
to help facilitate the withdrawal of a peacekeeping
mission. They can bridge the gap between an armed
international military presence and the handover of
responsibility for security to local authorities. United
Nations police could be a peacekeeping mission’s
exit strategy, stepping in after peacekeepers restore
a basic level of security, then building up a host
country’s law enforcement capabilities. Depending on
the circumstances, one could even imagine a world
in which troop numbers decline and police numbers
increase. Then we could draw down police as a host
country’s police and security services are able to take
up the baton for law enforcement and stabilization.
But that is not what we do today. We typically
work with the Secretariat to assign a fixed number of
16-37500

10/11/2016

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV.7808

police to a mission, and then provide the police with
a list of tasks to complete. Resolutions do not specify
when police divisions should focus more on protection
than on advising. We rarely consider surging police to
allow for troop withdrawals. Of course, it is hard to
use United Nations police strategically when serious
gaps remain in their skill sets — which speaks to my
first point — but part of the problem, too, is a lack of
awareness among those of us in the Council about the
role of United Nations police.

the local population through close, ongoing contact
with citizens, especially concerning the protection
of civilians, as we have heard several times. Our
objective, therefore, should be to ensure that the
population views the police more as guarantors of their
rights and freedoms, rather than in their essential role
as law enforcers. That should be our objective, and it
is the topic on which I will focus my statement. That
is why we believe that we must take into account five
key points.

Here I would like to make an admission, which is
that I could certainly spend more time thinking about the
role of United Nations police in peacekeeping. I would
ask my colleagues around the table to think back to the
last time that they reviewed a peacekeeping mandate.
How closely did they think about the performance of
that Mission’s police component? How closely did any
of us think about the task that it was performing, about
the division of labour even between formed police units,
individual police oficers and so on. We can bring more
intentionality to that task. Doing so matters, because
countless civilians are relying on United Nations police
to keep them safe.

The first is collaboration with the local population.
There are clear examples, among which I will
mention the case of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, where the lack of collaboration between the
local population and the Mission’s police component
is due basically to the fear of retaliation from armed
groups. It is a legitimate fear that should give us cause
to further consider ways to prevent it. It is therefore
critical that we focus on ways to build the host State’s
capacity in that regard.

I will close with just one example. Earlier this year,
United Nations police in the Central African Republic
deployed to secure polling stations through successive
rounds of voting in the Central African Republic’s
elections. At one polling place, the Baya Dombia
school, a rocket-propelled grenade was fired at a crowd
waiting to vote. United Nations police were on hand
to help secure the polling site after the attack and they
immediately commenced an investigation into who had
perpetrated the attack. Hundreds of voters, reportedly,
stayed at the school chanting “We will vote, we will
vote”. In that case, the United Nations police made sure
that violence did not keep those voters from making
their voices heard. And United Nations police can play
an incredibly important role in promoting security. We
on the Council need to dedicate ourselves with greater
fervour to helping enable police to do so.
Mr. Gasso Matoses (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I
express great thanks to the four Police Commissioners
for briefing the Council on their experience on the
ground. I also thank Mr. Ladsous for his briefing.
As the previous four Council members have said
and subsequent speakers will say, we fully believe in
the importance of the role played by police contingents
in peacekeeping operations in building trust among

Another example is the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA). I would like to address a question
to Mr. Issoufou Yacouba in that respect. MINUSMA,
as he rightly noted, is operating in an asymmetric
environment. It is therefore especially important to
have close patrols aimed at building confidence among
the population and ensuring that encounters with
United Nations police officers are capable of raising
awareness of the work of the Mission, especially
among the youth. Here, I wish to ask Mr. Yacouba how
he believes we can combine close community policing
with the justified need to maintain security in an
asymmetric environment, where the Mission’s mobility
is severely limited. What impact would the threats in
an asymmetric environment that hinders interaction
with the population we are called on to protect have on
limiting the work of the Mission?
The second thing I wish to mention concerns
accountability, which is the flip side of my previous
point. It is obvious that all Member States are firmly
committed to accountability on the part of peacekeeping
operations personnel, and Spain sincerely supports
that. It is necessary to prosecute all crimes committed,
particularly in cases of sexual exploitation or abuse.
In that regard, we reiterate our full support for UnderSecretary-General Ladsous in the implementation of
the Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy.

16-3750015/29

S/PV.7808

United Nations peacekeeping operations

10/11/2016

My third point directly touches on the work of
the police-contributing countries, including Spain
and other countries. As Ambassador Power has said,
we must be committed to providing carefully selected
uniformed forces with predeployment training,
including, importantly, the requisite human rights
and international humanitarian law training and ways
of preventing sexual exploitation and abuse. Vetting
and training must be complemented with appropriate
equipment for the uniformed police forces deployed on
the ground. That is particularly true in an environment
such as Mali, which requires robust police forces
especially intended for quick deployment. In scenarios
such as that, instruments such as the European
Gendarmerie Force, in which the Spanish Guardia
Civil participates and which was very successful in
the European Union military operation in the Central
African Republic in recent times, are especially useful.

operations system. This commitment was reflected
in Spain’s broad participation in international
missions under the auspices of different international
organizations. Currently, Spanish police forces
participate in 11 international missions. That is why
we have devoted special attention to the work of the
Secretariat in this regard, and we welcome the outcome
of the report on the external review of the functions,
structure and capacities of the Police Division, which
was requested by the Secretary-General in accordance
with resolution 2185 (2014). The report includes a series
of recommendations that warrant consideration by the
Council. We also want to underscore the importance
of finalizing the strategic guidance framework for
United Nations police so that police resources can be
utilized with common standards, which will allow them
greater effectiveness and efficiency in discharging
their mandates.

A fourth aspect has to do with one of the essential
functions carried out by police missions, that is,
support for the host State’s police. Once again, the case
of Mali is meaningful, as are the case of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti when it comes
to capacity-building for the Haitian National Police and
the case of the United Nations Mission in the Republic
of South Sudan when it comes to support for the local
police in establishing emergency response capabilities
in Juba in the context of the protection of civilians.

Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): This is a really
important issue, and I want to thank all the briefers.
Their presentations were very valuable indeed. One
fascinating insight that I learned this morning is that
19 per cent of the police in the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur are women,
inspiring Darfuri women and girls.

Finally, the fifth aspect I want to touch on, which
others have touched on, is to highlight the crucial role
of mission police components in the context of the
women and peace and security agenda. Ms. Priscilla
Makotose indicated that clearly in the context of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur. It is a fact that women’s participation in police
contingents is more advanced than it is in military
contingents, but a great deal needs to be done to achieve
the 20 per cent target that we have set for ourselves. The
presence of women, as has already been mentioned,
builds confidence among the civilian population and
makes it easier to report sexual and gender-based
violations. We must comply with resolution 2242
(2015), which the Council adopted in October 2015, and
redouble our efforts to increase women’s participation
in peacekeeping operations if we want to ensure that
those operations are truly effective.
Lastly, allow me to make a general observation.
Spain has always been firmly committed to the efforts
of the Organization to strengthen the peacekeeping
16/29

United Nations policing is at the front line of our
work. Policemen and policewomen under the United
Nations flag help communities at risk of violence,
they respond to incidences of disorder and they
provide technical expertise to improve domestic police
services in fragile States. But United Nations policing
concentrates its efforts disproportionately on day-today security in fragile States, at the expense of capacitybuilding elsewhere. Therefore, the big question is how
we can change that so that United Nations policing can
realize its potential.
Rather than make a full statement today, I would
like to hear from everyone around the table. In the
interest of modernizing our working methods, I will
now give up the floor.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank Senegal for
organizing this annual briefing and this very useful
interaction between Security Council members and
the heads of police components of selected United
Nations peacekeeping missions. We are grateful to
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Hervé Ladsous, for providing an overview of
current challenges facing United Nations police. We are
16-37500

10/11/2016

United Nations peacekeeping operations

also grateful to the heads of police components of the
United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan,
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur, the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali for providing
very thoughtful insights on the activities and prospects
of United Nations police, prevailing challenges, as
well as their safety and security. We wholeheartedly
commend United Nations police for all they are doing
in protecting civilians and in building capacities for
law enforcement institutions in host countries.
The police component of United Nations
peacekeeping and special police political missions plays
a crucial role in conflict prevention and management
in post-conflict peacebuilding, security, the rule of
law and in sustaining peace. Additionally, they give
support to the reform and developing of policing,
law enforcement institutions and conducting interim
policing and other law enforcement duties in host
countries. Being the first line of protection and contact
with local populations, they are an important element
for restoring confidence in the national police, besides
playing a crucial protective role centred around two
axes, namely, protection against physical violence and
the creation of a safe environment.
As a recognition of that reality, the Security Council
adopted resolution 2185 (2014), which strengthened the
role of United Nations police components in conflict and
post-conflict situations; in supporting, restructuring
and rebuilding law enforcement institutions and the rule
of law; and in implementing security sector reforms.
Resolution 2185 (2014) further calls on Member
States to enhance the capabilities and expertise of
United Nations police components regarding capacity
development and institution-building, supporting host
States’ policing institutions and self-sufficiency, and
the transfer of skills and expertise in order to ensure a
successful and durable transition.
In our statement, we intended to deal with three
issues, the protection of civilians, gender-sensitive
policing and police capacity-building and security
sector reform. Since previous speakers dealt at length
with the key issues that underline the subject matter
under consideration, we will stop at this time. We
would like to request the Police Commissioners’
assessment of the impact of resolution 2185 (2014), with
its comprehensive approach to United Nations police,
on the discharge of their mandates.

S/PV.7808

In conclusion, the complex context to which the
United Nations police component is exposed calls on
the Security Council to give clear, credible and realistic
mandates and strategic guidance to the Police Division
and to United Nations police components in the field
and to ensure that sufficient resources are provided,
informed by national and local priorities, including
the host State’s key reform objectives. In addition,
police-contributing countries should pay greater
attention to the training and selection of personnel,
while ensuring that peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
sustaining peace are tangible successes in conflict and
post-conflict situations.
Mrs. Carrión (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by commending you, Mr. President,
for convening this briefing, as well as the UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Hervé Ladsous, and the Police Commissioners of
United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan,
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali for their briefings.
It has been practically two years since the Security
Council adopted resolution 2185 (2014), which
was the first resolution on the functions of United
Nations police and in which the valuable contribution
to peacekeeping of the work of the United Nations
police was underscored and strategic and practical
guidance, among other services, for the heads of police
components were provided.
Similarly, the importance and growing relevance of
police work in peacekeeping operations was manifest
after the celebration of the first Chiefs of Police
Summit in June here at Headquarters, where Ministers
of the Interior, heads of Police and high-level officials
from more than 100 Member States met to analyse the
evolution of United Nations police work. In the same
way, meetings like today’s contribute to maintaining
the attention generated around this theme.
Uruguay is a long-term contributing country and
is highly committed to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. In respect of the contribution of police
personnel, my country has participated in police work
in peacekeeping operations since 1991, with its first
contribution to the United Nations Verification Mission
in Guatemala. To date, and withou interruption, we
have contributed to numerous United Nations missions,

16-3750017/29

S/PV.7808

United Nations peacekeeping operations

including those in Mozambique, Timor-Leste, Western
Sahara, Angola, Liberia, Côte D’Ivoire and Haiti.
Our participation is generally oriented towards the
deployment of individual police officerss, who mostly
acts as instructors and advisers, and in some cases also
undertake executive tasks.
As police-contributing country, Uruguay wishes
to express its recognition to the assesment work of the
Police Division of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, in particular its visits to countries that
decide to contribute personnel. In that connection,
it is essential to continue to improve the training of
formed police units and police officials, particularly
in the field of protecting civilians, taking into account
the increasingly complex environments in which
peacekeeping operations operate.
Uruguay, as a police-contributing country, meets
all United Nations requirements thanks to the training
provided by the National School of Peace Operations
of Uruguay, where both the military and the police
components for service with the United Nations are
trained. Training is comprehensive, with a special
focus on policies of zero tolerance for sexual abuse and
exploitation, gender policies and human rights training.
To conclude, I should like to direct an inquiry to
the Mr. Monchotte, Police Commissioner of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
MINUSTAH is recognized for its achievements over
the years in training of the Haitian National Police,
as well as the progress it has made with respect to
complementarity, the gradual use of force and joint
cooperation between the police and military components
of the Mission, acting in support of and in coordination
with the National Police. I stress in particular the good
results that have been achieved with the operational
application of the 1, 2, 3 mechanism. As Ambassador
Power mentioned, the Security Council’s exit strategies
for peacekeeping operations must absolutely take into
account the fact that strengthening the national police
allows the military component to withdraw first, to be
followed by the United Nations police, which would
herald the success of the mission.
In this respect, I would ask if the progress achieved
in training the Haitian National Police and in the
aforementioned cooperation can constitute a basis for
the exit strategy and transfer of responsibilities in the
security sector, with a view to the gradual withdrawal
of MINUSTAH military component in the future.
18/29

10/11/2016

Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for convening this important meeting, and to
commend once again the outstanding contribution of
Senegal to United Nations peacekeeping endeavours. I
wish also to express my gratitude to Under-SecretaryGeneral Ladsous for his valuable briefing. We
look forward to receiving the relevant report of the
Secretary-General.
My delegation is especially grateful to the United
Nations Police Commissioners who briefed us today.
I myself was privileged to see young police officers
in the field, especially in protection of civilians sites,
while on the Security Council mission to South Sudan,
and their work is highly appreciated indeed.
Ukraine actively supports United Nations policing
in its efforts to enhance the efficiency of field
operations, including by contributing its best police
officers to missions. As an active police-contributing
country, we note that despite the challenges faced by
United Nations uniformed men and women, policing is
a highly promising endeavour of our Organization.
While activities in volatile missions like the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali hit today’s headlines — and rightly
so — I cannot but acknowledge the achievements in
other peacekeeping and special political missions
where United Nations police is deployed, such as the
United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus.
We welcome the fact the United Nations policing
personnel has improved significantly in size and scope
to respond to changing conflict dynamics and to ensure
the efficient implementation of mandates, with due
regard to the safety and security of United Nations
personnel. The challenges faced by United Nations
police components on the ground have also evolved
significantly and need thorough consideration by the
Council. In that context, I would like to highlight several
points, and will try to do so in the spirit suggested by
the United Kingdom delegation.
First, Ukraine welcomes the progress made in the
development of the Strategic Guidance Framework for
International Police Peacekeeping. We also commend
the first United Nations Chiefs of Police Summit,
organized by the Police Division last June. This event
provided us with a solid foundation for the further
strengthening of international cooperation in United
Nations policing.
16-37500

10/11/2016

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Secondly, the complexity of tasks and growing
needs in building institutional police capacity in
post-conflict environments require Member States
to nominate their most qualified and skilled police
officers to missions. In that respect, Ukraine holds that
that predeployment and in-mission training of police
personnel for United Nations peace operations should
be enhanced. We also believe that ensuring deployment
readiness and increased performance requires the
collective and coordinated actions of the Secretariat
and Member States. The Police Peacekeeping Training
Center in Ukraine, with its predeployment course under
United Nations standards, is our contribution to this
joint venture.
Thirdly, we believe that peacekeeping operations
should be provided with resilient mandates, sufficient
to ensure security and public order, including by
halting illegal cross-border inflows of weapons and
mercenaries. Peace missions should have the means
and resources necessary for the effective monitoring
and verification of ceasefires, the withdrawal of heavy
weapons and disarmament.
Fourthly, I would like to highlight the importance
for police-contributing countries to register and
manage all formed police unit commitments through
the Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System. It is
crucial to ensure United Nations capacity to rapidly
deploy police forces to new or existing theatres, as well
as to maintain their mobility on the ground. Timely
troop generation and deployment are a prerequisite for
mission success.
Fifthly, without a common understanding of United
Nations standards and realities on the ground, successful
United Nations policing is not possible. Recalling the
presidential statement S/PRST/2015/26 of December
2015, on the findings of the report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446),
would like to emphasize the need to enhance triangular
cooperation between police-contributing countries,
the Secretariat and the Council. In particular, more
frequent police-related briefings by the Secretariat
could improve information-sharing, including before
mandating police elements of missions.
Finally, assistance to host States in capacitybuilding for the protection of civilians and counterterrorism is a vital task of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. To that end, police components, as integral

S/PV.7808

parts of peacekeeping operations, should be provided
with sophisticated technologies and clear mandates.
Let me conclude by thanking the heads of police
components and their personnel for their dedicated
service to the United Nations.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
We would like to thank Mr. Hervé Ladsous, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, and
the Police Commissioners of the United Nations Mission
in the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS), the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur,
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali for their briefings. Today,
more than 13,000 United Nations peacekeeping police
officers are deployed in 13 peacekeeping operations
and five special political missions. They perform their
duties with devotion in trying, complex situations.
China commends their spirit of dedication and sacrifice.
The international situation is currently undergoing
profound changes. Conflicts and disputes are growing
more diverse. The context for United Nations
peacekeeping operations and the tasks they set out
to achieve are increasingly complex. United Nations
peacekeeping police mandates are steadily increasing.
It is time for the international community to consider
in depth the circumstances facing peacekeeping police,
their tasks and a way forward by exploring ways and
means of improving their work. China would like to
share its perspective on the topic as follows.
First, the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and the three peacekeeping
principles — the host country’s consent, impartiality and
the non-use of force except in self-defence and defence
of the mandate — are the cornerstone of peacekeeping
operations. They provide an important safeguard for
effective police work. It is necessary to fully respect the
sovereignty of host countries, carefully listen to their
views and communicate better with them over matters
such as the duration of deployment and adjustments to
mandates. When, as a result of changed circumstances,
the host country demands an exit of United Nations
peacekeeping police, the Secretariat should draw up a
clear exit time frame under the political guidance of the
Security Council in order to avoid indefinite stays in
the host country.
Secondly, any peacekeeping police mandate must
be unambiguous, feasible and focused. Peacekeeping

16-3750019/29

S/PV.7808

United Nations peacekeeping operations

police components are confronted with a multiplicity
of complex factors in the field with everchanging
circumstances. The design of any given police
mandate should consider in an integrated manner the
host country’s priority needs and prevailing realities,
the capacity of police-contributing countries (PCCs)
and other factors, making sure that their mandate is
unambiguous, highly actionable and subject to timely
assessment in the light of changing demands so that
priorities and focuses may be adjusted continuously in
order to serve the core objectives of the peacekeeping
operation concerned.
Thirdly, the Secretariat should comprehensively
consider the new context and challenges confronting
peacekeeping police work by looking at the big picture
and the long-term horizon, stay focused on critical
processes, improve such work in a systematic manner
and make police work more effective and resilient in
the face of complexities. The Secretariat should pay
particular attention to strengthening the emergency
command capacities of the missions and boost
coordination among the police, civilian and military
components. It should elaborate on security rules
for peacekeeping police, coordinate with PCCs and
host countries, improve early warning capacities and
internal information sharing and ensure adequate safety
measures and the availability of medical equipment and
supplies. The aim is to raise the security level across
the board.
Fourthly, the role of PCCs should be accorded due
importance. PCCs and troop-contributing countries
(TCCs) are the main players undertaking peacekeeping
operations. The long-term development of United
Nations peacekeeping operations depends on the efforts
of PCCs and TCCs. Their contributions and sacrifices
must be acknowledged and respected. A failure to do so
would be detrimental to the long-term development of
peacekeeping operations. Communications between the
Security Council and the Secretariat, on one hand, and
PCCs and TCCs, on the other, should be strengthened.
The role of the General Assembly’s Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations should be fully leveraged
and PCCs and TCCs should be given a greater voice.
China is the largest PCC for peacekeeping
operations among the permanent members of the
Security Council. China’s peacekeeping police,
who are scrupulously devoted to their duties, have
given an outstanding account of themselves and have
received broad accolades from various parties. China
20/29

10/11/2016

started contributing police officers to United Nations
peacekeeping operations in 2000. Since then, we have
sent close to 2,500 police officers to mission areas such
as Timor-Leste, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Afghanistan,
Kosovo and Haiti. As we speak, more than 170 Chinese
peacekeeping police officers are operating in the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya, UNMISS
and other missions. In September 2015, China’s
President, Mr. Xi Jinping, announced several major
initiatives on China’s part to support United Nations
peacekeeping operations, including, inter alia, taking
the lead on creating a standby formed police unit and
providing training for peacekeeping police of other
countries. Currently, all of our commitments are being
honoured. China is ready to work with the international
community to contribute positively to the development
of United Nations peacekeeping police and to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Hervé Ladsous, as well
as the Police Commissioners of the United Nations
Mission in the Republic of South Sudan, the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur,
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali for their informative
briefings. We also thank all of their staff for their
implentation in good faith of the task of maintaining
peace and security in difficult situations.
For us, this meeting is symbolic because in Russia
today it is Police and Internal Affairs Servicemen’s
Day — the holiday of professional Russian police.
We see the police components as an integral part of
United Nations peacekeeping operations. They make
a contribution to carrying out the singular mandate
of each mission, as defined by the specifics of the
respective situations in the countries of deployment.
Today United Nations police face a daunting
task that has to do with the increasingly difficult and
complicated nature of the mandates of missions. They
monitor situations and report on violations of public
order, but they do more than just that. They provide
assistance to national bodies in the protection of
civilians and play an important subsidiary role in the
post-conflict reform of law enforcement institutions, as
well as in the improvement of the national capacities
of host countries. We are guided by the idea that,
while providing such assistance on behalf of the entire
16-37500

10/11/2016

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV.7808

international community, police, just as all United
Nations peacekeepers, must unstintingly comply
with Security Council mandates and uphold the basic
principles of peacekeeping. We must necessarily
acknowledge that the growing importance of police
places particular responsibility on peacekeepers and
leaders, and logically requires adapting the police
architecture of the United Nations.

their experience and training staff. Local police bear
the primary responsibility for ensuring the security of
civilians. It is important to prevent situations in which
as a result of years-long presence of missions, United
Nations peacekeepers in fact substitute the efforts of
the local police.. Without increasing local potential,
there can be no sustainable exit strategy for United
Nations presence.

We think that a crucial part of effectively
implementating mandates is establishing constructive
and confidence-based dialogue and relations with host
countries and, as necessary, with other parties to the
conflict. It is only in that context that assistance in
the protection of civilians can be tangibly effective.
While Acting in the difficult context of asymmetrical
threats, in close cooperation with local populations,
there is a need to carefully implement the so-called
people-centred approach. That approach consists
solely of the need, as necessary, of engaging in
confidence-based contact with locals. Any deviation
from upholding this principle creates the risk of being
accused of breaching the principle of impartiality.

In that regard, another important aspect is that
United Nations police contingents must clearly
understand their tasks, act in a professional manner and
be appropriately equipped and trained. In that regard, we
support the initiatives of many regional organizations,
in particular those of the African Union, to increase
the training level of their police components. This is an
area of international cooperation that was particularly
recognized at the June Summit of Chiefs of Police,
attended by representatives of States Members of the
United Nations, the Secretariat and United Nations
field presences. During that meeting, the Russian
delegation declared that it would double the number of
its police officers in peacekeeping operations. That is
already being done. Twenty per cent of Russian police
officers are women.

Let me provide an example: the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei provide support to
the so-called community protection committees. Those
committees consist solely of one of the tribes of the
region, the Ngok Dinka. The other tribe, the Misseriya,
is against their establishment. In that way, the Blue
Helments seem to support unilateral actions of one party
to the conflict, the Ngok Dinka, which runs counter to
the principle of impartiality and the agreement of both
sides. Furthermore, we think that United Nations police
should not take on non-inherent political functions — in
the case of monitoring human rights, for instance. That
job is reserved for other United Nations bodies.
We would also like to mention the issue of the
gathering and analysis of information. We share the
view that without it, it is hard to work effectively in the
field. Nonetheless, those activities have to be carried
out solely with a clear operative end in sight and through
legal means and with the agreement of the host country,
while fully upholding that country’s sovereignty. The
idea of intelligence and the classical understanding of it
are not applicable in this instance.
One of the key tasks for the leaders of police
components and missions in general is to lend assistance
in bolstering the capacity of the host countries to
resolve law enforcement challenges, such as sharing

We also intend to broaden our participation in the
training of international police. Over the past 16 years,
foreign police peacekeepers, including commanders,
from more than 50 countries, primarily in Africa,
have been trained at the training centre in the city of
Domodedovo. Russia has unique experience in the
area of the professional training of peacekeepers,
which we stand ready to share. We are convinced
that police peacekeeping should be the focus of due
attention from Member States. Outside independent
assessments cannot be a substitute for a discussion of
police issues within specialized agencies of the United
Nations. Discussions of the most difficult aspects — in
particular, the structure of police forces — should be
transparent. In that regard, we believe that the best
format for dialogue already exists in the Security
Council Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations
and the General Assembly’s Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, in which all troop- and
police-contributing countries are represented — without
the artificial exclusions that unfortunately occurred
during the police Summit — along with current and
potential host countries.
Mr. Kandeel (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Police Commissioners

16-3750021/29

S/PV.7808

United Nations peacekeeping operations

for their comprehensive briefings. I would also like to
express my full gratitude for their efforts and sacrifice
in peacekeeping operations with a view to maintaining
peace and stability.
Police components play a very central role in
the implementation of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, through the capacity-building of national
institutions, while enabling host countries to exert
security control throughout their territories. The police
component is considered the primary nexus between
the United Nations and civilians, and thereby plays a
very important role in enhancing trust and building the
confidence of communities in United Nations missions,
which would eventually build the capacity to implement
the mandates.
We note the recommendations contained in the
report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (see S/2015/446), which is in charge of
reviewing police peacekeeping operations. In that
regard, we underscore the importance of addressing
the recommendations of the General Assembly Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, which is
tasked with addressing all peacekeeping-related
policies. I take this opportunity to pose the following
two questions to the police commissioners. My first
question is addressed to the Police Commissioner of
the United Nations Mission in the Republic of South
Sudan. We acknowledge the daunting challenges the
mission faces in discharging its mandate, in particular
with respect to the protection of civilians — as we
witnessed during the Security Council’s visit to Juba
in September — and the efforts to overcome such
challenges in an unfriendly environment. We also
witnessed the challenge of securing civilian camps.
The question, therefore, is what is the plan and how
much progress has been achieved thus far with regard
to the development and capacity-building of the police
force in South Sudan?
The second question is addressed to the Police
Commissioner of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali. The All
Sources Information Fusion Unit is considered to
be a pilot model for developing intelligence units in
peacekeeping missions. Notwithstanding the benefits
of such units, there are certain concerns related to
the sovereignty of States regarding the information
obtained by United Nations forces and to what extent
those forces coordinate with host States.
22/29

10/11/2016

With regard to the vital role played by police forces
in communication with communities, we have two
questions. The first question is, to what extent have
intelligence units provided the police component with
an assessment of the risks to which those forces are
exposed? The second question is, do the Government
and the police forces coordinate efforts? Once again,
I take this opportunity to extend my deep gratitude
and acknowledgement to the police commissioners for
the sacrifices and efforts they are exerting to keep the
peace.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Mr. Ladsous and the
Police Commissioners of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan, the African Union/United Nations
Hybrid operation in Darfur (UNAMID), the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali for sharing their
experiences with us. I also express my heartfelt
appreciation to all peacekeepers for their contribution
in the face of severe challenges on the ground. Today’s
briefings remind us of the complex and diverse
mandates being undertaken by United Nations police
components, including protecting civilians, creating
amenable conditions for humanitarian assistance,
supporting peace processes, restructuring and
reforming the security sector and promoting the rule of
law and human rights.
Today, I would like to focus on national police
capacity-building, in line with the presentation given by
Mr. Monchotte, the MINUSTAH Police Commissioner,
but I also listened with interest to references to the
capacity-building of local police forces, which includes
a gender focus, provided by the Police Commissioner of
UNAMID. I believe that one of our long-term priorities
should be to help build and reform the police and law
enforcement institutions of host nations, although that
may not always be the top priority in all cases in the
short-term as pointed out by one of the briefers. That
process will enable such institutions to play a sustained
role in maintaining peace and security, including after
the withdrawal of the peace operations.
The United Nations Integrated Mission in TimorLeste (UNMIT) was a particularly solid example of
the successful deployment of civilian police exploits.
National police commanders identified the greatest
improvements in administrative support areas such
as project management, training, development and
16-37500

10/11/2016

United Nations peacekeeping operations

maintenance of databases, human resources and
finance. Work to strengthen the capacity of the national
police contributed to UNMIT’s successful closure at
the end of 2012.
I believe MINUSTAH has the potential to be another
successful example in that area. While challenges
remain, MINUSTAH has successfully supported the
Haitian National Police in a number of areas centred on
capacity and the rule of law. Progress has been made
through community violence-reduction programmes,
improved criminal justice procedures, security sector
reform, joint patrols, community policing and the
development of the 2017-2021 strategic plan.
Police capacity-building efforts like these can play
a major role in enabling United Nations peacekeeping
operations to draw down and eventually withdraw.
On that note, I would like to thank Mr. Monchotte
for providing us with interesting statistics on the
improvements and a list of the remaining challenges. I
would like to ask Mr. Monchotte if he could describe, in
concrete terms, some examples of successes and lessons
learned from addressing challenges he has faced on the
ground with regard to police capacity-building.
Mr. Walbridge (New Zealand): At the outset, I too
would like to thank Mr. Ladsous and the four Police
Commissioners for their informative and valuable
briefings this morning. New Zealand would like to
take this opportunity to acknowledge their respective
efforts and those of the personnel under their command
in working towards achieving the mandates set by
the Security Council. New Zealand looks forward to
the implementation of the recommendations and the
external review of the functions, structure and capacity
of the United Nations Police Division, especially with
regard to United Nations policing having a more fieldfocused and results-oriented outlook, which should
have a direct and positive impact on the good work that
the Police Commissioners are all undertaking.
New Zealand recognizes the importance of
capacity-building and creating enduring stability and
security, and the need to recruit suitably qualified and
experienced police personnel who are able to effectively
contribute to building up the core functions of the
national police of the country where they are employed.
That includes recruiting more suitably qualified
female personnel, given the unique contribution that
women make to conflict resolution and post-conflict
peacebuilding, a point that was made by Mr. Ladsous,

S/PV.7808

Commissioner Makotose and several other Council
members around the table today. Capacity-building
should also be linked to the need to implement
sequenced and prioritized mandates that would allow
for recruitment focus to switch from protection to
development as the mission evolves.
The release last week of the Executive Summary on
the independent special investigation into the violence
that occurred in Juba between 8 and 11 July highlighted
a number of shortcomings within the United Nations
Mission in the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS),
and we consider it timely that the UNMISS Police
Commissioner briefed the Security Council today on
crisis management. We thank him for his insight and
update. We consider it worth highlighting that it is
not just about having plans in place, but also ensuring
that those plans are understood by all, rehearsed and
regularly reviewed so that, in the case of UNMISS, all
are working towards the goal of effectively achieving
the protection-of-civilians mandate. Having said
that, New Zealand acknowledges that protection-ofcivilians mandates, by their very nature, are complex
and require vigorous and robust application of the rules
of engagement.
We welcome the opportunity for interaction at
today’s meeting, and in responding to the questions
already posed by my colleagues around the table, we
would be grateful for any further specific comments
from the Police Commissioners about how the Security
Council and the United Nations Police Division can
better help them and their personnel in achieving their
mandates on the ground.
In particular, for UNMISS Police Commissioner
Munyambo, New Zealand would be interested in
hearing what measures have been put in place to
address the issues raised in the special investigation,
particularly as they relate to the actions, or inaction, of
the formed police units and their protection-of-civilians
role. In that respect, we welcomed his comments today
concerning the importance of ensuring that all police
officers not only have the relevant skill sets but also the
right mindset to respond quickly and appropriately to
respond to a crisis situation.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Senegal.
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Ladsous
and the other briefers this morning for having accepted

16-3750023/29

S/PV.7808

United Nations peacekeeping operations

our invitation and, above all, for having illustrated the
difficult conditions of our operations, under which our
tasks are accomplished for the good of humankind. At
this late hour, I hardly need to underscore the growing
importance of police in peacekeeping operations — the
briefers have more than adequately done that. I will
simply note why my delegation took the initiative of
convening this debate.
Senegal is the largest contributor of police units
to United Nations peacekeeping operations. Given
the growing role of the police in those missions, my
delegation considered it useful to take this opportunity,
as we preside over the Council this month, but also
during United Nations police week, to ask Council
members to participate in this interactive dialogue. With
nine formed police units in six police stations, for a total
of 1,250 personnel throughout our theatre of operations
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID), the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), the United Nations
Mission in the Republic of South Sudan, the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau, not to mention individual police
officers, Senegal has much to gain from this debate,
by sharing its contribution and experience but, above
all, by listening to others and asking for their input in
order to improve its training and deployment policies
for formed police units in peacekeeping operations.
The 65 recommendations issuing from the
assessments — organized by Mr. Ladsous — on police
units, including documents on strategic guidance, seem
to be on the right path. Shortcomings, weaknesses and
areas of improvement were identified — I will mention
but a few, specifically: the often late deployment of
police to missions, resulting in development aspects
not being included in initial action plans; unqualified
personnel, often due to poor training, which hampers
their operational capabilities; the difficulty of the Police
Division in filling vacancies within mission forces;
mandates too rigid for specific and asymmetrical
developments on the ground; the lack of a reliable
and effective information- and intelligence-gathering
system that would enable us to be proactive; but also the
difficulty of missions in preventing the misconduct of
24/29

10/11/2016

their personnel, which tarnishes the image of the United
Nations. And we have all emphasized the lack of women
personnel, who in many cases are more appropriate for
local policing efforts. The figure cited was 17 per cent,
not 7 per cent, but in UNAMID, with a female Head of
Mission, it is 19 per cent, still a significant degree of
improvement.
I would now like to ask our briefers a few questions,
the first of which — on the issue of the language that the
missions are operating in in the various theatres — was
raised by the French delegation. The second has to do
with the fact that peacekeeping missions are increasingly
deployed in hostile environments where functioning
equipment and well-trained personnel are needed
in order to carry out complex tasks effectively.
Mr. Ladsous’s Department has frequently deplored
the lack of available equipment. On the other hand,
some missions have problems with a lack of qualified
managerial personnel. What are the implications of
those factors for the execution of mandates? That
question is for all four briefers and Mr. Ladsous.
With regard to MINUSTAH, Hurricane Matthew
recently did enormous material damage to the country
and significantly worsened the humanitarian situation
there. MINUSTAH had to throw itself into assisting
the population, which was very badly affected at a
moment when the security situation was deteriorating,
so the police component was forced to add aiding
the population to its traditional tasks. How, in the
Commissioner’s opinion, was it able to combine the two
missions? And what were the constraints in terms of
personnel and equipment?
Regarding UNAMID, where the protection
of civilians is concerned, what steps can be taken
to ensure better physical protection for women in
Darfur — Ms. Makotose is a woman and Force
Commander — who are often at risk of being raped by
armed groups?
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): With your
permission, Mr. President, I think it would be a good
idea to ask each of our four Police Commissioners
to respond — briefly, I would emphasize — to the
questions specifically aimed at them, after which I
16-37500

10/11/2016

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV.7808

could complement their answers. I think that would be
more logical.

carrying weapons. We would therefore love to see more
women in the FPUs.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Ms. Makotose.

Another area where we are getting guidance is
through the aforementioned women’s association
network. Another Police Division initiative is the
gender toolkit, which helps us tailor our outreach to
communities in our gender mainstreaming efforts.
A website is being developed to help us reach out to
women and police-contributing countries in order to
enable them to contribute more women to missions.
We also encourage prior training for women to better
prepare them for deployment to missions and surviving
the rigorous requirements of mission life. The Police
Division is also developing a roster for members,
especially the senior leadership, so that when they are
needed women can be deployed more quickly.

Ms. Makotose: I would like to express my
appreciation for all the comments by Council members.
They are very helpful to the mission and can also
pave the way for our continued engagement regarding
further support.
I will begin with the last question. The steps we
are taking to protect women include actually sending
patrols with them, especially when they are doing
activities related to their livelihoods, since they are
more vulnerable when they are farming, collecting
firewood and gathering the grass that they use in their
work. Apart from patrols for the camps for internally
displaced persons, we have introduced patrols in the
areas that women visit, which we plan in conjunction
with the women’s leadership. Thus we specify certain
days when they can go out to fetch water and collect
firewood. We have also been able to intervene in a
personal capacity, by using the women’s association
network to introduce fuel-efficient stoves, which have
helped to reduce the need to send out patrols.
I would also like to respond briefly to the issue
raised by the representative of France on language and
culture. We do indeed have to deal with such challenges
in the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID). We do our best to learn the
local language, as well as to teach English to the local
communities, and that has improved our interaction
with them. They really appreciate the lessons, and we
appreciate being able to learn Arabic.
UNAMID appreciates the offers to do with the
issue of training, as raised here today, and I am sure
that the Police Division will be following up so that
we can benefit from such offers for further training.
I also want to mention the ongoing Police Division
efforts regarding tactical and strategic guidance for
mission development. I would mainly like to highlight
the importance of deploying the 20 per cent of women
individual police officers, but also to ask to see that
extended to the formed police units (FPUs), because the
need is there. The problem is that women are sometimes
attacked by men carrying guns, and as a result, when
they are patrolling they sometimes feel intimidated
because most of the patrols are also made up of men

I therefore do see us being able to surpass the 20 per
cent target ratio for female police that we have set, and
that in future a ratio of male to female deployment that
actually represents the population is possible, with the
Council’s support. More importantly, however, I see it
as essential if we are to meet the needs of the male,
female and child populations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Munyambo.
Mr. Munyambo: I thank the members of the
Security Council for their appreciation of the efforts of
United Nations police (UNPOL).
I would like to respond to the question from the
representative of Malaysia on the role of UNPOL in the
United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan
during the crisis. UNPOL did indeed play a very big
role during and even after the crisis, including in such
areas as search operations, crowd control and access
control at gates and the deployment of robust patrols,
even outside the civilian protection camps. I would
also like to emphasize the importance of understanding
the fear about what was happening at the beginning
of the crisis. In Malakal in particular, we deployed
additional formed police units (FPUs) to reinforce the
city, while during the crisis in Wau we also deployed
FPUs transferred from Bentiu. During the crisis in Juba
we were protecting four categories of people — those in
the protection-of-civilian sites fleeing the bullets; other
internally displaced persons; and Dinka and Nuer,
whom we had to separate, since they could not be mixed
owing to their perceived threats to one another. We also
had other categories of people, including non-citizens

16-3750025/29

S/PV.7808

United Nations peacekeeping operations

doing business outside, including Eritreans, Ethiopians,
Ugandans and some Kenyans, who also ran for
protection to the protection-of-civilians sites. So I can
say that we played a major role in the protection of all
of those categories of people during the crisis. After
the crisis, we continued to draw the lessons learned and
training and working with other components to ensure
the protection of civilians.
To respond quickly to the question posed by the
Ambassador of Egypt on what we are doing with regard
to building the capacity of the South Sudanese national
police, I want to recall that while we do not have the
mandate of capacity-building, there is a window of
opportunity with respect to the joint integrated police.
Indeed, in this regard, we have tried to develop a
training curriculum and also provide the instructor who
will be conducting the training of the joint integrated
police. So far 500 have assembled, and we will continue
engagements with them.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Munyambo for the clarifications he has provided.
I now give the floor to Mr. Monchotte to respond to
the comments made and the questions raised.
Mr. Monchotte (spoke in French): The Permanent
Representative of Malaysia asked a question as to the
progress made in connection with the judicial police.
While undeniable progress has been achieved in
capacity-building, there is still room for progress. It is
for that reason that we particularly support capacitybuilding in the area of judicial intelligence, training,
crime-scene investigation and forensics.
I can give a concrete example of such progress.
Recently there was a mass jailbreak from some of
the national prisons. We carried out a large-scale
operation that, without the intelligence gathered by the
Haitian National Police, would not have been possible
to the same extent. We also used a third-dimension
observation capacity provided by our component’s
recently created drone units, with a view to the partner
taking ownership.
I will now turn to the question posed by the
Permanent Representative of Uruguay on the
drawdown strategy, which is based on an assessment
of the competencies taught. While the situation is not
the same for the military component, there is a need
for in-depth consideration of what has been taken on
board by the partner. We are working regularly on this
26/29

10/11/2016

issue, and the elaboration of the strategic development
plan accords with this. So the outlook is positive here,
but I think that we need to take the time to carry out
an evaluation in order to be able to better assess the
situation when the time comes.
The Permanent Representative of Japan asked what
successes have been achieved and what lessons have
been learned. I would refer first to the progress made
in democratic crowd control. We have put in place a
protocol that gives priority to the involvement of the
Haitian police force. Since I arrived, and even before
then, United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
forces have not been deployed on the front lines. So
the partner has taken ownership of best operating
procedures, although we still need to make progress in
that area.
The lessons learned from this include, first, those
from the ongoing contacts that we have owing to the
co-location of Haitian law-enforcement units with
specialists from our police component; and the second
lesson is the importance of the close contact I have with
the Director General, which, when there are specific
problems — I will come back to this issue later — makes
it possible to enhance our capacity to respond.
Another example that I think is a positive one is the
fact that ownership has been taken of the drafting of the
upcoming 2017-2021 strategic plan. While other plans
required substantial support, this most recent one is
currently being drawn up in a much more autonomous
way by the partner, although we are still providing
some support.
As to the question raised by the President of the
Security Council, which concerns the situation in the
south of the country, of course that event complicated
an already complex situation. It was completely
unforeseen, brutal and sudden. We had to rethink
the situation very quickly and, although we had been
involved mainly in preparations for the elections,
respond in an appropriate way. As I was saying a
moment ago, we immediately and decisively contacted
the Director General of the national police in order
to coordinate our efforts. I had to redeploy personnel
while taking account of the capacity available in terms
of resilience and of the support to be provided to
those units that were most affected by this unexpected
climatic event. That is why I redeployed the Rwandan
contingent; some of its forces were in Les Cayes, which
16-37500

10/11/2016

United Nations peacekeeping operations

was slightly less affected than the town of Jérémie,
where they were usually located.
The vacuum created by this redeployment, which
was absolutely necessary in order to support the
department affected, that of Grande Anse, was filled by
the dispatch of 65 Senegalese gendarmes, representing
a formed police unit in Port-au-Prince. Since they were
already located in Les Cayes, I preferred to use those
elements. Of course, I sent individual police officers as
reinforcements, and all of this was done in coordination
with the Haitian police.
I should like to touch for a moment on the linguistic
challenge that we face, as it is important. It is up to
the troop-contributing countries to make every effort
to ensure that on the ground, in the Mission, police
officers can benefit from all the distance training that
is available, for example, the Rosetta Stone system. We
have to recognize the efforts made by the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations on this issue, and I think
that the initiative on joint coordination efforts with the
International Organization of la Francophonie is very
interesting in this regard.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Monchotte for the clarifications he has provided.
I now give the floor to Mr. Yacouba to respond to
the comments made and the questions raised.
Mr. Yacouba (spoke in French): I should like to
thank everyone present for the close attention paid
to our briefings, which has given rise to some very
relevant questions.
First, to respond to the question asked by the
representative of France, I would note that there are
two linguistic aspects here. I will not go into detail,
but as far as the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
is concerned, we deployed to northern areas, in addition
to those who chose to go, individual police officers who
speak the local language, in order to facilitate contact.
We included all neighbouring countries, so we were
able to find police officers who speak the relevant local
languages.
As far as technology is concerned, I think that it
has been fairly well developed. It is a very important
issue, because unfortunately there is an urgent threat,
and we have no reliable human sources of information
that would make it possible to confirm the nature of
the threat. But these surveillance methods make it

S/PV.7808

possible better to protect personnel and populations
and safeguard the mandate. The acquisition of drones
is being considered as well as all of the rules that apply
to their use, which are currently being developed. That
is all I can say about this issue.
The representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela asked a question about recruitment. I can
provide the example of our experience in MINUSMA.
With the Police Division, we have already identified
specific elements that are of interest to us and of which
we inform the Division. The latter in turn contacts the
police-contributing countries, and we subsequently
interview to recruit the people whom we believe will
truly be appropriate to work in context of our Mission.
The representative of Spain referred to community
policing and asked how we dealt with it in connection
with our Mission. We are of the mind that security
should not be imposed. The community needs to
tell us what its issues are. Accordingly, because of
the lack of police in some northern and central parts
of the country, we took the initiative to strengthen
cooperation with those units through patrols. We do
not carry that out alone, but with the help of the other
components of the Mission through the development of
certain quick-impact projects. We try to ensure that the
impact of the quick-impact projects is all-around, will
benefit the entire community and rebuild trust between
the population and the Malian forces because, in some
regions, trust is lacking. We are however trying to
gradually restore that trust.
The representative of the Russian Federation also
asked a question that is really a question concerning
terminology. The intelligence that we are discussing in
this context comes from a criminal source. No other
word in French better describes it. When we refer to
“criminal intelligence”, that is something else. That
kind of intelligence is indispensable, so as to know how
to ensure the protection of people when we know that
we are going to deploy them to an area. When we say
that a population is under threat, before we go and help
them, we need to know, first of all, the dangers that
we will face. In that regard, I believe that gathering
this kind of intelligence is of the utmost importance.
We use that intelligence to strengthen the capacity of
the Malian forces. If the population does not want to
provide information, it is because it is not protected. We
therefore have to consider how we protect an informer,
and all of that is linked to essential security aspects.

16-3750027/29

S/PV.7808

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The representative of Egypt brought up the issue
of the All Sources Information Fusion Unit (ASIFU),
which is a concern. In all respects, we are very happy
with ASIFU, a unit at the core of the Mission. It carries
out very relevant analyses that are always tied security
issues. The information provided by ASIFU is shared by
all MINUSMA structures in connection with carrying
out activities. It is one thing to carry out activities in a
specific area, but if the area in question is unfortunately
unaccessible owing to security issues, one needs to be
informed. That information is not kept solely within
MINUSMA. The leadership of MINUSMA, for
example, holds regular meetings with the Government
authorities. Within the force, we have regular meetings
with the Chief of Staff of the armed forces. I have
regular meetings with the Malian forces, as well. We
use that opportunity to exchange all information with
the various components. In that regard, I believe that
there is no problem.
That is the crux of what I have to say. We
stress the importance of the support of the Security
Council to further raise awareness of the work of
police-contributing countries.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): One of two timely
questions was asked concerning Abyei, regarding
which we must be aware of the fact that, despite several
political commitments that were made five and a half
years ago, there is still no joint police force there. The
United Nations and the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei provide the minimum necessary level
of police to ensure the minimum level of law and order
in the Abyei box. We have created units that provide
and contribute to community policing in the Ngok
Dinka community. Need I mention that we made the
same offer to the Misseriya community, which was
rejected by the Government of Khartoum and resulted
in the asymmetrical situation, which, I believe, the
representative of the Russian Federation pointed out.
That continues to be our objective.
With regard to the events in Juba in July, as I told the
Council, we are firmly committed to the implementation
of the recommendations of the report, which resulted
from the independent special investigation led by
Major General Cammaert. My close colleague,
Mr. Wane, is heading up a task force that is working
towards implementing all of the recommendations in
28/29

10/11/2016

connection with soldiers, civilians and police officers.
All of that has been put in motion, and I promise to
keep the Security Council up to date in real time.
With regard to the host of questions that were
asked this morning, I thank you, Sir, for having taken
this initiative. We know the very special role that your
country plays in the area of police contributions. I
commend both the quantity and the excellent quality
of your country’s contribution of police personnel. The
corps is made up of people who are highly professional
and whose conduct is beyond reproach. And I am
truly grateful.
I believe that the discussion has illustrated above
all the fact that police activities, which form a part of
peacekeeping operations, cannot serve as a universal
model. At the core of the matter constant tensions arise
from two constraints, which vary according to the
context: on the one hand, the necessity to compensate
for the inexistence or shortcomings of a national police,
and, on the other, to boost national capacities. And the
situation changes from one moment to the next.
Ten years ago in Haiti, the problem was the
gangs of Cité de Soleil. The priority was therefore an
intervention on the ground to neutralize the members
of those gangs. Today, as the Haitian National Police
has reached a greater level in terms of quantity and
quality, priority has been placed on the very important
area of training in terms of both of those elements. The
police component of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti, in its role of maintaining law and
order, is much less needed and has become rather a
backup force, composed of our troops and police units
remaining in the country.
The situation in South Sudan was the exact opposite.
In 2011, the mandate accorded by the Security Council
was one of capacity-building. The terrible deterioration
of the situation there, which began in December 2013,
meant that, because of the impossibility of cooperating
with South Sudanese institutions that had blood on
their hands, we had to put capacity-building activities
on hold. And we focused to a much greater degree on
policing while hoping that the time would come — as
the Police Commissioner said — for integrated joint
policing, provided for in the peace agreements, and
full-on capacity-building. There is no one-size-fits-all
model. Every situation has to be dealt with individually.
I would like to address some of the other issues
that were brought up. Clearly, language skills are a
16-37500

10/11/2016

United Nations peacekeeping operations

must. Wherever possible, we need to have more police
who can interact with the local populations. That was
one of the goals of the Conference on Peacekeeping in
Francophone Environments, held in Paris three weeks
ago. In two weeks, I will take part in the sixteenth
Summit of the International Organization of La
Francophonie, to be held in Madagascar. I use all such
opportunities to remind people of the major importance
of capacity if we want to function correctly.
Secondly, with regard to intelligence policy, I
know that the terminology continues to lead to certain
comments, but it is clear — and Mali was clearly an
interesting case here — that we cannot act effectively if
we are blind and deaf. Therefore, we need intelligence
capacities in military terms; we need intelligence
for policing and for civilian activities. Therefore,
Mr. President, you know that we are implementing,
we are trying to design a type of framework for what
could be the intelligence policy of the United Nations.
It is clear — and we are working with Member States
on that — that we do take account of all the limits
concerning, first of all, the need to be consistent with
our mandate, not working outside our mandate. It is
really for the needs of implementing the mandate.
We work in a positive relationship with the host
Government. We are prohibited from undertaking any
James Bond-style or other such type of operations.
Everything needs to be very much focused on the
needs that we face. For all that, we need specific tools
in terms of technology, that is, surveillance drones in
many situations could really help us in our work. Then
there are the observation balloons, with clusters of
cameras and sensors. Those play a very critical role.
They allow us to supervise the security in the capital
of the Central African Republic, in Bangui. In terms
of new institutions, including in Bangui, we have set
up a task force for the security of the capital, and this

S/PV.7808

brings the military and the police closely together, and
all that is being constantly fine-tuned. I think all that is
really necessary.
In part, all that is really the outcome of the impetus
that was given by Senegal’s resolution 2185 (2014) two
years ago. I think that the Secretary-General’s report
that will be issued shortly will give a good illustration
of the fact that the Council has given a major impetus
to that, and it helps us out very much in all our work.
I will conclude on an important point, which was
illustrated during the United Nations Chiefs of Police
Summit held last spring. This is an opportunity for me
to thank all the police-contributing countries because
I know very well how in each country a permanent
tension exists between its domestic security needs and
the interest of ensuring that its national police acquire
international experience and also contribute to the needs
of the international community. I know to what extent
that is very difficult for Ministries of the Interior, for
the heads of national police forces and of gendarmeries.
The figures show that. We have doubled the numbers of
United Nations police force over the last seven or eight
years. We now have 13, 500 police, and new pledges
have been made in the framework of the United Nations
Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System. All that
shows that there is now a greater awareness of the
importance of all that work. Once again, it demonstrates
the generosity of the contributing countries, and that
should be commended. Allow me to particularly thank
your own country once again, Mr. President, for all that
Senegal is doing to help us.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Ladsous. Once again, I want to convey to you,
Sir, and to the Force Commanders the thanks of the
Security Council.
The meeting rose at 1.55 p.m.

16-3750029/29
