Gene.-al Assemhly-Thirty-se<"ond Session

158

Taking note of the rcport cf the Sccretary-General on
the management of thc Fund submitted to it at its thirtysecond session, 100
1. Notes with satisfaction thc dccisions t:iken by
the Consultative CommittC'c on the Voluntary Fund for
the Unitcd Nations Decadc for Women at its first two
sessions, hcld in March and Junc 1977; 101
2. E,presses the hove th~1t the projccts which thc
Consultativc Committee has already approved will be
implemented as soon as possible;
3. Urges the spccializl'd agencies and other United
Nations bodics concerned. including the United Nations
Deve!opment Programme. to assist thc regional commi~sions in formulating projects drawn up in connexion
with thc: United Nations Decadc for Women, with a
vicw to submitting thcm to the Consultativc Committee:
4. A/so urges the spccialized agencies and other
United Nations bodies concerned, including the Unitcd
Nations Development Programme, to co-operate closcly
with the Consultative Committee with a view to developing programmes which will contribute to the advancement of women;
5. Requests thc Secre 1ary-Gencral to continue to
submit annual reports on the managemcnt of the Fund
and:
(a)
To incl ude in such reports a summary of the
projects selccted by thc Consultativc Committee for
financing by thc Fund;
( b) To submit periodically to thc General Assembly
progress reports on the execution of such projccts.
105th plenary meeting
16 Decemher 1977

32/142.

Women's participation in the strengthening of international peace and security and in the strug~le a~ainst colonialism, racism, racial fliscrimination, foreign aggression and occupation and ali
forms of foreign domination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its rcsolutions 3519 (XXX), 3520 (XXX)
and 3521 (XXX) of 15 December 1975 and 31/136
of 16 December 1976,
T aking into account that sccure peace and social
progress, thc establishment of the ncw international cconomic order as well as the ful! enjoyment of human
rights and fundamental freedoms requirc the active participation of women, thcir equality and dcvclopmcnt,
Appreciating the contribution of women to the
strengthening of international peace and security and to
the struggle against colonialism, racism, racial discrimination, forcign aggression and occupation and ali
forms of foreign domination,
Emphasizing its grave concern that in sorne regions
of the world colonialism, apartheid, racial discrimination
and aggression continue to exist and territories are still
occupied, which represents a most serious infringement
of the principles of the Charter of thc United Nations
and of human rights of both women and men, and of
the peoples' right to sclf-dctermination,
100 A/32/174.
10 1 Jbid., sect.

H.

Reaf/irming thc objectives of the United Nations
Decade for Womcn. thc Declaration of Mcxico on thc
Equa::ty of Womcn and Thcir Contribution to Dcvelopment and Peacc, 197 5 1º2 and the World Plan of Action
for thc Implementation of the Objectives of the Internati,1nal \Vomcn ·s Y car, ,o::
1.
Takes note of the rcport of thc Secrctary-General
on thc implcmcntation of General Assembly rcsolution
3519 ( XXX) ;'º 4

2. Calls upun all Statcs to continue to make their
con'.ribution to creating favourablc conditions for thc
climination of discrimination against womcn and far
thcir ful! and cqual participatior; in thc social dcvelopment proccss and to cncouragc broad participation of
womcn in thc cffort to strcngthcn intcrnational pcace.
atend thc proccss of international détcntc, curb the
anm racc and takc measurcs for disarmament;
3. Seizcs tlie occasion of thc [nternational AntiApartheid Y car to be obscrvcd in 1978 to invite all
States fully to support women exposed to colonialism,
racism and apartheid in their just struggle against the
racist régimes in southcrn Africa;
4. Invites all Statcs to proclaim, in accordance with
their historical and national traditions and customs, any
dav of the ycar as United Nations D;1y far Women's
Rights and International Peace and to inform the Sccretary-General thereon;
5. Requests thc Commission on thc Status of
Womcn to consider, as a contribution to the preparation
of thc World Confcrencc of the United Nations Decadc
for Women, to be held in 1980, the elaboration of a
draft declaration on thc participation of women in thc
struggle far thc strengthcning of international peacc
and security and against colonialism, racism. racial discrimination, foreign aggression and occupation and ali
forms of foreign domination and to report thereon to
thc Economic and Social Council at its sixty-fourth session;
6. Invites thc Sccretary-General to submit to the
General Asscmblv at its thirty-fourth session a progrcss report on the implcmentation of resolution 3519
(XXX);
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fourth session, under thc ítem "United Nations
Decade for Women: Equality, Dcvelopment and Peace",
a subitem entitled "lmplcmentation of General Assembly resolution 3519 (XXX): rcport of thc SccrctaryGeneral".
105th plenary meeting
16 December 1977

:{2/14:l.

Elimination of all forms of religiom1
in toleran<·~

T/1(' General Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions 1781 (XVII) of 7 Deccmbcr 1962 and 3069 (XXVIII) of 30 November 1973,
as well a., its rcsolution 3267 (XXIX) of 10 December
1rn4_ in which it rcquestcd the Commi~sion on Human
1 •2 Re¡)Orf

Wom,·11'.1

of rhe World Conferencc of the lntemationa/
( United Nations puhlication, Sales No.

}' ear

F.76.IV. I), chap. l.
10:i //,id., chap. 11. sect. A.
,o.t A/32/211.
