FORTIETH

YEAR

rd
MEETING:

NEW

10 JUNE

1985

YORK

CONTENTS

Page
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2583)

. . . . . . . . . . . .. .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .

Expression of welcome to the Prime M’inister, President of the Council of Ministers
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Peru; the Minister of State for Foreign
Affairs of Egypt; and the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of India
..
Expression

of thanks

to the retiring

Adoption

of the agenda

President

. . . .. . . .. . , . .. . . . . . . . .. . . .. .

..,.....*.............,..*...,........*......,*

The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17213);
(b)

Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Mozambique
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council

(S/17222);
(c)

Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation
of Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
Namibia (S/17242)
. .. . . . . .. . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . .. . . . . . . .. . .. . . . . ..

WPV.2583 and Corr. 1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . , ) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2583rd MEETING
Held in New York on Monday,

President: Mr. Errol MAHABIR

(Trinidad and Tobago),

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

10 June 1985, at 3 p.m.

Savetsila, and to Mr, Birabhongse Kasemsri, representative of Thailand, for their service in the Presidency for the
month of May. I am sure I speak for all members of the
Council in expressing to them our unreserved gratitude for
the great skill with which they conducted the business of
the Council last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2583)
1. Adoption

of the agenda

2. The situation in Namibia:
(4 Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17213);
(b) Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of Mozambique to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17222);
(4 Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of Namibia (S/17242)
The tneeting was called to order at 4.10 p.m.
Expression of welcome to the Prime Minister, President of
the Council of Ministers and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Peru; the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of
Egypt; and the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of
India
1. The PRESIDENT: I should like at the very outset of
the meeting to acknowledge the presence at the Council
table of the Prime Minister, President of the Council of
Ministers, and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Peru, Mr.
Luis Percovich Rota; the Minister of State for Foreign
Affairs of Egypt, Mr. Boutros Boutros Ghali; and the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of India, Mr. Khurshed
Alam Khan. On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to them,
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
2. The PRESIDENT:
As this is the first meeting of the
Council in June, I should like to take this opportunity to
pay tribute, on behalf of the members of the Council, to
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Thailand, Mr. Siddhi

The situation in Namibia:
(4 Letter dated23 May 1985from the PermanentRepresentativeof India to the United Nationsaddressed
to the
Presidentof the Security Council (S/17213);
(4 Letter dated 23 May 1985from the PermanentRepresentative of Mozambique to the United Nations
addressedto the President of the Security Council
(S/17222);
(4 Further report of the Secretary-Generalconcerningthe
implementationof Security Council resolutions435
(1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
Namibia (S/17242)
The PRESIDENT: I shouldlike to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the rcprcsentativesof
Algeria, Angola, Bangladesh,Bhutan, Cameroon, Canada, Cuba, Democratic Yemen, Ethiopia, the German
Democratic Republic, the Federal Republic of Germany,
Ghana, Guyana, Indonesia, Jamaica, Kuwait, Liberia,
Mexico, Morocco, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan,Panama,
South Africa, the Sudan, Turkey, Uganda, the United
Republic of Tanzania, Yugoslavia and Zambia in which
they requestto be invited to participate in the discussionof
the item on the agenda.In conformity with the usualpractice, 1 propose,with the consentof the Council, to invite
those representativesto participate in the discussionwithout the right to vote, in accordancewith the relevant provisionsof the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rulesof
procedure.
3.

At the invitation of the President,Mr. Kofa (Liberia) took
a place at the Counciltable; Mr. Bessaieh
(Algeria), Mr. de
Figueiredo (Angola), Mr, Wasiuddin (Bangladesh),Mr,
Tshering(Bhutan),Mr. Engo (Cameroon),Mr. Lewis(Canada), Mr. OramasOliva (Cuba),Mr. Al-Ashtal (Democratic
Yemen),Mr. Dinka (Ethiopia), Mr. Ott (German Democratic Republic),Mr, Lautenschlager(FederalRepublicof
Germany), Mr. Gbeho(Ghana), Mr. Karran (Guyana), Mr.
Aiatas (Indonesia),Mr. Barnett (Jamaica),Mr. Abuihassan
(Kuwait), Mr. Marin Bosch(Mexico), Mr. Alaoui (Morocco),

Mr, Icaza Gallard (Nicaragua), Mr. Gambari Nigeria), Mr.
Shah Nawaz (Pakistan), Mr. Kam (Panama), Mr. von
Schirnding (South Africa), Mr. Birido (Sudan), Mr. Tiirkmen (Turkey), Mr. Otunnu (Uganda), Mr. Rupia (United
RepubIic of Tanzania), Mr. Golob (Yugoslavia) and Mr. Lusaka (Zambia) took the places reservedfor them at the side of
the Council chamber.

the representativesof Burkina Faso, Egypt and Madagascar, which reads as follows:
“We, the undersigned, members of the Security
Council, have the honour to request that during its
meetingsdevoted to consideration of the item entitled
‘The situation in Namibia’, the Security Council, under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure, extend an
invitation to Mr. Sam Nujoma, President of the South
West Africa People’s Organisation.”

4. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the CounciI
that I have received a telegram dated 5 June from the
Acting President of the United Nations CounciI for
Namibia, which reads as follows:

If I hear no objection I shall take it that the Council
decidesto agreeto this request.

“I have the honour to inform you that the United
Nations Council for Namibia wishes to participate in
the upcoming meetings of the Security Council on the
item entitled ‘The situation in Namibia’. The Council’s
delegation will include the Acting President of the
Council, Mr. Noel Sinclair, and the Vice-Presidents,
Mr. Hocine Djoudi, Mr. Ignac Golob, Mr. Natarajan
Krishnan and Mr, Ilter Tiirkmen.”

At the invitation qf the President, Mr. Nujonza took a
place at the Council table.
7. The PRESIDENT: The Council is meeting today in
responseto the request contained in letters addressedto
the President of the Security Council on 23 May by the
representativeof India [S/17213] and the representativeof
Mozambique [S/17222].

On previous occasions the Security Council has extended
invitations to representatives of other United Nations
bodies in connection with the consideration of matters on
its agenda. In accordance with past practice in this matter,
I propose that Security Council extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to the Acting
President of the United Nations Council for Namibia and
the delegation of the Council.

8. Members of the Council have before them document
S/17242 which contains the text of a further report of the
Secretary-Generalconcerning the implementation of Security Council resolutions435(1978)and 1439(1978)concerning the question of Namibia. I should like to draw the
attention of membersof the Council to the following documents: S/17 114,letter dated 19April from the representative of India to the Presidentof the Council; S/ 17119,letter
dated 22 April from the representativeof the United States
to the Presidentof the Council; S/17120, letter dated 22
April from the representativeof the United Kingdom to the
President of the Council; S/17123, letter dated 23 April
from the representativeof France to the President of the
Council; S/17124,letter dated22 April from the representative of China to the Secretary-General; S/17128, letter
dated 24 April from the representative of Egypt to the
Secretary-General;S/17141, letter dated 30 April from the
representativeof the Union of Soviet Socialist Republicsto
the Secretary-General; S/1714.5,letter dated 2 May from
the representative of Italy to the Secretary-General;
S/17152, letter dated 4 May from the representative of
South Africa to the Secretary-General; S/17159, letter
dated 7 May from the representative of Algeria to the
Secretary-General; S/17184, letter dated 8 May from the
representativeof India to the Secretary-General; S/17190,
letter dated 13 May from the representativeof Uruguay to
the Secretary-General;S/17207, letter dated 20 May from
the representative of Japan to the Secretary-General;
S/17243, letter dated S June from the Acting Presidentof
the United Nations Council for Namibia to the SecretaryGeneral; and S/17249, letter dated 5 June from the Chairman of the SpecialCommittee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
addressedto the Presidentof the Council.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sinclair (Acting
President of the United Nations Council for Namibia) and
the other members of the delegation took a place at the
Council table.
5. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter dated 7 June from the Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid, which
reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request the Security Council to
permit me to participate in my capacity as Chairman of
the Special Committee againstApartheid, under the provisions of rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, in the Council’s consideration of the item
entitled ‘The situation in Namibia’,”
On previous occasions the Security Council has extended
invitations to representatives of other United Nations
bodies in connection with the consideration of matters on
its agenda. In accordance with past practice in this matter,
I propose that the Council extend an invitation under rule
39 of its provisional rules of procedure to the Chairman of
the Special Committee against Apartheid.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Garba (Chairman
of the Special Committee againstApartheid) took aplace at
the Council table.

9. The first speakeris the Minister of State for Foreign
Affairs of India, Mr. Khurshed Alam Khan.

6. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter dated 5 June [S/17244] from

10. Mr. ALAM KHAN (India): Allow me at the outset,
Sir, to offer you felicitations upon your assumptionof the
2

high office of President of the Council. Our two countries
enjoy cordial and co-operative relations, enriched immeasurably by the age-old ethnic and cultural bonds that reach
out to span the geographical distance between them. We
are happy that the representative of a friendly fellow-nonaligned country is presiding over the Council as it takes up
the question of Namibia, an issue with which the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries is vitally and intimately
concerned. Your eminent personal qualities and diplomatic experience are well known. We feel assured that the
Council is in good hands and that it will approach the task
before it with a sense of purpose. We are confident that
your wise guidance will enable the Council to achieve constructive results.

mentation of that resolution by insisting on conditions
contrary to the provisions of the United Nations plan;
rejected South Africa’s insistence on linking Namibian
independence to irrelevant and extraneous issues; declared
that the independence of Namibia could not be held hostage to the resolution of issues that were alien to resolution
435 (1978) and decided to meet as soon as possible following the Secretary-General’s report for the purpose of
reviewing progress in the implementation of resolution 435
(1978) and, in the event of continued obstruction by South
Africa, to consider the adoption of appropriate measures
under the Charter of the United Nations.
16. South Africa’s response to resolution 539 (1983)
came no later than the day after its adoption. With familiar arrogance and defiance, Mr. Botha once again insisted
that no settlement plan could be implemented unless a firm
agreement was reached on the withdrawal of Cuban
troops from Angola [see S/lblOd].

11. I avail myself of this opportunity to convey to you,
Sir, and through you to the other members of the Council
the greetings and good wishes of the Prime Minister of my
country in his capacity as Chairman of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

17. Members of the Council will therefore understand
the deep sense of frustration and profound concern felt by
the international community at the manner in which the
situation has evolved. It is a frustration that stems not
merely from the fact that an unequivocal and firm message
from the Council was spurned and repudiated even before
the ink on it was dry. In a more fundamental sense, it is
frustrating-indeed
alarming-to see the United Nations,
which assumed direct responsibility over Namibia nearly
two decades ago, watch helplessly from the sidelines.
Meanwhile, efforts purportedly aimed at facilitating the
implementation of resolution 435 (1978) continue to be
talked about, and the impasse is prolonged.

12. We also pay a tribute to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and to the representative of Thailand for the excellent manner in which the Council was led in the month of
May.
13. I wish also to say how happy we are to see the
Secretary-General with us. As we express our deep appreciation for his untiring and devoted efforts to promote the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and, in particular, to implement the decisions of
the United Nations in respect of Namibia, we assure him
of our continuing support and wholehearted co-operation.
14. The Council is meeting in response to a call made by
the members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
at the Extraordinary
Ministerial Meeting of its Coordinating Bureau on the question of Namibia, held at
New Delhi from 19 to 21 April. The Bureau sought an
urgent meeting of the Security Council to resume consideration of the question of Namibia and to give effect to the
Council’s own resolutions in this regard, in particular resolution 435 (1978). The Bureau further invited the Foreign
Ministers of a number of countries to participate personally in these meetings [S/17184, annex, paras. 48 and 491. It
is my privilege to be here *in pursuance of that mandate.
The presence here of several distinguished Ministers from
non-aligned countries, including the Prime Minister of
Peru, is a reflection of the high importance and urgency we
attach to the cause of Namibia’s independence.

18. For that reason alone, if for no other, ‘we are happy
that the Council is once again taking up the matter. In so
doing, the Council is asserting its critical role and assuming its legitimate and inescapable responsibility in this
regard. This series of meetings, therefore, is of crucial
significance.
19. The recent Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of the
Co-ordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries, devoted
especially to the question of Namibia, was a reflection as
much of the high priority and importance the non-aligned
countries have traditionally attached to the question of
Namibia as of the urgency of bringing about the independence of Namibia through the implementatio? of Security
Council resolution 435 (1978). The Final Document of the
New Delhi Meeting has already been circulated [S/17184,
annex], and therefore I need not dwell in detail upon the
assessment made by the Ministers assembled in New Delhi
and the conclusions they reached. I may, however, recall
that the Bureau, at that meeting, reiterated that the United
Nations had primary responsibility for Namibia and that it
was therefore incumbent upon the United Nations to
ensure the speedy attainment of genuine and internationally recognized independence by Namibia. It remains the
firm conviction of the Bureau that resolution 435 (197X),
which seeks to put into effect the United Nations plan for
Namibian independence, constitutes the only basis for a
peaceful settlement of the Namibian question. The Bureau
reiterated the categorical rejection of the linkage of Na-

15. The Council is now meeting to consider the situation
in Namibia after a lapse of almost two years. That in itself
is a sad commentary on the lack of progress towards
implementation of the United Nations plan for Namibia’s
independence, a plan which has been in existence for
nearly seven years. When the Council last met on the situation in Namibia in October 1983, it took one of the most
important decisions on the question of Namibia in adopting resolution 539 (1983). In that resolution the Council,
inter ah, reiterated that resolution 435 (1978) was the only
basis for a peaceful settlement of the Namibian problem,
condemned South Africa for its obstruction of the imple3

the means to achieve that end. Why, then, should it have
taken so long to resolve this question? Why is South Africa
being permitted to defy the unanimous call of the international community? With what conscience can anybody
hold the independence of Namibia hostage to issues that
have no bearing on it? Can we remain silent spectators of
the suffering people of Namibia being used as pawns in a
game involving larger strategic interest? Can we afford to
continue to tolerate South Africa’s aggressive actions
against the front-line States and its duplicity--as evidenced
once again .by its latest act of sabotage deep inside Angolan territory?

mibian independence to the withdrawal of Cuban troops
from Angola, It called upon the Security Council to act in
a decisive manner in fulfilment of the direct responsibility
of the United Nations with regard to Namibia and to take
urgent measures in order to ensure that the United Nations
plan, as approved in resolution 435 (1978), was immediately and effectively implemented, without modification
or preconditions.
20. With regard to the latest obstacle placed by Pretoria
in the way of implementation of resolution 435 (1978),
namely, the decision to establish a so-called internal
administration in Windhoek, the Bureau expressed its
strong condemnation and observed that this development
made it all the more imperative that the Security Council
meet forthwith and assume its responsibility fully to ensure
the speedy and unconditional implementation of resolution 435 (1978).

25. The time has come for the Council to acknowledge
what has become transparent to all-namely, that South
Africa has no intention of abiding by United Nations resolutions. The Council must take action to compel compliance by South Africa.

21. It is pertinent to recall here that the Council, through
the statement made by the President on 3 May 1985
[s/17151], has condemned and rejected any unilateral
action by South Africa leading towards an internal settlement outside resolution 435 (1978) as unacceptable, and
declared the establishment of the so-called interim government in Namibia to be null and void,

26. As the Co-ordinating Bureau noted at its meeting at
New Delhi, the international community has shown exemplary patience with an arrogant and intransigent regime. If
South Africa persists in its intransigence, there can be no
option but to impose comprehensive mandatory sanctions
under Chapter VII of the Charter.
27. It is our earnest hope that the current series of meetings of the Council will lead to more resolute action than
we have seen in the past. It is our expectation that the
Council will chart a course of action which will bring independence to the people of Namibia without delay, in conformity with resolution 435 (1978). We should also give the
Secretary-General a clear mandate within that framework
to monitor and secure compliance by South Africa.

22. It is again characteristic of South Africa that it
should choose to defy international public opinion and the
Security Council and press ahead with its plans to install a
puppet administration in Namibia. We have learned with
indignation and grave concern of reports regarding the
ceremony pIanned for 17 June in Windhoek. In its communique of 4 June, issued in the course of its extraordinary plenary meetings at Vienna, the Council for Namibia
called upon the Security Council

28. I should like to add a word about the position of my
own country with regard to the question of Namibia. Our
attachment to the Namibian cause and our espousal of it is
a matter of public knowledge and record. We were the first
country to take up the question of South West Africa
before the General Assembly in 1946.That sameyear, WC
becamethe first voluntarily to imposecomprehensivesanctions against South Africa. As a founder-member and
Vice-Presidentof the United NationsCouncil for Namibia,
India hasstriven to promote the interestsof the Namibian
people.We are proud to be of assistanceto the South West
Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO)-the sole and
authentic representativeof the Namibian people-whose
leadershipis presenthere today with us, in the personof its
President,Mr. Sam Nujoma. We remain firm in our conviction that the people of Namibia will ultimately prevail,
for theirs is a just cause.

“to take appropriate measures to preempt the installation of the ‘interim government’ and to ensure the
immediate and unconditional implementation of the
United Nations plan for Namibian independence” [see
S/17243, anrzex]. We fully endorse this call by the legal
administering authority for Namibia until independence.
23. We have noted the contents of the latest report submitted by the Secretary-General, [S/17242] dated 6 June.
His concluding remarks cannot but cause deep disquiet
and profound concern. He noted that implementation of
Security Council resolution 435 (1978) continues to elude
us for reasons which are irrelevant and extraneous and
stressed that it is imperative for all concerned to respect the
provisions of the United Nations plan, which is binding on
the parties and remains the only agreed basis for the independence of Namibia,

29. I should like to close with a quotation from the
inaugural addressby the Prime Minister of India, Mr.
Rajiv Gandhi, Chairman of the Movement of NonAligned Countries, at the recent New Delhi meeting, as
follows:

24. The situation that confronts us today is strangely
ironic, There is universal agreement that the travail of the
Namibian people must come to and end and that Namibia
must be free. Similarly, there is universal agreement that
the United Nations plan for Namibian independence, as
approved in Council resolutions 385 (1976) and 435 (1978),
constitutes the only basis for a peaceful settlement of the
Namibian question. We are thus all agreed on the end and

“Just a few years ago, Namibia’s progresstowards
independenceappearedso sure, Today it has becomea
casualty to power politics and multinationals’profit. In
the process,the very credibility of the institution that
4

had guaranteed this independence, the United Nations
Security Council, has come under question. The issue
now is whether a wronged and dispossessed people will
be supported or deserted by the world body. It is thus a
challenge to the United Nations. Will the United
Nations now, in its fortieth year, fulfil its moral and
political obligations, or will military and economic
might prevail over right?’

36. We wish first to say a special word to thanks to the
Secretary-General for his continuing, indefatigable work
to secure the liberation of Namibia. The United Nations
Council for Namibia reiterates its unqualified confidence
in our Secretary-General in the discharge of his efforts on
behalf of the Organization, and assures him of our continuing support. We also express appreciation to him for his
valuable report [S/17242].

30. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is Mr. Noel Sinclair, Acting President of the United Nations Council for
Namibia, whom I invite to make his statement.

37. Just 72 hours ago, the United Nations Council for
Namibia concluded at Vienna its Sixth Extraordinary Plenary Meeting. On that occasion we adopted a Declaration
and Programme of Action which we have requested to
have circulated as a document of the Security Council [see
S/17262, annex]. In the Declaration, the Council once
again makes a fervent appeal for maximum international
support for the early attainment of independence by Namibia. Among other things, the Council reiterates in that
document that special responsibility rests with the Security
Council to act without further delay to secure the implementation of its own relevant resolutions, in particular
resolution 435 (1978).

31. Mr. SINCLAIR,
Acting President of the United
Nations Council for Namibia: Mr. President, for myself, as
representative of Guyana, it is with special pleasure that I
see you, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of fraternal,
neighbouring Trinidad and Tobago, presiding over the
Security Council in this month of June. These feelings are
rooted in the unshakeable and long-standing bonds of
friendship and solidarity which unite our two countries,
bonds which themselves are further strengthened by our
joint endeavours within the Caribbean Community and
Common Market (CARICOM),
our regional integration
organization, to make a reality of the shared aspirations of
our peoples for development and the strengthening of our
independence and of the unity of the CARICOM region.
The Guyana delegation is confident that with your diplomatic skills, which we have come to know so well at first
hand, and with your vast experience and vision, the business of the Council during the month of June will be successfully concluded.

38. The entire southern African region is beset by tension
and insecurity created by South Africa’s apartheid policies,
its sustained campaign of armed aggression against neighbouring States, its continued illegal occupation of Namibia, along with the policies of coercion, repression and
oppression which accompany such occupation, and, most
recently, its defiant attempts to exclude the United Nations
from participating in change in respect of Namibia or in
any aspect of the present or future situation of that
Territory.

32. I also wish to pay tribute to your predecessor, the
representative of Thailand, for the efficiency and serenity
with which he presided over the business of the Council
during the month of May.

39. Quite apart from these considerations-which
must
be a cause of alarm to everyone seated around this tablethe United Nations Council for Namibia does not view the
situation in southern Africa in an isolated manner. The
situation in this subregion is one of a few easily identifiable
situations with a potential for seriously disrupting international peace and security. In this context, Central America
and the Middle East come to mind immediately. To the
extent that that situation deteriorates sufficiently to warrant a special convening of the Security Council, to that
extent is the threat to international peace and security
made greater and the need for the Council to reassert its
authority more imperative.

33. There are millions of people in South Africa and
Namibia whose lives are as yet untouched by the benefits
of international organization; people whose daily experience is oppression, marginality, alienation and exclusion;
people for whom concepts of self-determination and freedom are without meaning.
34. The urgent request addressed to the Council by the
Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the Movement of NonAligned Countries and the Chairman of the Group of African States for a resumption of consideration of the
question of Namibia is once again a sharp reminder of the
plight of those people, in respect of whom the Organization has not yet discharged its responsibilities. This deficiency becomes all the more stark as we approach the
fortieth anniversary of the establishment of the United
Nations.

40. During the course of this series of meetings of the
Security Council, we will hear that 1985 is the year of
several anniversaries, which reminds us of the inexorable
passage of time. It is inevitable therefore that we also
reflect on the way in which time has been passing Namibia
by, To be sure, Namibia also has its anniversaries. It gives
us little comfort to recall that it was 19 years ago that the
General Assembly terminated South Africa’s Mandate
over the Territory, or that it was 14 years ago that the
Security Council first declared that States were under obligation to recognize the illegality of South Africa’s continuing presence in sovereignty. Much less comfort does it give
us to recall that nearly seven years ago the Security Council adopted what is universally recognized as the only inter-

35. The United Nations Council for Namibia, as the legal
Administering Authority for the Territory until independence, welcomes the convening of the present series of
meetings of the Security Council to continue consideration
of the question of Namibia.
5

nationally accepted basis for a peaceful settlement of the
question of Namibia.

That resolution was adopted by 13 votes to none. There
were two abstentions: France and the United Kingdom, I
would, therefore, have been more correct to choose this
resolution 264 (1969) as my reference point. In that case,
1985 would have represented a sixteenth anniversary for
the Council.

41. In a true sense, therefore, what we are also observing
in 1985 is the seventh anniversary of the failure of attempts
by the Security Council to deal decisively and resolutely
with South Africa in respect of Namibia. With your kind
permissioti, Mr. President, I should like to quote a few
paragraphs from an earlier Security Council resolution on
Namibia:
The fifth preambular

43. Incidentally, the next time the Council met following
the adoption of resolution 264 (1969) was on 12 August
1969, four months and three weeks later. On that occasion
it adopted resolution 269 (1969), in whicn it condemned
the Government of South Africa for its refusal to comply
with resolution 264 (1969). Paragraph 8 of resoIution 264
(1969), which had stated that the Council would meet
immediately in the event of non-compliance in order to
decide on necessary measures, became paragraph 6 of resolution 269 (1969). This time, there were I 1 votes in favour,
as opposed to 13 in the preceding March. There were four
abstentions: Finland, France, the United Kingdom and the
United States.

paragraph reads:

“Mindful of the grave consequences of South Africa’s
continued occupation of Namibia”.
and the sixth preambular

paragraph:

“Reaffirming
its special responsibility
people and Territory of Namibia”.
In paragraph

toward

the

1, the Security Council

44. I chose resolution 435 (1978) as my reference point
because that resolution was adopted at a particular point
in time. That resolution, it will be recalled, had as its basis
a number of ideas which were originally put forward by
five States after an intense period of consultation with
South Africa. The United Nations Council for Namibia,
the members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
the African Group of States-we were all then prepared to
suspend our scepticism as to whether five States, all friends
and major trading partners of South Africa with heavy
investments in South Africa and in Namibia itself, were
prepared to stick with a plan which had as its objective the
withdrawal of South Africa’s presence from Namibia and
the eventual accessionof the Territory to independence.

“Recognizes that the United Nations General Assembly terminated the Mandate of South Africa over Namibia and assumed responsibility for the Territory until
its independence”.
In paragraph

2, it

“Considers that the continued presence of South
Africa in Namibia is iIlega1 and contrary to the principles of the Charter and the previous decisions of the
United Nations and is detrimental to the interests of the
population of the Territory and those of the international community”.
In paragraph

45. Sincethe adoption of that resolution therehasbeena
noticeable period of drift in the Security Council’srelations with South Africa in regardto Namibia. The Pretoria
rtgime has systematicallyput a widening distancebetween
itself and the Council where Namibia is concerned. Its
recent actions in Namibia have the clearpurpose of undercutting and making irrelevant resolution435 (1978).Meanwhile, in the face of South Africa’s defiance,the Council’s
reaction has been one of effective retreat-not without
protest, to be sure.But it hasbeena reaction, effectively, of
retreat.

3, it

“Culls upon the Government of South Africa to withdraw immediately its administration
from the Territory”.
In paragraph

4, it

“Declares that the actions of the Government of
South Africa designed to destroy the national unity and
the territorial integrity of Namibia through the establishment of Bantustans are contrary to the provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations,”

“Decides that in the event of failure on the part of the
Government of South Africa to comply with the provisions of the present resolution, the Security Council will
meet immediately to determine upon necessary steps or
measures in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations.”

46. It is hardly possibleto review the record of South
Africa’s intransigencein respectof Namibia without wondering how it was possiblefor such a record to be maintained in the first place, However odious apartheid may be
as a systemof relationsbetweenpeoples, it isa truth that
certain powerful Statesdo not perceivea sufficientlycompelling interest in moving decisively for its abolition or in
applying pressureagainstthe rCgimcthat implementsthat.
abominable policy. In fact, the existence of apm+zeid
createsan environment in which profits can be increased.
For some, therefore, qmrtheid is good for business.

42. Commendably
tough and resolute-sounding
language. That was the language of resolution 264 (1969)
adopted by the Security Council as long as 16 years ago.

47. Also, there are some who, preoccupied as they are
with what for them is the struggle against the advance of
communism throughout the world, see an embrace of

and in paragraph

8, it

6

South Africa as a strategic necessity. The South Africans,
for their part, are vigorously exploiting this preoccupation.
48. It is the pursuit of these interests by the States concerned that has led them to shield South Africa from the
wrath of the international community and that causes Namibia still to be on the international agenda nearly 20
years after the General Assembly declared South Africa’s
authority over the Territory to have come to an end. It is
the complicity, the double-dealing and the cynicism of a
few which are responsible for the Security Council’s image
of indecisiveness in respect of Namibia. Let there be no
mistake about that.
49. Three years after the adoption of resolution 435
(1978), the Security Council was called upon to impose
sanctions against South Africa because of the Pretoria
rbgime’s refusal to co-operate with the United Nations in
respect of Namibia. The resolution was vetoed by three
States which themselves had participated in authoring the
plan included in resolution 435 (1978). How well founded
was our scepticism!
50. The situation today is that the Pretoria rigime is fortifying the barriers to freedom in Namibia. It is feverishly
seeking to shut out the United Nations, to shut out and
destroy SWAPO.
51. The presence of’ so many Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of non-aligned countries on this occasion is certainly testimony to the gravity of the situation recently
created in respect of Namibia and underscores the need for
firm action by t.he Security Council at this present
juncture.
52. While the Security Council’s record in respect of Namibia gives little reason for encouragement, the United
Nations Council for Namibia recognizes that the current
series of meetings is being held in a particular international
context. The environment in 1985 is different in some vital
ways from that in which the Council met in 1978. Among
other considerations, there is a new situation inside South
Africa itself, where we see that the oppressed class of late
has been rising up in greater numbers, with greater intensity and with greater militance than ever before, demanding that the rulers in South Africa allow them the
enjoyment of their inalienable rights. The polarization now
seen in South African politics is such as we have never seen
before.
53. The reaction of the Pretoria rigime to these intensified demands for change has been so brutal that it has
embarrassed even those who have traditionally chosen to
shield that rkgime. In fact, the South African rulers have
recently been displaying such viciousness and cynicism
that it will be difficult for their traditional Western apologists to continue defending them without displaying even
greater cynicism themselves. For example, while echoing
the contention originally advanced elsewhere that there
could be no implementation of resolution 435 (1978) until
Cuban troops were withdrawn fron Angola, South Africa
was found recently lo have sent its commandos deep inside
Angola, far away even from Angola’s border with Na-

mibia, to conduct sabotage operations against Angolan
installations. Do the South Africans truly want to see
Cuban troops withdrawn from Angola? Or do they rather
prefer to see those troops remain so that they can use that
presence as an excuse for non-co-operation?
54. What South Africa has effectively done is to pull the
rug from under the policy of “constructive engagement”.
It will be recalled that constructive engagement was being
loudly proclaimed as a viable option, an alternative to
sanctions, for which the United Nations Council for Namibia has been calling for more than a decade. It requires
no great acuity for anyone to see that constructive engagement has not worked. The South Africans have done the
opposite of what was promised.
55. At the same time, the international debate on apartheid and relations between the races in South Africa has
recently gained in scale and intensity. The overwhelming
feeling in that debate is in support of the oppressed peoples
of South Africa and Namibia and against the Pretoria
rbgime. In this regard, the United Nations Council for
Namibia has followed with keen interest and satisfaction
the development in the United States of the campaign of
pressure for disinvestment by American companies and for
greater responsiveness by the United States to the demands
of South Africa’s oppressed peoples for change. This campaign has so far led to a decision for the imposition of a
number of sanctions against South Africa.
56. While we await the internal processes which must
take place before this decision can become law, the United
Nations Council for Namibia wishes to express its appreciation not only to those in Washington but also to those
throughout the United Nations who have worked so tirelessly and energetically to create an atmosphere in which
such a decision could have been taken.
57. I have just outlined a few elements which characterize
the new international context in which the Security Council’s present debate is taking place. The United Nations
Council for Namibia expects that this new environment
will motivate different responses to its demands and to
those of the member States of the Movement of NonAligned Countries for firm action by the Security Council
against South Africa in respect of Namibia.
58. Another aspect of the new situation is, of course, the
establishment of a so-called interim government in Namibia. The United Nations Council for Namibia has taken
careful note of the public reactions to that development by
States Members of the Organization. In particular we have
noted the statement made on 19 April 1985 by the spokesman of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of France
[S/17123, annex]; that handed to the South African
Government on 15 April by the Government of the United
Kingdom [S/17120, annex]; and the statement issued by
the United States Department or State on 19 April
[S/l 7119, annex].
59. I recall that when the Security Council met and
adopted resolution 435 (1978), it was against the background of a decision by the Pretoria rkgime to proceed

with internal elections in Namibia. After the adoption of
that resolution, the representative of France said:

urges the Security Council to act decisively in the fulfil-

ment of the direct responsibilityof the United Nations for
Namibia and to take, without further delay, appropriate
action to ensureSouth Africa’s co-operation with its resolution 435 (1978) without modification or preconditions.

“I formally appeal to the South African Government
not to impose an internal settlement that is doomed in
advance and to decide to co-operate with the United
Nations in order to enable Namibia to take its place in
the community of independent nations. I ask it most
formally to refrain from a choice that would disastrously isolate it from the rest of the international community.” [2087th meeting, para. 57.]

65. The United Nations Council for Namibia believes
that enoughNamibianshave sufferedand died; the southern African region has been terrorized enough by South
Africa; the authority of the United Nations and of the
Security Council in particular hasbeendefiedenough. The
Security Council’s inability in the past to take decisive
action against South Africa is a fact which itself has made
for the increaseof tension in southern Africa. We believe
that the Security Council, which is entrustedwith primary
responsibility for the maintenanceof international peace
and security, must take firm, decisiveaction now, It is not
enoughsimply to repeat yet again a determination to take
suchaction sometimein the future, as the Council hasbeen
doing since1969.Sucha responsewould meanallowing the
perpetuation of suffering, tension and insecurity in southern Africa. The Security Council needsto make a credible
responseto the developing situation in that region,

60. The representative of the United Kingdom said:
“We are issuing no threats, but they should not underestimate the gravity of the situation that could arise if
there were no solution in sight and we met here in the
Council again. No one in South Africa should mistake
the determination that underlies the reasonable and
constructive attitude that we have shown for the last 18
months and will show over the next few weeks. The
choice is now for South Africa. The rest of Africa and
the world, in adopting this resolution, have shown
which way they wish to go.” [Ibid., para. 81.1
61.

66. We believethat so long as all Statesdemonstratethe
necessarypolitical will to sorespond, South Africa’s reign
of terror in southern Africa will end, Namibia will soonbe
free, and peacein southern Africa will be protected and
safeguarded.

The representative of the United States said:

“It is therefore a time for persistence and vigorous
effort in persuading South Africa that its best interests
and the best interests of the Namibian people lie in cooperating with the United Nations in the implementation of the resolution we have adopted, and not in
permitting a return to the past spiral of violence and
isolation.” [Ibid., para. 71.1

67. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the Prime
Minister, Presidentof the Council of Ministers, and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Peru, Mr. Luis Ptrcovich Rota,
on whom I now call.

62. The establishmentof a socalled interim government
in Namibia, which is to be offcially put in placenext Monday, 17 June, confirms the fearsexpressedby those three
representatives seven years ago. It removes all doubt,
where such doubt might have existed, concerning South
Africa’s intentions. This developmenthasseriousimplications for the Security Council and for its future relations
with South Africa over the implementationof resolution
435 (1978).

68. Mr. PERCOVICH ROCA (Peru) (interpretationfiom
Spanish):Peru isparticipating in this specialseriesof Security Council meetingswith a clear awarenessof the significance of the causethat has gathered us together. We are
meetingto considerwhat the Council can do. It is, after all,
the organ to which the Charter of the United Nations has
entrusted supreme importance and clear, inescapable
responsibilitiesfor the maintenance and promotion of
peace.The Council is faced with a situation which underminespeacein southern Africa, and the resultant hotbed
of tension justifiably preoccupies the international
community.

63. The representativesof France and the United States
in 1978both spokeof isolation asa consequenceof South
Africa’s refusal to co-operatewith the United Nations in
respectof Namibia. The representativeof the United Kingdom, while not speakingof isolation, left no doubt about
what should be the Council’s responseto such non-cooperation,

69. It is a great pleasurefor me, Mr. President, to see
you, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Trinidad and
Tobago, a member of our Latin American region and the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, guiding our
debates.Your origin is a further expressionof the harmonious relations between Trinidad and Tobago and Peru,
which I am happy to emphasizein greeting you today on
behalf of my Government.

64. In their statement issuedon 3 May 1985[S/17151],
the membersof the Security Council declared that South
Africa’s action was contrary to the expressedwill of the
international community and in defiance of United
Nations resolutions.The United Nations Council for Namibia expectsthat now, asa consequence,the entire membership of the Security Council, including thoseto which I
referred eariirr, will act to ensurethat in the event of South
Africa’s non-i. lmpliance, its isolation in the international
community will be effective. Accordingly, the Council

70. As a Peruvian, I am particularly pleasedto extend a
warm greeting to my compatriot, the Secretary-General.
71. The current seriesof meetings has been expressly
requestedby the Co-ordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned
Countries at their Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting at
8

New Delhi last April [S/17184, annex, para. 48J. It wasthe
Ministers’ wish that the Security Council take decisive
action to meet the United Nations’ direct responsibilityfor
Namibia and take urgent measuresfor the immediate,
effective and unconditional implementation of the United
Nations plan approved in resolution 435 (1978).

the United Nations and becauseof the seriousconsequences of an illegitimate act. The illegal occupation of Namibia, including Walvis Bay, the Penguin and other
offshore islands,constitutesa flagrant impairment of the
inalienableright to self-determination,freedom and independenceof its people and, therefore, a seriousthreat to
international peaceand security. Similarly, the practice of
apartheid, which the United Nations has described as a
crime against humanity, must be condemned, as it
infringes the fundamental rights of the broad African
majority, while legislativelyand through the South African
Constitution, it favours a regimeof domination, exploitation and racist separatism.

72. The presentsituation in Namibia must be analysedin
the context of global, political, strategic-military and economic trends in the world today. We can thereby identify,
on the one hand, existing obstaclesand opposition, and,
on the other, ways and meansto move towards a solution
of this painful problem that affects not only the peopleof
Namibia but also the very conscienceof mankind.

79. In keepingwith the principlesenshrinedin article 88
of the Constitution of Peru, to reject all forms of imperialism, neo-colonialism and racial discrimination and to
stand in solidarity with the oppressedpeopleof the world,
the Peruvian Government reaffirms its abidanceby the
substantiveaspectsof the Declaration which was adopted
by the recent Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries[ibid., parrcs.
16-471.Thus we denouncethe powerful international economic intereststhat have decisivelycontributed to South
Africa’s continued occupation and plunder of the natural
resourcesof that rich Territory. Similarly, we expressour
strenuousrejection of the illegal and colonial occupation
of Namibia and the abhorrent practice of apartheid, and
deplore the resort to delaying tactics which impede dialogue on the independenceof Namibia.

73. The situation is a particularly delicate and complex
one, characterized by the persistenceof trendsthat dangerously exceedthe bounds of international coexistence.Similarly, we note an increasingdeterioration in multilateral
institutional co-operation, to the detriment of the United
Nations asa whole. In the economic sphere,the prospects
for the developingcountries continue to be grim. The relative recovery of someindustrialized economiesis counterbalanced by a recessionin the third world which stems
from changesin the structure of world production and the
maintenanceof an international economic order of which
the injustice is unparalleled in the history of mankind.
74. Precariouspeace,a deap-seatedeconomiccrisis,sudden changesin strategic and military concepts,a deterioration in the quality of life and a severeintensification of
poverty seemto be the order of the day, obliging us to
redouble our efforts to eliminate hotbedsof tensionand to
remain steadfastin our multilateral questfor peaceand the
elimination of the persistent colonial situations that
impede its achievement.

80. Convinced that the future always works toward the
reign of justice, my Government is optimistic over the
encouragingunanimity with which the Security Council
adopted on 3 May last the statementof its Presidentcondemning the South African decision to establisha socalled interim government in Namibia [S/27151]. We
believethat unanimity must now be reaffirmed if weare to
serve the noble causeof decolonizationand human rights.

75. It is a notorious coincidence that the Security Council is meeting today especiallyto considerthe problem of
the independenceof Namibia at the very time when weare
commemorating the twenty-fifth anniversary of the General Assembly’s adoption of resolution 1514(XV), also
known as the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.

81. Despite the fact that the people of Namibia has
already experiencedmore than 100yearsof abusivesubjugation, it isgratifying to note the bold efforts of the United
Nations, since its establishment,to find a final solution
that will meet the just aspirationsof‘ the people of that
Territory. The Peruvian Government congratulates the
world Organization on this tangibledemonstrationof service to the causeof oppressedpeoplesand reiterates its
unswervingcommitmentto demandthe full and unequivocal implementation of the United Nations plan for Namibia, asapproved in resolution435(1978) which defines
the only universally acceptedframework to ensurea peaceful transition of Namibia towardsindependence.Similarly,
my Government welcomed the historic decision of the
International Court of Justicewhich confirmed in its advisory opinion on 21 June 1971the illegality of South African presencein Namibia.’

76. For peace- and freedom-loving countries, it is reassuringto note that the balancesheetof the past 25 years
of historic claims has promoted the causeof self-determination and independenceof oppressedpeoples.However, it
is a matter of grave concern that somepeoples,suchasthe
peopleof Namibia, arestill beingsubjectedto foreign subjugation, domination and exploitation that have deprived
them of their inalienable right to absolutefreedom, to the
exercise of their sovereignty and to the integrity of their
national terrilory.
77. The persistenceof any vestige of colonialism, in any
manifestation, is a negation of funclamentalhuman rights
which flies in the face of history,

I should like to avail myself of this opportunity to
reiterate our full support for the United Nations Council
for Namibia, the solelegalAdministering Authority of the
Territory, which since its establishmenthas spared no
effort to protect the rights and interestsof the Namibian
82.

78. My Government attaches great importance to the
situation of Namibia and givesit priority attention because
it is one of the most seriouschallengesto the authority of
9

people in the face of repression and plunder under the
intransigent rCgime of South Africa, which seeks to perpetuate its illegal occupation. Peru considers totally valid
Decree No. 1 for the Protection of the Natural Resources
of Namibia,2 promulgated by the United Nations Council
for Namibia on 27 September 1974. We deem illegal the
exploitation
of non-renewable resources by foreign
enterprises.

Ministers for Foreign Affairs who are attending these
meetings. Their presence will undoubtedly be decisive in
our efforts to achieve the long-overdue solution to this
cause.
87. The normative framework within which the question
of Namibia must be placed is in risk of crumbling if it fails
to receive the necessary political will to ensure that concrete steps are taken within clearly defined time limits. My
delegation considers that the talks between the parties
directly concerned should be resumed under the aegis of
the Secretary-General. All of us gathered here should give
the political support necessary to ensure an end to unilateral measures or delaying tactics and to foster the negotiating process leading to implementation of resolution 435
(1978).

83. The independence of Namibia has been emphatically
and clearly stipulated by the United Nations. No extraneous conditions can be introduced at this time. The seriousness of the deadlock calls for formulas that will make
possible a rapid denouement of the negotiation process to
achieve the defined objective. However, it must be clearly
understood that the principle of the liberation of Namibia
is not dependent upon, nor can it be the result of, factors
extraneous to the dynamics in a Territory under illegal
colonial control.

88. At this hour of decision regarding a worthy future of
freedom for the people of Namibia, we cannot permit arrogance to fan the flames of the crisis, thereby postponing a
final solution to a problem that has been with us for the
past 40 years of steadfast struggle for the attainment of
international peace and security.

84. The non-aligned countries have professed faith in the
principle of the non-use of force in international relations.
That is only right, because in general our history has been
marked by acts of force that frequently have been committed by countries having better technical resources and harbouring imperialist designs and hegemonistic pretensions.
That is why we hold fully valid the principles governing the
peaceful settlement of international disputes, for without
strict respect for those principles, peace will be either precarious or unattainable. The definition of these principles
was a lengthy process, but they are now enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations, with which all of our countries have agreed to comply. Without due observance of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and noninterference in their domestic affairs, the non-utilization of
the threat or use of force, and compliance with obligations
flowing from international treaties, it is impossible to see
how there can ‘be serious talk about a desired peaceful
order. Respect for such principles is an unshakable position of my country, and upon it depends the future international order.

89. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the United Republic of Tanzania,
Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, who wishes to make a statement as
the current Chairman of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) and on behalf of the United Republic of
Tanzania. I welcome him and invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
90. Mr. MKAPA (United Republic of Tanzania): Mr.
President, I am grateful to you and the members of the
Council for allowing me to participate in this, yet another
series of meetings devoted to the consideration of the question of Namibian independence. I wish to convey to you
our very warm and sincere wishes on your assumption of
the high office of President of the Council for this month
and to assure you of our full co-operation. I am confident
that your rich diplomatic experience will be invaluable in
guiding the deliberations of the Council. In particular it is
fitting that a representative of Trinidad and Tobago, a
country known for its firm opposition to colonialism and
other forms of oppression, should preside over deliberations on the issue of the liberation of the people of Namibia and the people of southern Africa as a whole.

85. We should like to believe that, in the international
sphere, all States harbour similar aims. However, there
exist more threatening situations than encouraging ones.
Colonialist and imperialist policies have not disappeared,
nor have attempts to split the world into power blocs and
spheres of influence. Institutionalized racism subsists, and
fundamental human rights continue to be violated in various regions. Forms of political, economic, socio-cultural
and religious discrimination continue to be practised in
many developed and developing countries. Various forms
or threats of intervention, troop movements, and even
massive military concentrations of foreign forces are evident in certain regions.

91. When the Council met twice in 1983 to consider the
question of Namibia, it sought to arrest the tragic situation
there. The Council had decided to seek the speedy implementation of its plan for the independence of that Territory. Specifically, the Council was addressing itself to the
challenge posed by the implementation of the Namibian
independence process approved in resolution 435 (1978)
and given momentum by the subsequent diplomatic consultations which culminated in the proximity talks in the
summer of 1982. Those consultations were considered successful because all the outstanding issues pertaining to the
implementation of resolution 435 (1978) had been
resolved. The resulting resolutions 532 (1983) and 539
(1983) therefore specifically addressed themselves to the
need to elaborate the modalities for a cease-fire between

86. On behalf of my Government, I wish to express my
deep gratification at being able to participate in this meeting which was convened on the initiative of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries. It should lead to lifting the
moral and political lien which this question of Namibia
holds on the Organization and on the entire international
community. I wish also to extend a warm greeting to the
10

the warring parties and of the electoral system so as to
facilitate the commencement of unconditional implementation of the United Nations plan approved in resolution
435 (1978). But the reports submitted by the SecretaryGeneral pursuant to both resolutions 532 (1983) and 539
(1983) pointed out clearly that one of the parties, namely
South Africa, was unwilling to pave the way for implementation of the plan. Regrettably this remains the case today,
The obstruction by the apartheid regime persists, and in
consequence the people of Namibia continue to languish
under colonial and racist tyranny.

scientific and military co-operation. In the economic field,
the certificate of political respectability accorded by constructive engagement has paved the way for billions of
dollars of new investments and loans for South Africa.
96. Can there by any doubt that constructive engagement has emboldened and sustained South Africa’s
defiance? I invite the Council to recall the way the upartheid regime brandished that political support and protection when it contemptuously rejected resolution 539 (1983)
in a statement it issued on 29 October 1983 [see S/IdlOd],
when the Council was forced to meet under circumstances
similar to the present ones.

92. When my delegation spoke before the Council in
May and in October 1983, it expressed its deep regret that,
notwithstanding the extensive and exhaustive negotiations
which had taken place, one of the parties had unilaterally
chosen to veto the implementation of the agreement
reached. Today we reaffirm our unmitigated dismay. With
new demands being made and new colonial measures
being undertaken by the upartheid regime, there is no hope
that that regime ever intends willingly to facilitate the
implementation of the United Nations plan for the independence of Namibia. For that reason, the Co-ordinating
Committee for the Liberation of Africa of the OAU and
the Extraordinary
Ministerial
Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Countries on the
question of Namibia, meeting respectively at Accra in February and at New Delhi in April of this year, requested the
Security Council to resume its consideration of further
measures to give effect to its resolutions and to brealc the
prevailing impasse. The present series of meetings has been
made more urgent by the most recent decision of the upartheid regime, to impose an internal settlement in Namibia
through the installation of a so-called interim government
drawn from a coalition of its puppets under the umbrella
of the so-called Multi-Party Conference.

97. Constructive engagement is the twin of linkage, that
horrendously absurd precept making the independence of
Namibia conditional upon the withdrawal of Cuban
troops from Angola. It must surely be obvious now that
the presence of those troops is being used to mask the
deep-rooted political opposition of the apartheid regime
and its allies to Namibia’s independence, as well as to
protect the multinational interests which have convergent
desires to continue plundering the natural resources of Namibia. Moreover, the apartheid regime and its friends have
settled upon the course of using the presence of those
troops to try to attain long-standing political objectives
against Angola. As a result, resolution 435 (1978) remains
unimplemented, and linkage stands in the way.
98. Linkage and constructive engagement have together
been rejected and condemned by the entire international
community as conducive to the reinforcement of apartheid,
to the sustenance of aggression against the neighbouring
independent African States, in particular the continued
occupation of Angola, and to the denial to the Namibian
people of their right to self-determination and independence. That rejection still stands. Africa, the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries and the international community
in general have reiterated that the presence of Cuban
troops in Angola is without relevance to the decolonization process in Namibia,

93. The Council, therefore, no longer faces simply
obstruction of the implementation of its resolution 435
(1978); it is also confronting the formal beginning of the
bantustanization
of Namibia. The representative of
SWAPO, in the statement he will make later on, will forcefully put the case of Namibia. But his message is quite
simple: the independence of Namibia has been denied too
long, and the people of Namibia cannot wait in perpetuity.

99. The twentieth ordinary session of the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the OAU held at Addis
Ababa last November, underlined this position. It reiterated its rejection of “linkage” and “parallelism” between
Namibia’s independence and the withdrawal of Cuban
troops from Angola as being manifestly incompatible with
the letter and spirit of Security Council resolution 435
(1978)3 and reprehensible and gross interference in the
internal affairs of Angola.

94. Twenty-two resolutions of the Council over the last
17 years have not brought an end to colonial and racial
aggression against the people of Namibia. All efforts by
the front-line countries, SWAPO, the Secretary-General
and the Organization have been frustrated by South
Africa. Why do the Security Council and the international
community brook South Africa’s defiance and obstruction
of their will?

100. The decision of Angola regarding those troops is a
sovereign prerogative of that State. It is consistent with the
Charter of the United Nations and with international law.
No country has any right to violate the norms of international law. Angola, like any sovereign Member State, has
an inherent right to determine the form and closeness of its
bilateral relations with any other State. The United Nations
is an organization of sovereign and equal Members. It is not
an organization of greater and lesser sovereignties or of
groups of countries whose rights under international law
are more potent than those of others. It is extortion to make

95. No policy framework has done more to undermine
the international efforts to free Namibia than the so-called
policy of constructive engagement. Put into effect five
years ago, that policy has attempted to lend the apartheid
regime international respectability and has rewarded it
with collaboration in all fieids, as well as with general
political protection. That collaboration has fou’nd concrete
expression in closer diplomatic ties and contacts and in
11

armed aggression, now posed to try to reverse the victories
achieved by the people of Africa over the past decade.
Inside Namibia itself, the situation has greatly deteriorated
as the regime has stepped up repression in its bid to liquidate opposition. Through a combination of tactics, the
rt+gime has on the one hand now set up a coalition of
puppets under the so-called Multi-Party
Conference
umbrella, and on the other, the regime has continued to
intimidate, arrest and kill those ~110 have expressed opposition to colonialism and apartheid. In particular, members
of SWAP0 have been targeted for indiscriminate arrests,
torture and other forms of violence and death. Through
this two-pronged strategy of the force of arms and political
manipulation, including the recent imposition of the socalled interim government, the apartheid rigime hopes to
transform Namibia into another bantustan. Yet despite
these manoeuvres and repressive measures, the people of
Namibia have not succumbed to disillusionment or despair, Instead they remain undaunted in their resolve to
oppose the occupation of their country. This resolute
determination in the face of such violence has found
expression in the ever-increasing support for SWAPO,
their sole and authentic representative. Indeed, as was the
case with the Turnhalle Alliance, the Multi-Party Conference is doomed to collapse.

the implementation of Security Council resolutions contingent upon the satisfaction of the geopolitical preoccupations
of any Member of the Organization, especially a permanent
member of the Council.
101. Resolution 435 (1978) was negotiated and adopted
as a framework for the search for the independence of
Namibia. That and that alone was its purpose. It did not,
and was not meant to, encompass or promote issues irrelevant or prejudicial to that objective, and it was certainly
not intended to be a vehicle for any Power or group of
countries to attain by extortion national foreign-policy
objectives otherwise unattainable or denied them.
102. There can be no doubt that those who want to pervert logic, falsify the truth and trample on the rights of
peoples for the sake of ideological expediency do not want
peace in southern Africa. Those who go to great lengths to
manufacture for South Africa excuses with which to
attempt to justify aggression cannot claim, any more than
the aparzheiclauthorities themselves, to be agents for stability in our region. Rather, their actions result in increased
instability and violence.
103. South Africa is occupying Namibia illegally. It occupies parts of Angola. With characteristic duplicity it
announced a false withdrawal of its occupation troops
from southern Angola, only to have a unit of its expeditionary forces captured red-handed on a sabotage mission
in a northern enclave of Angola. Yet an attempt is being
made to obscure the fact of the occupation of Namibia and
Angola and instead to propel into predominance considerations which do not relate to the independence of Namibia
or even to the security of the region, but which seek to
advance global cold-war ambitions. Why do we not hear
condemnations of South Africa for its occupation of
Angola? Why do we receive no proposals regarding practical measures of censure and isolation of this subversive
and evil empire?

107. The problems of southern Africa should be seen in
their true context. Apartheid in South Africa and the occupation of Namibia, made necessary by the desire of the
mcist rCgime to create a string of buffer States to cushion
itself, constitute the root cause of the conflict, No amount
of excuses, falsifications and even outright lies can obscure
this fundamental element. Any attempts to interpret the
struggle for the dismantlement of apartheid and for securing independence for Namibia in the context of ideological
confrontation between East and West have to be strongly
rejected by the Council, as they have been by the international community.
108. It will not come as a surprise if we are told, as we
have been so many times in the past, to be patient while
the racists in South Africa ponder the nature and form of
change in Namibia and indeed in South Africa itself. We
have been told so often in the past that a breakthrough
was imminent and that we should be patient while the
friends and allies of South Africa successfully led that
rCgime into a negotiated settlement of the Namibian problem. Indeed, we have waited not only for the past five years
in which constructive engagement has been in effect, but
for the almost two years since we last came before the
Council to plead the Namibian case. But what do we have
to show for our patience? Increased destabilization, occupation and other forms of aggression; more repression
inside Namibia, and now an internal settlement imposed
on the people of Namibia. More of this, then, will be what
the Council will be allowing if it fails to act decisively in
response to the challenge before it, We have bougbt too
much time as it is for the apurthez’d rCgime.

104. The veritable inertia of the contact group of Western countries is no less regrettable. It is saddening that, by
allowing the unwarranted preoccupations of one member
of the group to suspend its collective judgemcnt on Namibia, it has in large measures so far facilitated the sabotaging of a plan it authored and promoted for
international acceptance.
105. My delegation cannot afford to equivocate. Constructive engagement with the apartheid rigime is the sustenance of an evil system. It is not only inimical to the
independence of Namibia; it undermines the chances for
peace and security in the region. Apartheid, like all evil,
grows on what it feeds on. Therefore, it cannot be destroycd by kindness and persuasion-much
less so by a
policy which could be otherwise described only. as
appeasement.
106. If the aparrheid regime has found renewed vigour in
the extension of its policies of intimidation and repression
inside Namibia to destabilization and aggression against
the neighbouring African States, South Africa is, through
a combination of various forms of pressure, in particular

109. The manoeuvres, delays, deceptions and deviations
of the apartheid rigime have reinforced the universal recognition that the Namibian problem is a United Nations
problem, and thus should be dealt with under the auspices
12

of the Organization. Both resolutions 532 (1983) and 539
(1983) underline that imperative. In this respect, I wish to
register Tanzania’s satisfaction with the manner in which
the Secretary-General has dealt with the question, in particular in reasserting the central role of the Organization in
the negotiations for the independence of Namibia.

against the black population and its leaders, anti-apartheid
groups are asserting their moral and institutional authority. People march by the thousands, legislatures act on
divestment, cultural and sports organizations
distance
themselves farther and farther away from South Africa.
We salute and thank them. Can the Council afford to
ignore these spontaneous pleas and impassioned injunctions of the people, of legislatures and of Governments?

110. Correspondingly,
the Council must continue to
reject attempts to circumvent the United Nations and must
demand the immediate implementation of resolution 435
(1978) and call for the respect of the territorial integrity of
Namibia, including Walvis Bay and the offshore islands, in
accordance with resolution 432 (1978).

114. We llave not come to the Council for yet another
resolution. We already have 22 of them. We have come
here to urge the Council to assume its responsibilities
seriously and ensure that implementation commences. We
have come again to impress upon the five Western
members of the contact group their own responsibility in
working for the scrupulous implementation
of a Plan
which they were themselves instrumental in formulating.

111. Namibia is a problem from which the United
Nations cannot extricate itself. The United Nations in general, and particularly the Security Council, must continue
to play the central role in any efforts to bring about a
negotiated settlement. In this regard, we already have resolution 435 (1978), which remains-and
must remain-the
only internationally acceptable and most viable framework within which the United Nations can fulfil that role.
My delegation, Africa, and indeed the entire international
community remain convinced that despite incessant
attempts to dilute, circumvent and even undermine it, that
resolution, along with the plan it approves, retains its
intrinsic validity and continues to be the most acceptable
basis for a peaceful settlement of the Namibian problem.
The Council can therefore afford to do no less than reatfirm its authority and undertake its immediate, total and
unconditional implementation.

115. We have come before the Council because we
believe that the situation in Namibia has reached a crossroads. The challenge before the Council is therefore enormous, Through its actions, it can help pave the way
towards the freedom of Namibia and avert the dangers of
the growing confrontations in southern Africa in general.
We earnestly urge the Council to respond to the anguished
cry of the Namibian people for liberty.
116. Mr. BOUTROS
GHALI
(Egypt) (interprelatfon
,fiom Arabic): Allow
me lht
to express to you, Sir,
on behalf of the delegation of Egypt and on my own
behalf, my congratulations on your assumption of the
presidencyof the Council for the month on June. I am
confident that your diplomatic skills and political lcnowhow will enableyou to undertake this task in the best and
most complete way, We are all the happier to see you
presiding over the Council because of the close links
between our two countries in all fields.

112. The continued illegal presence of South Africa in
Namibia poses a unique challenge to the United Nations
and its pre-eminent body, the Security Council. Eighteen
year; ago the United Nations decided to assume direct
responsibility for the Territory. The persistence of the
aggression against the Namibian people has serious implications for international peace and security. Evidently, in
its persistent occupation, the rigime has equally prevented
the realization by the Namibian people of their inalienable
right to self-determination and independence, which is a
flagrant flouting of the Charter. But the apartheid regime
has also continuously used the Territory as a staging
ground for its acts of aggression and subversion against
the neighbouring independent African States. The apartheid rtgime has not shown any regard for the numerous
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council. As a result, conflict is bound to escalate. Failure
to act now will only pave the way for a total conflagration
in the region. The Council is the guarantor of international
peace and security and the sponsor of the United Nations
plan for the independence of Namibia. The Council has to
act and institute effective measures against the racist
rgime under Chapter VII of the Charter so as to force it
to end its occupation of Namibia. This represents the last
non-violent option to bring about the independence of that
Territory.

117. Allow me also to expressour thanks and congratulations to your predecessor,the representative of Thailand,
who presidedover the Council’s work in the month of
May with exceptional skill in a period that witnessedmany
international developments and events on many different
fronts.
118. We are meeting here today to consider a serious
issueendangeringthe peace and security of the African
continent and threatening the introduction of the influences and setbacksof the cold war in a continent that has
chosenfor itself the path of non-alignment, a continent
that haschosento remain apart from the struggle of the
major Powers.,The issueis the independenceof Namibia.
119. Today’s meeting of the Council, convened to consider the question of Namibia, on the initiative of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, is a clear indication
that the non-aligned countries and the overwhelming
majority of membersof the international community have
run out of patience.They no longer accept procrastination
and delaying tactics by the racist South African rkgime,
which has been determined to place one obstacle after
another in the way of Namibia’s independence and the
implementationOf resolution 435 (1978), which approved

113. Over the past few months, the anti-up&z&? forces
throughout the world have redoubled their opposition to
upartheid. Outraged by the unrepentant and ruthlessly
oppressive attacks launched by the apartheid rCgime
13

a clearly defined
independence.

plan for the achievement of that

who have been deprived of their basic rights and human
dignity. Beyond its borders, the Pretoria regime finds violence and aggression the only way to perpetuate its continued illegal occupation of the Territory of Namibia and
its exploitation of Namibia’s resources, against the will of
the original inhabitants and in defiance of the international
community.

120. Egypt has always taken a clear stand on this issue, a
stand that may be summed up as follows.
121. First, the occupation of Namibia by South African
forces is illegal, and its continuation runs counter to international law and defies the will of the international
community.

127. Furthermore, violence is the weapon brandished by
the regime in the face of neighbouring States which,
rightly, oppose its colonial policy. History has taught us
that such a regime based on violence and aggression as its
only means of survival cannot survive in the long run.
However, we have also learned that in the short term the
presence of such a regime will always be an element for
spreading unrest and instability in the region in which it
exists, and for exporting such unrest and instability to
other areas.

122. Secondly, we call for the unconditional implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978) forthwith, so
that the people of Namibia may determine its own future
and achieve its full independence.
123. Thirdly, we condemn the racist regime of South
Africa as well as its policies and manoeuvres to delay the
implementation of resolution 435 (1978), even though
seven years have elapsed since the Council adopted that
resolution. In particular, we condemn and reject the latest
manoeuvre of that regime, by which it is attempting to
install a provisional puppet regime in Namibia which
would follow its orders and carry out its plans, thereby
giving a false picture of self-rule. The States of the world as
a whole, either individually or through the United Nations,
regional organizatioris ‘and other international groupings,
have expressed their rejection of the perpetuation of the
illegal occupation of the Territory of Namibia by the racist
Pretoria tCgime. They have called for its immediate withdrawal, thus enabling the people of the Territory to exercise their legitimate right to self-determination and
independence.

128. The most recent developments have clearly shown
the nature of the racist Pretoria regime and the efforts
being made to hide it from international public opinion, or
at least some sections of international public opinion, in
order to ensure support for the regime. Within its borders
we have seen the strong resistance the regime faces from
the people of South Africa, a resistance that is increasing
every day, despite the ferocity of the regime’s repression.
The repressed masses-be they black, coloured or of Asian
origin, according to the categories set up by the racist
regime- reject, as do we, the&it accompli being imposed
on them. They are not deceived, nor are we deceived, by
the manoeuvres of the regime to conceal its inhuman racist
nature.
129. Among the tactics the Pretoria Government resorts
to we see new attempts to impede the implementation of
Security Council resolutions in general and resolution 435
(1978) in particular. Here we are referring to that regime’s
recent decision to transfer some of the administration of
the Territory to a so-called interim government, which, in
fact, represents only a coalition of a few puppets who do
not reflect the interests and,wishes of the indigenous inhabitants of Namibia and whose only concern is their own
interests linked to the perpetuation of colonialism and
occupation. The international community, which has on
previous occasions expressed its total rejection of the
attempts by the Pretoria rCgime to link implementation of
resolution 435 (1978) to conditions and demands totally
unrelated to the independence of Namibia, has also
expressed its condemnation and rejection of the latest
manoeuvre by the Pretoria regime involving the establishment of a so-called interim government, for that act is
nothing but a further obstacle to the implementation of
Security Council resolutions on Namibia. It also runs
counter to resolution 435 (1978), which clearly declares
that all unilateral measures taken by the illegal administration in Namibia are null and void.

124. However, despite all the attempts and efforts of the
international community in the past years, the people of
Namibia still continue to languish under the yoke of South
African occupation. Human rights continue to be violated
in Namibia every day. Namibia’s riches and natural
resources continue to be plundered. Furthermore, the
racist Government continues to tighten its hold on the
Territory. It increases its military presence there and continues to use the Territory as a base for aggression against
neighbouring States.
125. We must not consider the Pretoria regime’s behaviour in Namibia and its insistence on perpetuating its illegal occupation of the Territory in defiance of the will of
the international commumty as an abstract or individual
phenomenon. Rather, we must look at its behaviour in the
light of the nature of the regime and its basis and the
principles and ideologies it has adopted. There is a radical
fallacy related to the basis of the racist regime in South
Africa, and because of that fallacy any attempts at reform
or change are of no avail. What is needed is a general,
comprehensive change.
126. The South African regime in its current guise can
survive only through the use of force in its worst forms,
whether inside or outside its borders, Within its borders,
violence is considered the regime’s only way to repress the
majority which rejects its racist ideology and its position
with regard to more than 72 per cent of the population

130. We shall not at this juncture waste time on a rejection and denunciation of this latest act; all the States of the
world have participated in that rejection and denunciation,
regardless of their systems and positions. We would, however, like to mention in particular the declaration issued at
14

the inaugural session of the Extraordinary
Ministerial
Meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned
Countries on the question of Namibia held at New Delhi
in April, which expressed the condemnation of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and its rejection of this
unilateral act of the Pretoria rCgime and called upon the
Security Council to take the necessary measures forthwith
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations to
ensure respect by the racist Government of South Africa of
Security Council resolutions on Namibia.

mibia could be achieved. Everyone knows the intransigence with which the Pretoria rigime has greeted those
resolutions, either by rejecting them outright or by hindering or circumventing their implementation. The end result
is that that racist rCgime has rejected and continues to
reject Security Council resolutions and to defy the will of
the Council and of the international community as a
whole.
135. Today, we believe that it is no longer enough to
adopt theoretical resolutions. We must proceed with courage to fulfil our responsibilities by exerting the maximum
pressure on the Pretoria Government to force it to abide
by the will of the international community and to commit
itself to implement the resolutions of the Council. The time
has come-indeed, the time is long past-for the Council
to consider the imposition of comprehensive and mandatory sanctions against South Africa under Chapter VII of
the Charter, for it has become clear that all other attempts
to convince the Pretoria rtgime to abide by Council resolutions have failed.

131. The members of the Council have expressed their
position that the actions mentioned in the statement by the
President of’ the Council dated 3 May [S/17151] are contrary to the expressed will of the international community
and in defiance of United Nations resolutions and decisions, in particular Council resolution 435 (1978) and 439
(1978), which declared that any unilateral measures taken
by the illegal administration in Namibia in contravention
of relevant Security Council resolutions are null and void.
The note also stated:

136. Here, we should like to refer to the hope expressed
by the Co-ordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries at
its latest meeting at New Delhi that all members of the
Security Council would display the necessary political will
in this regard. In welcoming the further report of the
Secretary-General concerning the implementation of Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of Namibia, dated 6 June [S/172&], and
expressing confidence that that report will assist us in fulfilling our responsibilities, I should like to stress the central
role of the Secretary-General in ensuring a speedy implementation of resolution 435 (1978) without any amendment or linkage to any extraneous issues. Egypt wishes to
place on record its appreciation for the efforts undertaken
by the Secretary-General in this connection and its full
support of the Secretary-General in achieving the desired
goal.

“Members of the Council condemn and reject any
unilateral action by South Africa leading towards an
internal settlement outside resolution 435 (1978).”
132. I should like to reiterate from this rostrum of the
international ‘conscience and legality that the United
Nations commitment to the need to achieve independence
for Namibia, in addition to being a moral commitment
based on the elementary principles of justice, is also a legal
commitment founded on two bases-one,
the historic
responsibility of the United Nations as the successor to the
League of Nations that entrusted South Africa with a
Mandate over the Territory as a step towards Namibia’s
independence, and two, the instruments adopted by the
Organization itself to ensure international peace and security. The persistent refusal by the racist Government in
Pretoria to commit itself to the implementation of United
Nations resolutions and Namibia’s failure to achieve independence and national sovereignty represent a major
threat to the peace, security and stability of the region and
of the African continent as a whole.

137. The time has arrived for the Pretoria rtgime to
come to its senses and realize that, on the eve of the
twenty-first century, the world no longer accepts the application of colonial policies and racist practices based on
obsolete ideologies and thoughts that are totally illogical
and politically unrealizable. History has proved their failure and inability to survive. If the Pretoria rCgime is not
ready to accept those facts voluntarily, the international
community has the duty to force it to do so.

133. Under the powers entrusted to it, the General
Assembly has attempted to fulfil its responsibilities, and in
1967 it established the United Nations Council for Namibia to undertake the administration of the Territory
until its independence. Each year the General Assembly
also adopts a number of resolutions on Namibia in which
it calls upon South Africa to put an end to its illegal occupation of rhe Territory and calls upon other States to
adopt all necessary measures to force South Africa to
comply with United Nations resolutions in this regard.

138. We in Egypt fully appreciate that our independence
and that of our brothers in Africa-for
which our peoples
have paid dearly in blood and resources-will
remain
incomplete so long as our brothers in the south of the
continent continue to languish under the yoke of colonial
occupation.

134. Furthermore,
the Security Council has adopted
many resolutions on Namibia, all of which endorse the
right of the people of Namibia to self-determination and
independence, stress the illegality of South Africa’s presence in Namibia and call upon South Africa to put an end
to its illegal occupation of the Territory. Resolution 435
(1978) contains a concrete framework for a comprehensive
and peaceful settlement by which the independence.of Na-

139. Egypt, which served as host in its capital to the first
Office of SWAPO, reaffirms its unflagging support for the
legitimate struggle of the Namibian people under the leadership of its sole legitimate representative. And here, I
salute our brother Nujoma, who is with us in this chamber.
I stress our determination to provide all possible moral
15

and material assistance until the heroic people of Namibia
achieves its independence and joins its brothers on the
African continent who have preceded it on the road to
freedom.

Nations, particularly in the field of decolonization, and on
the other, greater opportunities for concertedaction by the
international community to end colonialism, oppression
and exploitation. In you, Sir, we have a dedicatedand able
diplomat from a friendly country, Trinidad and Tobago,
whosehistorical past, presentaspirations and future destiny are linked to the African continent and its peoples,
The role your country has played in the anti-slavery and
anti-colonial struggle is widely recognizcd. Similarly, the
outstanding contributions many of your compatriots have
made towards giving birth to the noble ideal of PanAfricanism have in no smallmeasureaddedimpetusto the
decolonization processin Africa and the Caribbean.Needlessto say, you and your predecessors
have actively participated and continue to participate in United Nations efforts
to bring about Namibia’sindependence.In acknowledging
all this, we pay a tribute to all those whose lives and
actions have advanced further the causeof freedom everywhere, and we urge those who are following in their footstepsto rededicatethemselvesin the common strugglefor
liberation, justice and progress.History and circumstances
have thrust an awesomeresponsibilityon you, Sir, asPresident of the Security Council at this particular time when
this body is considering the question of Namibia. We
reposetrust and confidencein you in the knowledge that
your wisdom, statesmanshipand devotion to the Charter
of the United Nations and the principle of the right to
self-determinationin particular will enable you to guide
the Council’s deliberations to a successfulconclusion. I
assureyou of the readinessof the SWAP0 delegation to
give whatever co-operation may be required of us in this
regard.

140. Egypt reaffirms its commitment to assist and help
the African front-line States in their honest stand in continuing to support the struggle of the Namibian people, despite the pressures and acts of aggression they have suffered
at the hands of the racist Pretoria rigime.
141, The achievement by the Namibian people of independence, freedom and national sovereignty is inevitable
and inescapable. Therefore, despite the obstacles and difficulties we continue to face on the road to the achievement
of that goal, we must not succumb to pessimism. We must
redouble our efforts, because there are encouraging signs
in the notable development in international public opinion
in many States, including Western Europe and the United
States, in favour of exerting both economic and political
pressures against the Pretoria rtgime to force it to relinquish its intransigent position and co-operate with the
United Nations to achieve Namibia’s independence in
accordance with resolution 435 (1978).
142. Our responsibility here in the United Nations-in
particular in the Security Council-is to act for the speedy
achievement of that goal; to put an end to bloodshed on
the battlefield and to the suffering of the Namibian people
still under the yoke of occupation after 100 years of struggle against colonialism-a
struggle the effects of which
may spread across southern Africa and, indeed, to the
whole of Africa. We must also contain the conflict, for its
repercussions and dimensions cannot be foreseen.

147. Allow me at this juncture to thank Mr. Krishnan of
India, representativeof the current Chairmanof the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,as well asMr. dos Santos
of Mozambique, Chairman of the Group of African States
for the month of May, for requestingthe Council to meet
to consider the question of Namibia.

143. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is Mr. Sam
Nujoma, President of SWAPO, to whom the Council
extended an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules
of procedure. I now call on him.
144. Mr. NUJOMA: I should like at the outset to thank
you, Sir, and the other members of the Council for giving
me this opportunity to appear once again before this body.
Let me also take this opportunity to congratulate you
warmly on your assumption of the high office of President
for the month of June.
145. In the same vein, I express sincere gratitude and
appreciation to those who undertook the cask of President
of the Council for the month of May-the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and the representative of Thailand-for
guiding the Council’s deliberations with skill and efficiency, and particularly for reacting promptly to the decision of the racist rigime of Pretoria aimed at installing a
puppet administration in Namibia. By condemning as null
and void the unilateral decision of the illegal rigime, the
Council, through its President, sent an appropriate and
categorical message which underscored the seriousness
with which the Council viewed that action.
146. Mr. President, you have assumed the stewardship of
the Council at a time when there are, on the one hand,
renewed challenges against the authority of the United

148. The situation in Namibia is extremely grave and
demands prompt and decisive action by the Council.
Racist South Africa’s intransigenceis a matter of record.
Its continued illegal occupation of Namibia and increasing
military build-up have been condemnedtime and again;
yet the aspirations of the Namibian people for freedom
and independenceremain unfulfilled.
149. How many more Namibians must be shot at and
killed by the maraudingmurder squadsof the racist Pretoria rCgime?How many more lives of innocent little babies
must be snatched away by the poverty and disease
imposedupon them by the colonial system?How long can
mothers and fathers continue to witnesstheir sons being
forcibly conscripted into the colonial army of occupation,
and their children subjectedto arbitrary arrest, incarceration and torture? How many more children must become
orphans?How many more Namibian patriots must disappear in the darknessof State terrorism, never to be heard
of again? How many more homes and villages of Namibians whose only crime is their uncompromising
demand for freedom must be destroyed? HOW much
longer must the rape and plunder of our country and its
16

resources continue? How much longer must we listen to
the repeated pleas for patience? How far can the apartheid
rCgime be allowed to go in its ‘defiance of United Nations
resolutions? Is this not the time for the Security Council yo
declare that enough is enough?

155. At the same time, it must be said that there is a wide
credibility gap about the role of the United States Administration as a reliable interlocutor in southern Africa.
156. The Council must strongly condemn racist apartheid South Africa for the blatant violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola, considering the
fact that the illegal rigime continues to use Namibia as a
military base from which to launch its military attacks,
destabilization and sabotage. The Council must also categorically re.ject Pretoria’s arrogated right to transgress the
borders of the front-line States, whater the pretext might
be.

150. These are some of the pressing questions that we
bring before this pre-eminent organ of the United Nations.
151. In the Final Document adopted by the Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau of
Non-Aligned Countries on the question of Namibia, held
at New Delhi from 19 to 21 April [S/17184, annex], the
Security Council is called upon to assume its responsibilities fully and to act in a decisive manner in the fulfilment
of the United Nations direct responsibility over Namibia
by taking effective measures to ensure the implementation
of the United Nations plan as approved in resolution 435
(1978). The Ministers placed strong emphasis on the
imperative need for the immediate and unconditional
implementation of that plan.

157. SWAP0 would like also to call upon the international community to render, as a matter of urgency, all
support and assistance to the front-line States, in a concerted effort to strengthen their defence capabilities in the
face of racist South Africa’s policy of regional expansionism and aggression. It goes without saying that the solidarity and support of those neighbouring States for the
struggle of the Namibian people, led by SWAPO, their
sole and authentic representative, is an indispensable factor in the common endeavours to hasten the decolonization process of Namibia.

152. To this end, and to further underscore the importance and seriousness that the Movement attaches to the
Namibian problem the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of 18
member countries of the Movement were requested personally to participate in this debate. We are happy to note
the presence of such an impressive number of Foreign
Ministers, which will enhance the importance of the debate
and put further stress on bringing about the immediate
resolution of the Namibian problem. In this context, I am
particularly gratified to acknowledge the presence at this
meeting of the Prime Minister of Peru, and I thank him for
taking time from his demanding responsibilities to attend
this debate, and specifically for his important statement.

158. The oppressed masses of South Africa and Namibia
are greatly inspired by the emerging national consensus of
Americans from all spheres of life advocating strong
action against the obnoxious system of apartheid and
demanding an end to the illegal occupation of Namibia.
What is even more heartening is their outright rejection of
the infamqus policy of constructive engagement. This
widely colidemned policy-call it an unholy alliance, evil
or an unmitigated disaster-has
increased the hardships
and suffering of our peoples.

153. The extremely grave situation which is prevailing in
Namibia is singularly due tc racist South Africa’s continued illegal occupation of Namibia. The policy of massive military build-up and the brutal repression of our
people blindly being pursued by the, occupationist rCgime
has transformed the country into a police State. There has
been no fundamental change in the repugnant system of
apartheid, in terms of who holds power, benelits from the
Namibian wealth and enjoys privileges. It still remains a
master-servant relationship.

159. After more than four years, it should be obvious to
every reasonable person that the policy of constructive
engagement, or so-called quiet diplomacy, has failed to
prove its case, On the other hand, emboldened by this
pro-apartheid policy, the apartheid chieftains have further
entrenched themselves in power in South Africa specifically by denationalizing the black majority in the land of
their birth. The fraudulent schemes that have been
imposed in South Africa in the name of the bogus constitutional reforms or a new political dispensation are in reality
intended to undermine the solidarity and the unity of the
oppressed sectors of the population. They are of no consequence to the demands of the struggling masses for political self-determination and the eradication of, apartheid.
Evidence abounds that the black majority is strongly resisting this frontal onslaught against their legitimate interests
and just rights, which can truly be satisfied only when
there is a new democratic order based on the principle of
one man, one vote. Already the patriots and militants
representing a cross-section of the South African society
have taken up arms in order to confront the oppressors
and their military machine in the countryside, in the townships, at the work place, and on the streets of the major
citadels of the racist Power. The freedom fighters and
democrats of the South African National Liberation
Movement, under the overall leadership of the African

154. Then, of course, there are the other crimes emanating from the apartheid doctrine of the continued illegal
occupation of Namibia, such as the repeated acts of
aggression, destabilization and military attacks by the
racist Pretoria rCgime against independent African States,
as well as its continued sabotaging of their economic
infrastructures in a sinister campaign aimed at undermining the economic development and security of those States.
In this connection, a case in point is the recent “Cabinda
scandal”, which once again exposed the bad faith and
duplicity of the Pretoria rtgime, in terms of its hostile
designs on Angola; it was a calculated, outrageous act
of sabotage which clearly belied the declared intentions of
that criminal rt+gime to end its long-standing policy of
aggression against Angola.
17

manoeuvrings to find alternatives to resolution 435 (1978)
while publicly professing scrupulous adherence to it.

National Congress of South Africa, have the right to
appeal for and receive all-round material assistance and
continued political support from the international community in their heroic struggle against the evil system of aparrheid, which stands universally condemned as a crime
against humanity and as constituting a serious threat to
international peace and security.

163. Let me now proceed directly to the heart of the
matter, namely the decision of the occupying illegal Pretoria rCgime to install a puppet interim administration.
Again I raise the question of the credibility gap of the
United States Administration, which is supposed to be
working on the minds of the chieftains of the Botha rtgime
to make them stick to their acceptance of the United
Nations plan as approved in resolution 435 (1978).

160. The adverse consequences of the policy of constructive engagement-a policy which should be called by its
proper name, as a policy of destructive engagement-have
not been limited to South Africa. We can actually point
out its manifestations in various forms beyond the frontiers of the apartheid State. The evidence is there for everybody to see how Pretoria’s efforts to destabilize the
economies and to undermine the security of the independent African States have increased and continue to
increase in frequency and intensity. Pretoria and its allies
have continued the practice of training, financing and utilizing local traitors and reactionary elements in order to
pursue their political and strategic objectives in southern
Africa, including promoting regional domination and
imperialist exploitation of the human and natural resources. A case in point is the recent shameful spectacle of the
puppets, both local and foreign, and their American and
South African corporate paymasters that was staged along
the Namibia-Angoia border. The ringmaster at this staged
event was none other than Lewis Lehrman, a United States
disgruntled reactionary, Reaganite politician who is looking for an international platform in hopes of enhancing his
political ambitions for an elected office in that country.
But the most revealing thing was that this gentleman let
the cat out of the bag by reading aloud to the gathering a
letter from President Reagan in which he-that
is,
Reagan-endorsed
the goals of the so-called Democratic
International and assured the assembled agents of colonialism and imperialism that “your goals are our goals”.

164. Notwithstanding the assurances given by Washington and others about their having strongly intimated to
Pretoria that it should desist from going ahead with the
installation of the puppet administration in Namibia, the
racists will go ahead and impose yet another fait accompli,
perhaps even while the Council is debating the question of
Namibia.
165. In one sense, the problem before the Council
involves a repetition of South Africa’s arrogant defiance of
United Nations resolutions, but in another sense it is a
revealing example of the complicity of the major Western
Powers with South Africa for the sake of their vested interests in Namibia, their objective being to prevent SWAP0
from coming to power in Namibia, even through implementation of the United Nations plan, and also to bypass
the United Nations.
166. In this context, we should like to recall the strong
condemnation and rejection of racist South Africa’s illegal
and unilateral action by the Extraordinary Ministerial
Meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned
Countries on the question of Namibia, by the United
Nations Council for Namibia, and, as has been noted, by
the President of the Security Council in a statement on 3
May [S/I77513.

161. Those who are traitors to the sacred cause of the
oppressed but struggling masses have by their own choice
parted company with history and cannot consider themselves to be among those who will enjoy the fruits of victory and a glorious future, They have thus become part of
the problem which will be eliminated; it is just a matter of
time. When that comes about, these traitors will be cast
into oblivion together with their mentors.

167. The Council, meeting against the backdrop of this
challenging situation, is now called upon to assume its
responsibilities fully and to act decisively in fulfilment of
the direct responsibility of the United Nations over Namibia, which must be met soon through Namibia’s attainment of freedom and genuine independence. Specifically,
we urge the Council formally to condemn and reject racist
South Africa’s decision, which paves the way for an internal settlement in violation of resolution 435 (1978) and 439
(1978). Moreover, the Council should urge all States to
refrain from according any recognition to or undertaking
any kind of co-operation with the puppet administration
in Namibia or any other entity installed in Namibia by the
illegal rCgime,

162. SWAP0 reiterates here without fear or favour that
the primary obstacle today to the attainment of Namibia’s
independence is the United States precondition of linking
the independence of our country to the presence of Cuban
troops in Angola. To add insult to injury, those who implement this abominable policy have the arrogance to allege
that we must accept this outrageous imposition as the reality of the situatioli whether we like it or not, and that there
will be no independence for Namibia as long as the Cuban
troops remain in Angola. In other words, the United States
Administration is responsible for holding Namibia’s independence to ransom and for prolonging the suffering and
misery of our people. The racist rCgime of Pretoria is making full use of this situation, thanks to the linkage precondition. It is no secret that the Reagan Administration has,
right from the time of its inception, engaged in endless

168. We are also of the view that the United Nations
Council for Namibia, as the legal Administering Authority
over Namibia until independence, should, through a legislative act, declare as international criminals Namibians
involved in this illegal action, and call upon Member
States to arrest them wherever they might be found.
169. In pursuance of its goal of the bantustanization of
Namibia, racist South Africa is now scheming to achieve
18

the secession of the eastern region of our country, the
Caprivi Strip. The rtgime has, in fact, already sent to the
Caprivi its colonial agent, an Afrikaner by the name of
Lucas Kruger, to draw upa “constitution”under
the slogan
of “a constitution for Caprivi by Caprivians” and to instigate that section of our population to regard itself as separate from the rest of the Namibians. It should be recalled
that in past years the racist rttgime has built up a huge
military and air base at Mpacha from which to attack and
destabilize the neighbouring independent States of Angola,
Botswana, Zambia and Zimbabwe and an independent
Namibia. Already the racist Pretoria rCgime is using that
base to supply huge quantities of arms and to provide other
forms of support to the Angolan bandits of the National
Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA).
SWAP0 strongly urges the Council to prevail upon racist
South Africa to desist from its evil intention to balkanize
Namibia and to ensure the unity and territorial integrity of
Namibia.

to promote the political and other interests of the people of
Namibia, with the attainment of independence as the primary goal. We should also like to stress that the United
Nations system should continue existing assistance programmes which are now and will continue in the future to
be of direct benefit to Namibians, including such outstanding United Nations initiatives as the United Nations Institute for Namibia, the Namibia Vocational Training
School, the Nationhood Programme for Namibia and various scholarship programmes. What is needed most is an
increase in funds for these indispensable schemes.
174. It goes without saying that SWAP0 supports
wholeheartedly the central role of the Secretary-General in
the implementation of resolution 435 (1978). We renew
here our trust and confidence in the Secretary-General and
commend him for his tireless efforts to hasten that process.
We believe that the Secretary-General should be given the
necessary support by the Member States to carry out his
mandate and to undertake such actions as would help pave
the way towards the immediate and unconditional implementation of the United Nations plan. To this end,
SWAP0 wishes to renew its readiness to co-operate fully
with him and his staff.

170. The world outside is demanding economic sanctions
against aplauthez’dSouth Africa. The Security Council bears
a special responsibility and must act now, promptly and
decisively, to secure the implementation ofits resolutions, in
particular resolutions 385 (1976) and 435 (1978). Now is the
time for this most important organ ofthe United Nations to
do what is called for and what is necessary, namely, to
impose comprehensive mandatory sanctions under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations, as the most
cffcctive additional means to ensure South Africa’s acceptance of the authority of the Organization and its compliance with United Nations resolutions on Namibia.

175. More than 18 years ago the Namibian people were
forced to take up arms to resist colonialism and to liberate
themselves. That commitment and the determination to
leave no stone unturned in the struggle remain resolute
and enduring.
176. The combatants of the People’s Liberation Army of
Namibia, the brave sons and daughters of the motherland,
have met the oppressors on all fronts and live up to the
challenge. They are today ready as ever to continue to
intensify the war of national liberation, adjusting to any
given situation and resolving problems as they arise in the
field.

171. That should be the message that goes out from the
Council in response to the repeated calls for the implementation of effective measures against the Pretoria authorities. In this connection, we call upon the Western
permanent members of the Council who have shielded
South Africa in the past to display the necessary political
will by joining the rest of the Council in adopting comprehensive mandatory sanctions against South Africa.

177. SWAP0 leads the nation at home and abroad; it is
the people organized who, acting as their own liberators,
are certain of the final victory. The cause of Namibia is the
cause of the United Nations. Let us, therefore, work hand
in hand to make the year 1985 the year of Namibia’s independence. In the meantime, as long as Pretoria’s illegality
and military occupation persist in Namibia, there is no
alternative but to intensify the struggle on alI fronts.

172. This year, 1985, marks the fortieth anniversary of
the founding of the United Nations. While we take note of
the preparations that are being made to observe that
important event in a proper and fitting manner, we should
like to appeal to the Organization and to the rest of the
international community that these festivities-including
the observance of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration on the Granting oi Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV)-reflect
the fact that Namibia, which has been a subject of annual debates in the
IJnited Nations for the past 40 years, is not yet free. Therefore, there is an imperative need for recommitment by all
the nations and peoples of the world to increase their
diplomatic, political, financial, humanitarian and military
assistance to the struggle of the Namibian people, led by
SWAPO, for freedom, self-determination and national
independence.

179. Mr. BESSAIEH
(Algeria) (interpretation from
French): Mr, President, it is my pleasant duty to congratulate you most warmly on behalf of my delegation on your
accession to the presidency of the Council. We arc convinced that your vast experience and your well-known personal qualities will ensure that the Council will have sound
guidance in its work.

173. SWAP0 reiterates its full support for the United
Nations Council for Namibia and calls upon it to continue

180. At this time I, should like also to pay a tribute to
your predecessor, the representative of Thailand, who

178. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the Minister
for Post and Telecommunications of Algeria, Mr. Boualem Bessaieh. I welcome him and invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.

19

187. Similarly, urged to respect the independence of
neighbouring countries, the South African rCgime coulcl
not for long hide its true nature; for breach of commitments dictated by tactical considerations is an irresistible
temptation to a rtgime which has made aggression a
regional strategy, as is borne out by its recent violation of
Angolan territory even as far as the Cabinda region.

guided the work of this body in an enlightened and effective manner during the past month.
18 1. The problems stemming from the critical evolution
of the situation in southern Africa unquestionably constitute one of the constant concerns of the international community and therefore require the unflagging attention of
the Security Council. The dangerously persistent tension
prevailing in that region of the world is the fault of a South
African rigime obstinately bent on ceaselessly introducing
new sources of instability in southern Africa. In fact, the
orchestrated escalation of tension pursued by South Africa
with an obstinacy made possible only by its impunity
reflects three aspects of a single threat.

188. This in brief is the grim record of successive recantations and repeated prevarications.
189. Faced with a situation marked by a new escalation
in provocation, the non-aligned countries then had the
duty to alert the international community and to call upon
the authority of the Security Council.

182. This threat stems, first, from a constant defiance of
the universal conscience by the persistent maintenance of
the odious system of apartheid. It also arises from a permanent affront to the authority of the United Nations by the
illegal maintenance of South Africa’s presence in Namibia.
Lastly, it arises from the built-in danger to international
peace and security constituted by the doctrine of aggression so perilously followed by Pretoria in its relations with
the countries of the region.

190. This is a legitimate response to the commendably
strong disapproval with which the international public has
unanimously reacted, in some cases resulting in decisive
initiatives and leading certain countries to adopt new political attitudes towards South Africa.
191. In keeping with that international condemnation,
the United Nations Council for Namibia has also, as the
Administering Authority for the Territory, expressed its
vigilant concern and appealed to the Security Council
firmly to oppose the new South African manoeuvres in
Namibia.

183. Those are the unchanging facts of a situation clearly
perceived as extremely grave by the international community. Thus, once again, the calm observation of events has
allowed it alone, and from the outset, a clear understanding of the underlying nature of a rtgime which has institutionalized racism as a means of government and
established aggression as a way of dealing with its
neighbours.

192. The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, in solidarity with the struggle of the Namibian people, which
accords with the original historic legitimacy of their Movement, met at New Delhi in April of this year unanimously
to condemn South Africa’s new manoeuvres and to call for
the implementation of the plan for Namibia’s accession
to independence endorsed in resolution 435 (1978). They
also called on the Security Council to take every appropriate measure under the Charter of the United Nations,
including those provided for in Chapter VII, to ensure the
implementation of that resolution. The new situation
created by South Africa lends urgency to those calls for
appropriate, effective action. A new fait accompli is being
prepared, one that would seriously-perhaps
irreversiblydamage the standing of the Organization and the Security
Council, and the very authority of its decisions. To tolerate
such a manoeuvre would be to agree to legitimize the
extension of the geographical area of racist domination
and would mean permitting an indefinite continuation of
the exploitation and oppression of the Namibian people,
as well as the establishment of a new base for aggression
against South Africa’s neighbours. To accommodate to
such a situation would be to sanction the triumph of the
policy of violating international law and the universal conscience, a policy that is openly aggressive, executed with
impunity and adopted with arrogance+

184. In fact, since 1946, the year when it decided to
extend its administration and its apartheid system to what
it now Namibia, the Pretoria regime has never ceased to
carry out open acts of illegality and institutionalized
absorption of that Territory. A sudden and irreversible
halt to those plans might have been brought about by
means of resolution 435 (1978) if South Africa had not
continually done its utmost to thwart its implementation,
as was demonstrated early on when it attempted, in 1978,
to impose a so-called internal solution on Namibia, which
was strongly opposed by the Council in its resolution 439
(1978).
185. At the same time, the introduction of linkages
extraneous to the clearly established facts of the Namibian
question was of a piece with its attitude of obstruction.
Encouraged in its attitude by the absence of an energetic
international reaction commensurate with its intransigence, South Africa is today preparing a new manoeuvre
in its unilateral attempt to bring about a so-called internal
solution, ignoring the fundamental problem of the decolonization of Namibia.

193. That is the meaning of the challenge that the international community faces today, one that must be met
with energetic measures, so that powerlessness when confronted with a fait accompli does not become the natural
tendency generally or, above all, in the Security Council,
on which it is incumbent finally to ensure the implementation of its own decisions.

186. Moreover, when called upon ta put an end to the
intolerable apu~thrid system, the racist minority rCgime
recently once again used the fallacious pretext of an alleged
gradual internal constitutional change to inflict further
blows on the dignity of the South African people,
20

194. A new conspiracy is beingprepared againstthe Namibian people, who appeal to each and every one of us in
our respectivecommitment to the independenceof peoples
but, above all, to all of usjointly, in our solidarity against
colonial oppressionand racial discrimination.
195. The year 1985 is one of several anniversaries:the
fortieth anniversary of the Organization, the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the struggle of SWAPO, the solelegitimate
representative of the Namibian people, and the twentyfifth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples.
196. The happy coincidenceof those three anniversaries
thus commemoratesthe united affirmation of the legitimacy of the causeof national liberation, the relevanceof a
historic Declaration and the primary responsibility of the
United Nations to promote the emancipation of peoples.
Therefore, one cannot conceiveof a better way to celebrate
those three anniversariesthan by reviving, with renewed
determination, the commitment of the Organization to
ensure the accessionto independenceof the Namibian
people.
197. The PRESIDENT: The next speakeris the representative of South Africa. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
198. Mr. von SCHIRNDING (South Africa): Allow me
on behalf of the South African delegation, Mr. President,
to convey to you our congratulations on your assumption
of the presidency.
199. It would bc unrealistic to consider the question of
South West Africa outside the regional context to which it
inextricably belongs.Developmentsin neighbouringcountries will inevitably have an effect on South West Africa,
just as developments in South West Africa will have an
important influence on the course of events in southern
Africa as a whole.
200. Furthermore, South Africa is an integral part of the
southern African region, Whether one likesit or not, this is
a fact. We have clear-cut regional interests,and, together
with other States,insist that countries in the region should
abide by certain ground rules.
201. First, no State should make its territory available to
individuals or organizations that wish to promote or prepare for violence against other States in the region, The
fact is that all the countries of southern Africa have disaffected groups and dissidentmbvements.If this ground rule
is not accepted,there is no limit to the potential escalation
of cross-border violence in the sub-continent.
202. Secondly, no foreign forces shouldbe permitted to
intervene in the region. The intervention of foreign forces
in any country in southern Africa is a potential threat to
the security and sovereignty of all of the countries of the
region. This is particularly so when suchforces are acting
on behalf of an expansionist super-Power. The Minister
for Foreign Affairs of my country hasrepeatedlyappealed

to the leadersof southern Africa to considerthis threat
very seriously,regardlessof the rhetorical positionswhich
they may adopt in this forum. Let them considerthe fate
of other countries which invited the Soviet Union or its
alliesto cometo their assistance
or that were unfortunate
enoughto be liberatedby them. Let themconsiderthe fate
of the peoplesof Poland, East Germany, Czechoslovakia,
Hungary, Bulgaria, Latvia, Estonia, Lithuania, South Viet
Nam and Cambodia. Let then think very carefully about
what is happeningat this very moment to the people of
Afghanistan. The lessonisclear: oncea country allowsthe
Soviet Union and its surrogatesto establisha strong presence within its borders, it is very difficult indeedto get rid
of them.
203. Thirdly, South Africa believesthat the problems of
conflict in our region should be solvedby peacefulmeans
rather than by violence.
204. Fourthly, we believethat the problemsof southern
Africa should be solved on a regionalbasis.We have our
differences, but we must resolve those differences ourselves,As PresidentBotha saidat the timeof thesigningof
the Nkomati Accord [S/16451, annexZj, Stateswith different socioeconomicand political systemscan live together
in peaceand harmony and work together in the pursuit of
common interests.Each country has the right to order its
affairs as it deemsfit, and inter-Staterelations,particularly
between neighbours,should not be disturbedby differing
internal policies. This is only sensibleand practical, as it
affords recognition to the fact that each country has its
own set of circumstancesfor which it must seekits own
solutions in the interestsof its citizens. President Botha
also pointed out that uncomfortable facts should not be
swept under the carpet and that divergent outlooks should
not be allowed to distract Governmentsfrom carrying out
their duty to accord their first priority to the welfare and
prosperity of their peoples.Only on this basiscan weall, as
Africans, give our subcontinenta chance to grow and to
develop.
205. It is significant that participants in this debate this
afternoon shouldhave referred to developmentsin Angola
in conjunction with the question of South West Africa.
Although my Government doesnot agreewith the statements which were madein this regard, the debateunderlinesthe fact that the problemsof Angola and South West
Africa are inextricably linked. They are linked in the following respect: in the first, place, the peoplesof Angola
and South West Africa both wish, above all else,to exercise their right to self-determination.They are linked,
secondly, because the presence in Angola of a large
number of surrogatetroops of a super-Powerrepresented
in the Council has made it impossiblefor the people of
Angola and the peopleof South West Africa to determine
their own future free from intimidation. Thirdly, they are
linked because in both casespolitical objectives are
pursued by violence rather than by peacefulmeans and
national reconciliation.
206. Where doesthe Republicof South Africa stand with
regard to these issues?First, South Africa supports the
right of the peoplesof both countriesto self-determination

21

and independence; secondly, South Africa insists on the
withdrawal of foreign forces from the region; and, thirdly,
it believes that the problems of both countries should be
solved by peaceful means, through national reconciliation
rather than through violence.

power should reside in the hands of one man, the South
African Administrator-General,
even though they have
repeatedly called upon South Africa to withdraw its presence and its administration from the Territory.
211. The Angolan people, who are now classified by the
Council and by the international community as having
been “liberated”, desperately desire the same opportunity
of expressing their political wishes as the people of South
West Africa have enjoyed. They would very much have
liked to have been able to participate in free elections of
any kind. They would have appreciated the opportunity of
being able to administer their own affairs and bring about
the reforms which they regard as necessary in their country. However, this opportunity has been denied to them by
the MPLA rtgime, by the Cuban interventionists and by
their Soviet masters. Can anyone in the Council seriously
maintain that the people of Angola under the MPLA
regime enjoy civil and political freedoms?

207. The conflict in Angola has its origins in the violation of the Alvor agreements of 1975. It will be recalled
that, under the terms of those agreements, Portugal recognized three movements, the National Front for the Liberation of Angola (FNLA), the MPLA [Peoyle’s Z;ibevation
Movement oJAnga/a] and the National Union for the Total
independence of Angola (UNITA).
These movements,
together with Portugal, were to have formed a transitional Government which would have held nationwide
elections for a constituent assembly before the end of October 1975. Such elections were never held, because the
MPLA imported foreign troops to impose its rule over the
country. This is a fact. There have never been free elections
in Angola, and, despite the fact that the Alvor agreements
were widely endorsed by the international community,
hardly anyone protested at the fact that the MPLA rCgime
disregarded the agreements and seized power for itself.
What became of the strong support for the FNLA and for
UNITA which existed in January 1976, when half the
countries members of the OAU had steadfastly refused to
recognize the MPLA? What became of the call of a large
number of OAU members for the withdrawal of all foreign
troops from Angola? The fact of the matter is that the right
of the Angolan people to self-determination has been
brushed aside. It would seem that the United Nations is
concerned about self-determination, human rights and
responsible Government only on the southern side of the
Cunene River.

212. My Government’s position with regard to the proposed transitional administration in South West Africa is
well known. It was set out by President Botha in a speech
which he delivered to the South African Parliament on 18
April of this year [S/17152, appendix 23. Let me repeat
some of its salient points.
213. President Botha emphasized that, for as long as
there is a possibility that the present international negotiations held any prospect of bringing about the genuine withdrawal of Cuban forces from Angola, the South African
Government would not act in a manner irreconcilable with
the international settlement plan. The proposed arrangement in South West Africa/Namibia should accordingly
be seen as an interim mechanism for the internal administration of the Territory, pending agreement on internationally acceptable independence for South West Africa.

208. South Africa, on the other hand, accepts the right of
the peoples of both South West Africa and Angola to selfdetermination. It has, however, insisted that when the
people of South West Africa decide on their future they
should do so in circumstances of fairness, peace and security. In 1978, a nationwide election was held in South West
Africa in which 78 per cent of the electorate participated.
That election was observed by over 300 journalists and
international experts and was judged to be as free and fail
as elections anywhere in the world. But the Security Council rejected the outcome of that election.

214. However, the people of South West Africa/Namibia, including SWAPO, cannot wait indefinitely for a
breakthrough on the withdrawal of the Cubans from
Angola. Should it eventually become evident after all
avenues have been thoroughly explored that there is no
realistic prospect of attaining this goal, the parties most
intimately affected by the present negotiations will
obviously have to reconsider how internationally acceptable independence may best be attained in the light of prevailing circumstances.

209. Again, in 1980, second-tier elections were held for
most of the communities in South West Africa, and once
again there was a very large voter turn-out; once again, the
United Nations rejected the step to give the people of the
Territory a say in the management of their affairs, When
responsibility for important aspects of the administration
of South West Africa was transferred to elected leaders in
the Territory in 1980, the Council rejected the step, even
though the new administration was unquestionably democratic and carried out important reforms.

215. In the meantime, South Africa will continue to
work for an internationally acceptable independence for
South West Africa. It will continue to search for a reasonable formula for genuine Cuban withdrawal from Angola.
If a firm agreement can be reached in this regard, it will
carry out its undertaking to implement the international
settlement plan. South Africa will continue to strive for
stability and peace in the region by encouraging all the
parties, including SWAP0 and Angola, to resolve their
differences around a conference table instead of by violence. It will continue to encourage dialogue between all
the South West African parties in the hope that they will
find a basis for still broader consensus in respect of the
future of the Territory. South Africa will continue to insist

210. NOW,when South Africa, as an interim mechanism,
is once again transferring important powers for the internal administration of South West Africa into the hands of
South West Africa’s leaders, members of the Council are
once again displeased. Apparently they prefer that total
22

that all the South West African parties be treated equally
and impartially. And if the United Nations wishes to play a
role in the future of South West Africa/Namibia,
it will
consequently have to demonstrate that it will be able to
carry out its functions impartially.
216. I should like to know with what aspects of this programme the Council disagrees. Does it favour the retention of the surrogate forces of an expansionist super-Power
in Africa? Is it opposed to the peaceful settlement of disputes? Is it not prepared to accept that there should be
dialogue between the parties of South West Africa on the
future of their country? Does it not believe that the parties
of South West Africa are entitled to equal treatment in
terms of the United Nations settlement plan? Or do they
share Mr. Nujoma’s view, stated earlier at this meeting,
that they are international criminals? If Council members
disagree with these propositions, then let them say so, so
that we may all know where we stand.

tricts, and more and more public amenities, hotels and
restaurants are open to all; and all South Africans will
soon be able to marry whomever they like and to belong to
the political organization of their choice.
221. However, as we make progress with the resolution
of our problems, so our opponents become more vitriolic
in their rejection of peaceful change. As we create new and
authentic channels for all the peoples of South Africa to
deliberate together on the problems which confront us, so
they propagate violence and kill, maim and intimidate the
genuine representatives of the vast moderate majority of
black South Africans,
222. This reaction proves that our critics are not interested in rational debate and equitable reform. On the contrary, they will ultimately be satisfied only when they have
utterly destroyed everything that has been created in South
Africa and have replaced it with their own totalitarian
alternative. Western States might not agree with this analysis, but I suspect that they would limply accept such an
outcome in southern Africa, just as they have done in
other parts of the world, shrugging their shoulders in dismay and saying how much they regret this tragic outcome,

217. As I have already emphasized, South Africa,has
consistently supported the withdrawal of foreign forces
from the region. And by accepting the international settlement plan, South Africa has already agreed to the reduction and the ultimate withdrawal of its own forces from
South West Africa. It strongly supports the wish that was
expressed by many members of the OAU in 1976 for the
withdrawal of all foreign forces from Angola. South Africa
is prepared to enter into an international agreement in
terms of which all foreign forces, regardless of their origin,
would be withdrawn from Angola.

223. The time has come for Western countries in the
United Nations to take a stand for the promotion of the
democratic values which they profess to espouse. We challenge them to commission some impartial and reputable
organization such as Freedom House to carry out an
objective and comparative study of the state of human,
political, economic and civil rights in all the countries of
the world. Such a study should judge whether Governments are attempting to increase possibilities for participation in the political process or to restrict such developments.
It should also provide an analysis of the constitutions, the
record, the associations and actions of movements such as
SWAP0 and the ANC. South Africa would be prepared to
co-operate fully with any such study.

218. Lastly, South Africa’s position on the peaceful resolution of disputes is equally clear. We have consistently
urged all parties in southern Africa to resolve their differences by peaceful means. Last year, inter din through the
good offices of the Secretary-General, we tried to engage
SWAP0 in a process which would lead to the cessation of
hostilities in South West Africa. We made it clear to them
that they could return to South West Africa to pursue their
political objectives by peaceful means. However, they
rejected those offers and decided instead to intensify their
so-called armed struggle. Within South Africa itself, we
have stated that we are prepared to enter into dialogue
with any party or individual who rejects violence.

224. In Angola, we have also urged a peaceful resolution
to the current conflict between the MPLA and UNITA
through a process of national reconciliation. Although we
accept that this is a question which the people of Angola
themselves must resolve, we are deeply concerned about
the ongoing civil war in Angola, not only because of the
suffering which it has caused to the people of Angola but
also because of the instability which it has created in OUI
region. This instability has presented opportunities for the
Soviets and the Cubans to exploit the suffering of Angola
for their own advantage.

219. Speakers this afternoon have referred in passing to
recent events in South Africa and, without conceding the
right of the United Nations to interfere in South Africa’s
domestic affairs, I should like briefly to comment on current developments in South Africa.
220. The actions of the South African Government have
proved its commitment to reform. Coloureds and Indians
are now exercising authentic power in Parliament and in
the Cabinet. South Africa has proposed the establishment
of an open-ended, non-statutory forum to negotiate with
black leaders over the political future. It is establishing
second-tier authorities in which all population groups and
communities will co-operate on bread-and-butter issues
affecting the daily lives of the peoples of South Africa.
Trade union rights are now enjoyed by all workers; sport is
played on a completely open basis; central business dis-

225. South Africa has also sought a peaceful resolution
. .
of its dispute with Angola. In a number of mmls,te,rial
meetings last year, it sought to persuade the MPLA regime
to accept the advantages of peace. It entered into the LUSaka agreement with the MPLA in good faith and carrled
out all of its obligations in terms of that agreement. Under
the agreement, the Angolan Government undertook to
exclude SWAP0 elements from the territory from which
South Africa had withdrawn. In the same manner, South
Africa expressed its grave concern to the Angolan Govern23

ment over the activities of large numbers of ANC terrorists
in various parts of Angola.

share the responsibility for having actively encouraged and
supported the terrorist activities of the ANC and SWAPO.

226. The South African Government repeatedly urged
the Angolan Government to remove these terrorists from
its Territory and to cease assisting them with training and
equipment and by making its Territory available to them
for the furtherance of their violent activities. On 21 May
1984, the South African Government proposed that both
South Africa and Angola should issue a joint declaration
that they would not allow any person or organization to be
trained or accommodated on their sovereign Territory to
operate against one another or to practise violence against
one another. Thus far the MPLA Government has failed
to respond to these representations.

233. The international community and the Council
should be in no doubt as to what South Africa’s position is
in this regard: it will not tolerate such activities. Although
it is committed to resolving its differences with its neighbours by peaceful means, South Africa will not hesitate to
take whatever action may be appropriate for the defence of
its own people and for the elimination of terrorist elements
who are intent on sowing death and destruction in our
country and in our region. We will not allow ourselves to
be attacked with impunity. We shall take whatever steps
are appropriate to defend ourselves.
234. Nevertheless, South Africa is convinced that the
problems of our region cannot and will not be solved by
violence.

227. The ANC elements in Angola cannot simply be
characterized as harmless refugees. On the contrary, they
pose a direct threat to the people of South Africa and
southern Africa. South Africa has disconcerting evidence
that northern Angola is now the main base area for the
training of ANC terrorists, who are then despatched via
other countries to South Africa. In addition, it is clear that
SWAP0 is still being allowed to launch terrorist attacks
from Angolan territory against the people of South West
Africa/Namibia.

235. Despite the heated rhetoric, despite the incidents
which flare up from time to time, there is a new understanding throughout the sub-continent of the common
interests which we share. There is a new awareness of the
dangers of cross-border violence, of the importance of
reconciliation, of the threat of foreign intervention and of
the benefits which regional co-operation can bring. The
ground rules of coexistence are slowly but surely gaining
acceptance. It is within this context that we are confident
that the people of South West Africa will before too long
be able to move forward to internationally recognized
independence.

228. It is an established principle of international law
that a State may not permit or encourage on its territory
activities for the purpose of carrying out acts of violence
on the territory of another State. It is equally well established that a State has a right to take appropriate steps to
protect its own security and territorial integrity against
such acts.

236. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Nigeria, Mr. Ibrahim Agbolla Gambari. I welcome him and invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

229. That is why the South African Government has
repeatedly urged the Angolan Government not to permit
such activities in its Territory and why the South African
Government has no alternative but to take whatever
action it deems appropriate for the protection of the peoples of South Africa from such acts of violence.

237. Mr. GAMBARI (Nigeria): May I extend to you, Sir,
my warmest congratulations on your assumption of office
as President for this month. It is a month in which the
determination of the United Nations to fulfil a solemn
promise to the Namibian people is going to be tested. Your
task, therefore, as President of the Council, will not be an
easy one. However, I am confident that you possess the
experience, the skill and the wisdom to guide the Council’s
deliberations to a conclusion which will enhance its prestige and effectiveness.

230. In the circumstances, the South African security forces have felt it necessary to gather intelligence on the activities of the ANC and SWAP0 terrorists in Angola and to
consider appropriate counter-actions,
231. In the course of such an operation, a small team of
South Africans recently clashed with Angolan military elements. Their objective was to reconnoitre a suspected
ANC camp close to the well-guarded Malongo oil installations near the town of Cabinda. Two South Africans were
killed and one was captured, The South African Government immediately informed the MPLA rigime of its willingness to discuss the incident,

238. It is almost two years since the Council last met to
consider the question of Namibia. The decision of the
Council at that time was that the main outstanding issue in
the implementation of resolution 435 (1978) was the determination of the electoral system to be used for the election
of the constituent assembly. The Council, therefore, called
upon South Africa to communicate to the SecretaryGeneral forthwith its choice of the electoral system in
order to facilitate the immediate and unconditional implementation of the United Nations plan approved in resolution 435 (1978).

232. There should, however, be no doubt about the root
cause of what happened in Cabinda. It was the Angolan
1t>\crnmcnt’s blatant disregard of international law in
allowing and encouraging the ANC to train and to prepare
liir acts of violence against South Africa. The Angolan
Government is, however, not the only culprit. The United
Nations and many members of the Security Council must

239. That was in October 1983. South Africa has since
not communicated its choice of the electoral system to the
Secretary-General. It has not permitted any advance to be
24

made in the implementation of resolution 435 (1978).
Rather, Namibian independence has been stalled and the
Security Council has not met on this question. In the interval, initiatives have been taken and negotiations conducted
on Namibia which almost give the impression that the
United Nations has become irrelevant in the matter. It is as
though the independence of Namibia were no longer a
subject of decolonization but a pawn in the ideological
chess game invented by South Africa to draw a superPower to its side.

responsibility for the Territory. Since then, the General
Assembly and the Security Council have adopted numerous resolutions and decisions all aimed at finding a peaceful, just and acceptable solution to the Namibian question.
The landmark of these efforts was the adoption by the
Council of resolution 435 (1978), which approved a plan
for the independence of Namibia.
247. Resolution 435 (1978) was arrived at after lengthy
and protracted negotiations during which SWAP0 was
prevailed upon to make numerous concessions-concessions which were never reciprocated by the racist regime of
Pretoria, All this was in the hope that in the end a solution
would be found.

240. It became convenient to sidetrack the timetable
carefully negotiated by the Council for Namibian independence and in its place to substitute a scheme designed to
install a puppet regime in that country. Namibia is being
held ransom for the achievement of an unacceptable “pax
South Africana”, which will reduce neighbouring States to
no more than client States of the South African apartheid
regime.

248. It is almost eight years since resolution 435 (1978)
was adopted, but the Namibian people are today no closer
to independence than they were prior to 1978. The problem is not with the plan endorsed in resolution 435 (1978),
for it provides adequate safeguards to take care of the
interests of all Namibians. Rather, the problem is that that
resolution is not being given a chance through faithful
implementation.

241. No amount of subterfuge can disguise the fact that
Namibia is a classic case of decolonization. It falls squarely
within the competence of the United Nations and will
remain so until the Organization discharges fully its
responsibilities and the people of Namibia attain genuine
self-determination, as envisaged in resolution 435 (1978).

249. What is needed therefore is not a new plan, nor
bilateral negotiations brokered by outside powers, but the
will of the international community, and particularly of
the United States, to prevail on South Africa to co-operate
with the Secretary-General in ensuring the implementation
of resolution 435 (1978) without any further delay.

242. Namibia is not the first colonized Territory to have
neighbouring States. Its fate should not be dictated by the
bilateral relations of its neighbours. Nigeria has viewed
with great disquiet the evolution of events in the past two
years on the question of Namibia.

250. The record of South Africa on Namibia’s independence is replete with deceit and bad faith. The racists have
just spoken before the Council, and their evasions, their
diversions and their lies have multiplied. Racist South
Africa has always been determined to settle the Namibian
question on its own terms and outside the framework of
the United Nations. In order to circumvent the call for its
withdrawal it set up the sham Turnhalle Conference to
create the impression of the commencement of democratic
process in Namibia. When that failed, and resolution 435
(1978) was adopted, South Africa raised the issue of the
impartiality of the United Nations as an obstacle to its
acceptance of the framework.

243. Like other members of the Movement of NonAligned Countries, Nigeria has been amazed at the latitude
given South Africa to continue to determine the fate of a
Territory over which it ceased to have legal responsibility
almost 19 years ago. The non-aligned countries which
requested this meeting of the Security Council should be
congratulated for putting a stop to a procedure that has
been clearly shown to be in the interests neither of Namibia nor of the United Nations, but is calculated to serve
the selfish interests of South Africa and those outsiders
who wish to continue to exploit the resources of Namibia.
244. By this meeting of the Council the international
community in general, and the Namibian people in partic-,
ular, are being reassured that the Namibian question still
belongs to the United Nations and that the Organization
owes a primary responsibility to the Namibian people for
the finding of a speedy and just solution to their plight.

251. While agreeing to attend the pre-implementation
Conference at Geneva in 1981, it made sure that it sabotaged the Conference. So, also, has it sabotaged the efforts
of the Western contact group of five, whose members cannot by any stretch of the imagination be considered by
Pretoria to be hostile to South Africa. Even the members
of the contact group had to admit that they were dealing
with an unreliable interlocuter which did not negotiate in
good faith but shifted its grounds each time a preoccupation was satisfied.

245. It i, for these reasons that my country attaches particular importance to this meeting. I wish therefore to
express my gratitude to the Co-ordinating Bureau of NonAligned Countries for the decision taken at its Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting which was held at New Delhi
from 19 to 21 April to request an urgent meeting of the
Security Council.

252. It is significant that, of the Western contact group of
five, only one, the United States, has persisted in negotiations with South Africa on Namibia. The other four countries have seen what many other countries, including my
own, saw much earlier, and that is that South Africa will
not willingly give up Namibia. Thus the non-aligned countries which called for this meeting of the Council are not

246. Nineteen years ago, on 27 October 1966, the General Assembly, through resolution 2145 (XI), terminated
South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia and assumed direct
25

alone in drawing the conclusion that South Africa has
merely been dreaming up one excuse after another to deny
independence to Namibia. Canada, France, the Federal
Republic of Germany and even the United Kingdom came
to the same conclusion when they quietly discontinued the
activities of the contact group.

government in Namibia in its continuing efforts to forestall an internationally acceptable agreement for the
independenceof Namibia and to preparethe ground for
a settlement that would deny SWAPO, the authentic
representativeof the people, the chance of coming to
power in a future government basedon electionssupervised by the United Nations,

253. The United States unfortunately creates the impression that South Africa is right in defying the international
community, and indeed the Security Council, in ignoring
the demand for the unconditional implementation of resolution 435 (1978). The United States stands alone in having
faith in the Pretoria group,

“The Federal Government of Nigeria reaffirms its
total commitment to the settlementof Namibia’s independenceunder Security Council resolution 435 (1978).
It therefore urgesthe Security Council to assumeits full
responsibility under the Charter of the United Nations
and expedite Namibia’s independence.”

254. Yet two years of the most intense and wide-ranging
negotiations between the American and South Africa have
not yielded any results that point in the direction of resolving the dilemma created by South Africa over Namibia. In
other words, South Africa has not made the efforts of the
United States appear worthwhile, at least in the eyes of the
Organization of African Unity, the Movement of NonAligned Countries, the United Nations, or even the close
allies of the United States. If any further proof of South
Africa’s traditional bad faith is required, the recent action
by the racist rtgime in Cabinda provides it, Rather than
negotiating faithfully with Angola, the racist rgime
continues to intimidate and destabilize Angola and its
other neighbours.

258. Nigeria, and, indeed, most membersof the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries have come to the Council
with a simple request. The Council should assumefull
responsibilityfor the unconditional implementation of its
resolution 435 (1978) without any further delay. In this
respectthe Council should reiterate in no uncertain terms
its total rejection of any linkage betweenNamibia’s independenceand any other issuesextraneous to resolution
435 (1978).

259. In its statement of 3 May [S/17151], the Council
most appropriately condemnedand rejectedany unilateral
action by South Africa leading towards an internal settlement outsideresolution 435 (1978).The Council must now
proceedto make it unmistakably clear that South Africa’s
persistencein installing a puppet rkgime in Windhoek,
which it intendsto do this month, will be consideredto be
a threat to international peace and security and a great
affront to the Council, which will call for appropriate sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations.

255. The introduction of the extraneous and irrelevant
issue of the presence of Cuban troops in Angola into the
Namibian independence debate has been vehemently
rejected and condemned. Nigeria has on several occasions
made its position very clear: Nigeria unreservedly rejects
the linkage and believes that any negotiations predicated
on it are totally unacceptable and futile. Here again my
Government is greatly disappointed that South Africa has
been able to count on the support of the United States in
imposing this condition.

260. The Council cannot continue to sparethe rod and
spoil South Africa. The recalcitrant child which South
Africa has proved to be deservesto be chastisedwith the
full weight of the Council’s authority, My Government
stands ready to assistthe Council fully in enforcing any
sanctionsthe Council may impose. In the meantime, the
Federal Government of Nigeria will continue to assist
SWAP0 to intensify its armed struggle againstthe forces
of oppression,until total liberation of its fatherland from
illegal occupation by a racist, brutal colonial rCgime.

256. The independence of Namibia cannot be held hostage to the resolution of issues that bear no relationship to
the Territory. Let those who have ideological scores to
settle choose other venues. In the meantime, let us be careful lest South Africa accomplish its diabolical plan through
a carefully conceived method of playing the ideological
delaying game.
257. Another disturbing aspect of the South African plan
was vividly revealed when South Africa announced the
establishment in Namibia of a so-called interim government. On 20 April, the Federal Government of Nigeria
issued a statement which read in part:

261. The PRESIDENT: The next speakeris the representative of Liberia, who wishesto make a statement in his
capacity as Chairman of the Group of African Statesat
the United Nations for the month of June. I invite him to
make his statement.

“It should be clear now to the international community that South Africa is resolvedto settlethe Namibian
question on its own terms,and outside the framework
of the United Nations. In this connection, it has proceededto circumvent the United Nations plan by promoting an internal settlementas part of its nefarious
attempt to imposea settlementthat leavesthe peopleof
Namibia in perpetual bondage. It is not a surprise,
therefore, that it hasdecidedto set up a puppet interim

262. Mr. KOFA (Liberia): It is with great pleasure,Sir,
that the delegation of Liberia congratulatesyou on your
assumptionof the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of June. Your competenceand personal qualities as a diplomat experiencedin international affairs, as
well as your talents asa seasonednegotiator, convince us
that the current debate of the Council under your able
guidance will produce satisfactory results.
26

263. I should like also to express our appreciation to
your predecessor, the representative of Thailand, for the
excellent manner in which he conducted the business of the
Council during the month of May.
264. I thank you and the other members of the Council
most sincerely for the honour the Council has bestowed on
my delegation by acceding to its request to participate in
this debate in its capacity as Chairman of the Group of
African States for this month. Liberia is gratified to be
afforded this opportunity at a time when the Council is
again considering the question of Namibia, with which
Liberia has a profound sense of identity dating back more
than 20 years, to when Liberia and Ethiopia, on behalf of
the African States, instituted proceedings against South
Africa in the International Court of Justice to secure the
freedom and independence of that Territory.
265. After a gap of two years, the Security Council is
once more called upon to consider the burning question of
Namibia, which in many ways has become the responsil$lity of the United Nations. Nearly 19 years have passed
since the General Assembly terminated the Mandate of
South Africa over Namibia and established the United
Nations Council for Namibia, with direct responsibility for
the administration of the Territory. Fourteen years have
passed since the International Court of Justice pronounced itself on the illegality of South Africa’s presence
in Namibia.’ Also, seven years have elapsed since a tenable
plan for the independence of the Territory, as approved in
resolution 435 (1978), was adopted by the Security Council
with the concurrence of all the parties, including South
Africa.
266. While the unrelenting efforts of the Council to promote the legitimate aspirations of the Namibian people
deserve high commendation, Africa remains gravely concerned about developments affecting the future of the Territory. Our concerns emanate from the sinister attempt by
South Africa to install a puppet government in the Territory by 17 June 1985, in violation of resolution 435 (1978).
The continued military build-up, including the recruitment
and training of Namibians for tribal armies and the use by
the racist rCgime of South Africa of mercenaries to suppress and exploit the Namibian people, are obstacles to the
peaceful settlement of the conflict. We also note with concern that the Council has always been prevented from
taking effective measures against South Africa in fulfilment of its responsibilities under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations because of the vetoes cast by one
or more of its permanent members.

shown and the invaluable support they have extended to
the cause of Namibia.
268. Forty years ago, South Africa helped draft the
Charter which commits all Member States to upholding
the principles of self-determination and equal rights for all
peoples. Yet today that same South Africa remains the
hard core of resistance to the applicability of those principles in respect of Namibia, We recall that on 27 July 1978
Mr. R. I?. Botha, Minister for Foreign Affairs of South
Africa, declared in the Council: “South-West Africa will
be independent, The people of the Territory demand it; it
is their will and their inalienable right.” [2O82nd meeting,
para. 2521. To further nourish the illusions of those who
believed him, he announced that Pretoria had “accepted
the proposal in its final and definitive form” [ibid., para.
-ml,
269. Despite these pronouncements, South Africa continues to occupy the territory and to violate the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the front-line States and to
endanger the peace, security and development of the
region of southern Africa.
270. What is at stake here is not only the dignity of the
humiliated people of Namibia, whose right to selfdetermination and independence has been denied; it is also
the dignity and ‘prestige of the Security Council, whose
primary function, to safeguard international peace and
security, is being called in question. South Africa must be
made to realize that it cannot disregard with impunity
world opinion and the dynamic developments and progress taking place in Africa, Its obstinate refusal to implement resolutions of the General Asskmbly and the Security
Council relating to the question of Namibia has been possible only because it enjoys the blessings and support of
certain Western members of the Council. The co-operation
of such countries with the racist rkgime extends to the
military, economic and nuclear domains, thus making
them accomplices in the crime of apartheid and in the
continuing occupation ‘of Namibia.
271, The problem of Namibia, which in essence is a
colonial issue, must be settled free from the influence of the
East-West confrontation. Therefore we reject all attempts
to link the independence of the Territory to any extraneous
issues that might alter its fundamental nature. Accordingly, resolution 435 (1978) must be implemented without
modifications or preconditions and must be applied with
the realism the situation demands. That is why we fully
share the view expressed by the Secretary-General in his
report submitted to the Council in 1983 when it was seized
of this question. He stated:

267. We reiterate once more Africa’s full support for and
recognition of SWAP0 as the sole authentic and legitimate
representative of the Namibian people. In the face of
South Africa’s intransigence and unprovoked aggression
against the people of Namibia, SWAP0 has shown commendable restraint and statesmanship by making concessions to Pretoria that have gone even beyond acceptable
limits. In saluting its leadership we are widening the frontiers of peace and freedom which the people of the world
cherish so dearly. We congratulate also the leaders of the
f.ont-line States on the courage and fortitude they have

“It is evident that the delay in implementing resolution 435 (1978) is having a destructive impact not only
on Namibia itself but also on the prospect of a peaceful
and prosperous future for the region as a whole. The
delay also has an adverse effect on international relations in a wider sphere, adding to the prevailing sense of
frustration and mistrust, with all that that implies for
peace and security in the region.” [S/15776, para. 16.1
27

272. It is important for us to abandon the persistent position of retreat in the face of Pretoria’s intransigence. The
administration
of Namibia does not belong to South
Africa; it is the responsibility of the United Nations, which
should carry out this monumental task to restore its own
reputation. It has become abundantly clear, in the light of
recent developments, that only through the attainment of
full independence by Namibians can progress be made in
the re-establishment of general stability in southern Africa,
and only with the emergence of a united, sovereign and
independent Namibia can the prolonged sufferings and
sacrifices of the people come to an end. This would be
possible if the Council could take actions to define the
system for the election of a constituent assembly to be held
under United Nations supervision and control and to
establish the United Nations Transition Assistance Group
force. The Secretary-General should be provided with all
the necessary powers to finalize the consideration of the
electoral process.

the Council was the final chapter of the long and grievous
human tragedy, followed by independence. Africa stands
ready to associate itself with any positive and effective
actions that might hasten this process and dispel the unfortunate impression that the whole history of the Territory
has been that of a mission betrayed. We are all witnesses to
the fact that the people of Namibia are suffering from
domination, racial discrimination and repression at the
hands of the racist authorities in South Africa. Their resentment, frustration and anger have reached the end of
human endurance, not only in Africa but throughout the
world where freedom is considered a non-negotiable goal.
In the present circumstances, we implore the Security
Council to take appropriate measures to implement its
resolution 435 (1978), approving the United Nations plan
for Namibian independence, so that a free and independent Namibia may emerge. That is our demand as representatives of peoples guided by the ideals of freedom,
justice, peace and progress. Additionally, the Council
should consider the imposition of comprehensive and
mandatory sanctions against the Pretoria rigime under
Chapter VII of the Charter as a necessary pressure to
ensure that country’s compliance with its decisions. It is
hoped that the conclusions that are reached at this series of
meetings of the Council will mark a new and decisive stage
in the already overdue process of Namibian independence.

273. We believe that it is the duty of the international
community to exert every effort to ensure the achievement
of this goal in the shortest possible time. We are confident
that the Council will consider ways and means to set in
final motion the process of independence for Namibia. In
this regard, we commend the Secretary-General for his
valuable and untiring efforts on behalf of the people of
Namibia. He continues to be a symbol of the aspirations
and hopes of the international community in general and
of the countries of the third world in particular for the high
degree of dedication and seriousness with which he discharges his responsibilities with respect to Namibia,

The meeting rose at 8.10 p.m.

NOTES
’ Leaal Conseauences for States of the Continued Presence of South
Africa in Nanzibii (Soutl; West ,4fii&) notwithstanding
Security Council
Resolution 276 .(1970).. Advisory . Oainion,
I. C.J. Retjom
1971. P. 16.
.
2 Official
Records of the General Assembly,
Thirty-jlyth
Session,
Su,oplement No. 24 (A/35/24)
GoI. 1, annex II.
’ A/40/87,
resolution
on Namibia
(AHG/Res.l25
(XX)).

274. When the struggle of the United Nations for the
reacquisition of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of the people of Namibia is recorded for posterity, it
should be said that the conclusion of the present debate in

28
