General Assembly-Fifth Session

B
The General Assembly
Authorizes the Secretary-General, in accordance with
established practice,
1. To arrange for the payment of an appropriate
remuneration for the members of the United Nations
Tribunal set up under article X above and to reimburse
their travel and subsistence expenses ;
2. To assign to the United Nations Tribunal such
staff and provide such facilities as the Secretary-General
may consider necessary to carry out the terms of the
present resolution, utilizing the existing United Nations
staff of the Libyan Mission in so far as possible.
326th plenary meeting,
15 December 1950.
389 (V).

Technical and financial assistance to
Llhya

Whereas Libya as a result of the war has suffered
extensive damages to private and public property, both
movable and immovable, as well as to its system of
communications,
Whereas the existence of these war damages and the
necessity of repairing them represents one of the major
economic and financial problems to be taken into consideration in order that an independent Libya may be
established with a sound basis for economic and social
progress, which is one of the avowed purposes of the
United Nations in accordance with paragraph 4 of
the resolution 7 adopted by the General Assembly on
17 November 1950,
The General Assembly,
Instructs the Secretary-General to study the problem
of war damages in connexion with the technical and
financial assistance which Libya may request from the
Economic and Social Council, the specialized agencies
and the Secretary-General, and to report on the subject to the sixth session of the General Assembly.
326th plenary meeting,
15 December 1950.
390 (V). Eritrea: Report of the United Nations
Commission for Eritrea; Report of the
Interim Committee of the General Assembly
on the Report of the United Nations Commission for Eritrea

A
Whereas by paragraph 3 of Annex XI to the Treaty
of Peace with Italy, 1947, the Powers concerned have
agreed to accept the recommendation of the General
Assembly on the disposal of the former Italian colonies
in Africa and to take appropriate measures for giving
effect to it,
Whereas by paragraph 2 of the aforesaid Annex XI
such disposal is to be made in the light of the wishes and
welfare of the inhabitants and the interests of peace and
security, taking into consideration the views of interested
governments,
7

See resolution 387 (V).

Now therefor1
The General Assembly, in the light of the reports 8 of
the United Nations Commission for Eritrea and of the
Interim Committee, and
Taking into consideration
(a) The wishes and. welfare of th~ inhabi!ants '?f
Eritrea, including the views of the va~10us racial, religious and political groups of the provmces of the territory and the capacity of the people for self-government,
( b) The interests of peace and security in East Africa,
( c) The rights and claims of Ethio_pia based ~n geographical, historical, ethnic or economic reasons, mcluding in particular Ethiopia's legitimate need for adequate
access to the sea,
Taking into account the importance of assuring the
continuing collaboration of the foreign communities in
the economic development of Eritrea,
Recognizing that the disposal of Eritrea should be
based on its close political and economic association with
Ethiopia, and
Desiring that this association assure to the inhabitants
of Eritrea the fullest respect and safeguards for their
institutions, traditions, religions and languages, as well
as the widest possible measure of self-government, while
at the same time respecting the Constitution, institutions,
traditions and the international status and identity of
the Empire of Ethiopia,
A. Recommends that:
I. Eritrea shall constitute an autonomous unit federated with Ethiopia under the sovereignty of the Ethiopian Crown.
2. The Eritrean Government shall possess legislative,
executive and judicial powers in the field of domestic
affairs.
3. The jurisdiction of the Federal Government shall
extend to the following matters: defence, foreign affairs,
currency and finance, foreign and interstate commerce
and external and interstate communications, including
ports. The Federal Government shall have the power to
maintain the integrity of the Federation, and shall have
the right to impose uniform taxes throughout the Federation to meet the expenses of federal functions and
services, it being understood that the assessment and the
collection of such taxes in Eritrea are to be delegated
to the Eritrean Government, and provided that Eritrea
shall bear only its just and equitable share of these expenses. The jurisdiction of the Eritrean Government
shall extend to all matters not vested in the Federal Government, including the power to maintain the internal
police, to levy taxes to meet the expenses of domestic
functions and services, and to adopt its own budget.
4. The area of the Federation shall constitute a single
area for customs purposes, and there shall be no barriers to the free movement of goods and persons within
the area. Customs duties on goods entering or leaving
the Federation which have their final destination or
origin in Eritrea shall be assigned to Eritrea.
5. An Imperial Federal Council composed of equal
numbers of Ethiopian and Eritrean representatives shall
meet at least once a year and shall advise upon the corns See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Session,
Supplements, N os. 8 and 14.

Resolutions adopted on reports of the Ad Hoe Political Committee
mon affairs of the Federation referred to in paragraph 3
above. The citizens of Eritrea shall participate in the
executive and judicial branches, and shall be represented
in the legislative branch, of the Federal Government, in
accordance with law and in the proportion that the
population of Eritrea bears to the population of the
Federation.
6. A single nationality shall prevail throughout the
Federation :
(a) All inhabitants of Eritrea, except persons possessing foreign nationality, shall be nationals of the Federation;
( b) All inhabitants born in Eritrea and having at
least one indigenous parent or grandparent shall also be
nationals of the Federation. Such persons, if in possession of a foreign nationality, shall, within six months
of the coming into force of the Eritrean Constitution, be
free to opt to renounce the nationality of the Federation
and retain such foreign nationality. In the event that
they do not so opt, they shall thereupon lose such foreign nationality;
( c) The qualifications of persons acquiring the nationality of the Federation under sub-paragraphs (a)
and ( b) above for exercising their rights as citizens of
Eritrea shall be determined by the Constitution and laws
of Eritrea;
(d) All persons possessing foreign nationality who
have resided in Eritrea for ten years prior to the date of
the adoption of the present resolution shall have the
right, without further requirements of residence, to apply
for the nationality of the Federation in accordance with
federal laws. Such persons who do not thus acquire the
nationality of the Federation shall be permitted to reside
in and engage in peaceful and lawful pursuits in Eritrea;
The rights and interests of foreign nationals resident
in Eritrea shall be guaranteed in accordance with the
provisions of paragraph 7.
7. The Federal Government, as well as Eritrea, shall
ensure to residents in Eritrea, without distinction of
nationality, race, sex, language or religion, the enjoyment of human rights and fundamental liberties including the following :
'
(a) The right to equality before the law. No discrimination shall be made against foreign enterprises in
exi~tence in Er~trea engaged in industrial, commercial,
agricultural, artisan, educational or charitable activities,
nor against banking institutions and insurance companies operating in Eritrea ;
( b) The right to life, liberty and security of person ;
( c) The right to own and dispose of property. No one
s~all be. deprived of property, including contractual
ng~ts, without d~e process of law and without payment
of Just and effective compensation ;
( d) T~e right to freedom of opinion and expression
anc_l ~he nght of adopting and practising any creed or
rehg10n;
( e) The right to education ;
(f)_ ~he right to freedom of peaceful assembly and
assoc1at10n ;
(~). The r!ght to inviolability of correspondence and
domicile, sub1ect to the requirements of the law;
(h) The right to exercise any profession subject to
the requirements of the law;

21

( i) No one shall be subject to arrest or detention
\Vithout an order of a competent authority, except in
case of flagrant and serious violation of the law in force.
No one shall be deported except in accordance with the
law;
(j) The right to a fair and equitable trial, the right
of petition to the Emperor and the right of appeal to the
Emperor for commutation of death sentences;
(k) Retroactivity of penal law shall be excluded;
The respect for the rights and freedoms of others and
the requirements of public order and the general welfare alone will justify any limitations to the above rights.
8. Paragraphs 1 to 7 inclusive of the present resolution shall constitute the Federal Act which shall be
submitted to the Emperor of Ethiopia for ratification.
9. There shall be a transition period which shall not
extend beyond 15 September 1952, during which the
Eritrean Government will be organized and the Eritrean
Constitution prepared and put into effect.
10. There shall be a United Nations Commissioner in
Eritrea appointed by the General Assembly. The Commissioner will be assisted by experts appointed by the
Secretary-General of the United Nations.
11. During the transition period, the present administering Power shall continue to conduct the affairs
of Eritrea. It shall, in consultation with the United
Nations Commissioner, prepare as rapidly as possible
the organization of an Eritrean administration, induct
Eritreans into all levels of the administration, and make
arrangements for and convoke a representative assembly
of Eritreans chosen by the people. It may, in agreement
with the Commissioner, negotiate on behalf of the Eritreans a temporary customs union with Et11iopia to be
put into effect as soon as practicable.
12. The United Nations Commissioner shall, in consultation with the administering Power, the Government of Ethiopia, and the inhabitants of Eritrea,
prepare a draft of the Eritrean Constitution to be submitted to the Eritrean Assembly and shall advise and
assist the Eritrean Assembly in its consideration of the
Constitution. The Constitution of Eritrea shall be based
on the principles of democratic government, shall include the guarantees contained in paragraph 7 of the
Federal Act, shall be consistent with the provisions of
the Federal Act and shall contain provisions adopting
and ratifying the Federal Act on behalf of the people of
Eritrea.
13. The Federal Act and the Constitution of Eritrea
shall enter into effect following ratification of the Federal Act by the Emperor of Ethiopia, and following approval by the Commissioner, adoption by the Eritrean
Assembly and ratification by the Emperor of Ethiopia
of the Eritrean Constitution.
14. Arrangements shall be made by the Government
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland as the administering Power for the transfer
of power to the appropriate authorities. The transfer of
power shall take place as soon as the Eritrean Constitution and the Federal Act enter into effect, in accordance
with the provisions of paragraph 13 above.
15. The United Nations Commissioner shall maintain
his headquarters in Eritrea until the transfer of power
has been completed, and shall make appropriate reports

General Assembly-Fifth Session
to the General Assembly of the United Nations concerning the discharge of his functions. The Commissioner may consult with the Interim Committee of the
General Assembly with respect to the discharge of his
functions in the light of developments and within the
terms of the present resolution. \t\ihen the transfer of
authority has been completed, he shall so report to the
General Assembly and submit to it the text of the Eritrean Constitution;
B. Authorizes the Secretarv-Ceneral, in accordance
with established practice:
1. To arrange for the payment of an appropriate remuneration to the United Nations Commissioner;
2. To provide the United Nations Commissioner with
such experts, staff and facilities as the Secretary-General
may consider necessary to carry out the terms of the
present resolution.
316th plenary meeting,
2 December 1950.

B
The General Assembly, to assist it in making the
appointment of the United Nations Commissioner in
Eritrea,
Decides that a Committee composed of the President
of the General Assembly, two of the Vice-Presidents
(Australia and Venezuela), the Chairman of the Fourth
Committee and the Chairman of the /}d Hoe Political
Committee shall nominate a candidate or, if no agreement can be reached, two or three candidates, for the
post of United Nations Commissioner in Eritrea.
316th plenary nieetinq.
2 December 1950.

*

*

*

The Committee established by the General Assembly
under !he above rc.w/uiiun to J101:1inute a rnndidate or
candidates for the office of United Nations Commissioner
in Eritrea agrcrd to nominate tlzr following candidates:
Mr. Victor Hoo ( Assistant Secretary-General);
Justice Aung Khine (Burma);
Mr. Eduardo Anze Matienzo (Bolivia).
The General Assembly, at its 325th plenary meeting on
14 December 1950, elected by secret ballot Mr. Eduardo
Anze Matienzo to the of!ice of United Nations Commissioner in Eritrea.

391 (V). The appropriate adjustment of the
frontiers between Egypt and the former
Italian colony of Libya, with particular reference to paragraphs 2 and 3 of Annex XI of
the Treaty of Peace with Italy
The General Assembly,
. Decides to defer to its sixth session consideration of
item 59 of the agenda of its fifth session entitled "The
appropriate adjust~ent of the frontiers between Egypt
and the former Italian colony of Libya, with particular
reference to paragraphs 2 and 3 of Annex XI of the
Treaty of Peace with Italy".
325th plenary meeting,
14 December 1950.

392 (V). Procedure to be adopted to delimit the
houndaries of the former Italian colonies in
so far as they are not already fixed by international agreement
The General Assembly,
l II accordance with its resolution 289 C (IV) adopted
on 21 November 1949, in which the General Assembly
callell upon the Interim Committee "to study the procedure to be adopted to delimit the boundaries of the
former Italian colonies in so far as they are not already
fixed by international agreement, and report with conclusions to the fifth regular session of the General Assembly",
Having ta!?en note of the memorandum,° prepared at
the Interim Committee's request by the Secretariat,
giving information relating to the boundaries of the
former Italian colonies not already fixed by international agreement, and having taken into consideration
the views of the interested governments,
1. Recommends:
(a) With respect to Libya,
That the portion of its boundary with French territory not already delimited by international agreement
he delimited, upon Libya's achieyement of independence, by negotiation between the Libyan and French
Governments, assisted on the request of either party
hy a third person to be select<:'d by them or, failing
their agreement, to be appointed by the SecretaryCenl'ral;
( !, ) With respect to the Trust Territory of Somali/and,
That the portion of its boundaries with British
Somaliland, as well as with Ethiopia, not already delimitvd lJv international agreement be delimited by
bilateral 11egotiations between the United Kingdom
Covernrnrnt ancl the Administering Authority, in respect of the boundaries with British Somaliland, and
between the Ethiopian Government and the Administering Authority in respect of the boundaries with
Ethiopia;
In orclcr to resolve any anrl all differences arising in
the coursc> of such negotiations, the respective parties
to each bilateral negotiation agree, on the request of
either party, to a procedure of mediation by a United
Nat ions Mediator to be appointed by the SecretaryCe11eral and, further, in the event of the inability of the
parties to accept the recommendations of the Mediator,
to a procedure of arbitration;
2. Recommends, further, that, with respect to any
other boundaries not delimited by international agreement, the parties concerned seek to reach agreement by
negotiation or b_v arbitration.
326th plenary meeting,
15 December 1950.
393 (V). Assistance to Palestine refugees
The Cen!'ral Assembly.
F::ccal!inq its resolution 302 (IV) of 8 December 1949,
f-!ai,ing examined the report'° of the United Nations
Relief ar;d W arks Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
9 See doct1rnents A/AC.18/103, NAC.18/103/Corr. 1 and
Al AC.18/103/Corr. 2.
1o See documents A/1451 and A/1451/Corr.1.
