United Nations

S/PV.4775

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-eighth year

4775

th meeting
Wednesday, 18 June 2003, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lavrov . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Russian Federation)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Tafrov
Mr. Tidjani
Mr. Muñoz
Mr. Zhang Yishan
Mr. De La Sablière
Mr. Von Ungern-Sternberg
Mr. Traoré
Mr. Pujalte
Mr. Khalid
Ms. Menéndez
Mr. Mekdad
Mr. Thomson
Mr. Negroponte

Agenda
Security Council mission
Report of the Security Council mission to Central Africa from 7 to
16 June 2003

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

03-39946 (E)

*0339946*

S/PV.4775

The meeting was called to order at 10.45 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council mission
Report of the Security Council mission to
Central Africa from 7 to 16 June 2003
The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and the United Republic of Tanzania,
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mrs. Booto
(Democratic
Republic
of
the
Congo),
Mr. Nyamulinda (Rwanda) and Mrs. Mulamula
(United Republic of Tanzania) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Jean-Marc de La Sablière, head of the
Security Council mission to Central Africa.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them photo
copies of the report of the Security Council mission to
Central Africa. That report will be issued as a
document of the Security Council under the symbol
S/2003/653 on Friday, 20 June 2003.

2

I give the floor to Mr. Jean-Marc de La Sablière,
head of the Security Council mission to Central Africa.
Mr. De La Sablière (spoke in French): The
members of the Security Council mission to Central
Africa have asked me to report to the Council on the
mission. As the President has just said, we have
prepared a report, which is currently being finalized
and which is now before the Council. The report
includes our analysis of the situation and the mission’s
recommendations. I would like to make a brief oral
report about our mission today. Of course, I suggest
that each member refer to the written report we have
prepared.
The Security Council mission that visited Central
Africa from 7 to 16 June 2003 set for itself the main
objective of supporting the peace processes in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi.
A second transitional President has just taken
office in Bujumbura. It is to be hoped that an allinclusive agreement should soon take the form of a
Government of national reconciliation in Kinshasa.
Nevertheless, we must note the fact that active
hostilities continue in both countries. Both countries
are at a critical juncture in their history.
Along with the Heads of State of the countries
most directly involved in the peace processes —
namely, South Africa, Angola, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Burundi, Rwanda, Tanzania
and Uganda — the Council’s mission contacted the
heads of rebel movements and conveyed very strong
messages to them.
The mission visited Bunia a scant two weeks after
the humanitarian crisis there led the Security Council
to adopt resolution 1484 (2003).
Given their countries’ contributions to the peace
process, the members of the Council mission took
pains to listen to the views of Heads of State in
Pretoria, Luanda and Dar es Salaam with regard to the
two situations at the heart of the mission.
In Kinshasa the mission asked President Kabila
and other Congolese officials to speed up the
establishment of a transitional Government. In that
regard, we took note of the commitment expressed to
us by the parties to resolve by the end of the month the
issue of appointing political and military transitional
staff. We reminded everyone in the strongest possible
terms, and in particular the Rassemblement congolais

S/PV.4775

pour la démocratie-Goma (RCD-Goma), that the
Council demanded the immediate cessation of
hostilities.
A cycle of violence has ravaged Ituri for several
months. Attacks in the Kivus have recently become
more intense. The main victims are not combatants,
who are often well armed, but rather the civilian
population. We do not want the next victim to be the
peace process itself if the political programme of the
transition does not materialize.
That is why all the parties must ensure that the
armed groups receive no further foreign assistance,
which enables them to perpetuate the conflict. We
spoke to the Presidents of Rwanda and Uganda — who
assured us of their support for the Multinational Force
deployed in Bunia — of the great importance of what
they can contribute to the stabilization of the Great
Lakes region by exerting a positive influence on the
armed groups.
The Security Council mission also provided an
opportunity to remind all the actors that there can be no
impunity for the human rights violations that,
unfortunately, almost always accompanied the fighting.
The pillaging of natural resources, analysed by the
Panel of Experts headed by Ambassador Kassem, has
become one of the causes of the continuing hostilities
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and can no longer be tolerated.
In Bunia, the Council members were able to
witness the remarkable cooperation between the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and the Interim
Emergency Multinational Force. Here, I must
commend the dedication and courage of the Uruguayan
contingent. The deployment of the Multinational Force,
which is being carried out — despite particularly
difficult logistical conditions — somewhat more
rapidly than anticipated, has already begun to create
favourable conditions for a return of security. Thus, the
conditions will be right, when the Multinational Force
departs on 1 September, for a more effective United
Nations presence in Ituri.
It is very likely that the camps in Bunia housing
people who were internally displaced by the recent
violence will grow as the situation normalizes. The
humanitarian needs that the international community
will have to address will be considerable.

Bunia has been deeply traumatized by the
massacres of which its inhabitants were victims. A
great many of the militia members we saw along the
side of the road were young children; the problem of
child soldiers is well known to the Security Council.
However, the dignity and determination of the
representatives of the interim institutions of Ituri and
the women’s associations that we met in Bunia attest to
the fact that peace and reconciliation are deeply desired
by the population — an essential condition in the
search for a political solution.
In Ituri, as in the rest of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, we told everyone that a settlement of the
conflict must be political. MONUC, together with the
authorities of the transition in Kinshasa, must work to
that end. It is from that perspective that Council
members should examine the recommendations
submitted by the Secretary-General in his recent
special report on MONUC (S/2003/566). It will be a
matter of defining how MONUC’s role in the peace
process of the Democratic Republic of the Congo can
be most effective, perhaps considering the possibility
of giving it a more robust mandate, taking into account
the departure of the Multinational Force from Bunia on
1 September.
In Bujumbura, the presidential transition that
occurred on 30 April, in conformity with the provisions
of the Arusha Agreement, has made the process
irreversible. In the absence of a complete ceasefire,
however, peace in the country remains fragile.
The Security Council mission encouraged the
Burundians to take the final steps that, however
difficult they may be after 10 years of civil war, will
enable them to seal their reconciliation. We invited
those engaged in the transition to continue to
demonstrate their determination by accelerating
reforms, particularly those in the security forces and in
the justice system. We urged the belligerents to put an
end to the hostilities. In particular, we let it be known
in the clearest way possible to the rebel movements
that did not sign the Arusha Agreement that the
ceasefire commitments must be respected. We told
them that, as Burundians, they must prove their sense
of responsibility by joining the peace process, and we
encouraged the Government, from that perspective, to
provide room for them within the army and in the
transitional institutions. We also emphasized to
everyone that the grave human rights violations that the
Burundians had endured could not remain unpunished.

3

S/PV.4775

The Council members were able to witness the
work of the mission that the African Union deployed to
Burundi. That peace operation — the first sent by the
African Union — deserves the international
community’s support. In addition, the Council mission
noted the need to provide adequate economic and
budgetary assistance to the transitional Government.
This Security Council mission, which took place
at a particularly delicate time in the two peace
processes that are under way in Central Africa, enabled
us to renew a direct dialogue with the actors. Mindful
that our visit in the region would not fail to create
strong expectations, we took care to remind our various
interlocutors that it was, above all, on them that peace
and reconciliation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in Burundi depended. The States of the
region also have an important part to play in promoting
a return to peace and security. In that regard, everyone
recognized the need to restore confidence on both sides
of the borders. It seems to me that, while remaining
mindful of the possibility of holding an international
conference on peace in the Great Lakes region, we
could also consider the idea of a declaration of goodneighbourliness, which was met with interest on the
part of the heads of State to whom we presented it.
In conclusion, on behalf of all the members of the
mission, I should like to thank everyone who
participated in its organization. That involved
considerable work and enabled the mission to work
under excellent conditions. Since I had the honour to
lead the mission, I should like to say, on a more
personal level, how pleased I was with the work that
we did together.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ambassador De La Sablière for his statement.
On behalf of the Council, I should like to express
gratitude and appreciation to all the members of the
Security Council mission, which was very ably led by
Ambassador De La Sablière, for the manner in which
they discharged their important responsibility on the
Council’s behalf.
The next speaker is the representative of Rwanda.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Nyamulinda (Rwanda) (spoke in French):
On behalf of my delegation and my Government, Sir, I
should like to commend your Government, yourself

4

and your delegation for the competence with which you
are guiding the work of the Council this month. At the
same time, I should like to pay a tribute to your
predecessor, Ambassador Munir Akram of Pakistan,
and his delegation for the energy they brought to the
work of the Council in May.
My delegation also wishes to thank you, Sir, for
having organized this important meeting to consider
the report of the Security Council mission to Central
Africa. It is taking place at a very difficult moment for
the Great Lakes region of Africa, and as the region of
Ituri in particular is in thrall to the struggles of rival
armed groups, sowing death, which we all deplore, and
misery among the civilian population of the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
My delegation also wishes to take this
opportunity, on behalf of the Government of Rwanda,
to commend Ambassador Jean-Marc de La Sablière and
the mission of Security Council ambassadors that he
led to Central Africa for the effectiveness with which
they performed an excellent job in that region. We hope
that the recommendations of the Council, with all of its
acknowledged experience and vision, will in future be
a source of inspiration in the search for a solution to
unresolved issues from the Lusaka and Pretoria
Agreements, including the complete disarmament of
the former Rwandan Army forces (ex-FAR) and
Interahamwe militias, which continue to pose a real
threat to the security of Rwanda.
Nevertheless, my delegation would draw the
Council’s attention to the following observations on
developments in the political and military situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in general and
in Ituri in particular.
In recent days, my Government has been
subjected to various persistent accusations from certain
elements of the press and from so-called civil society,
represented by the Bishop of Butembo. These sources
have described the presence of the Rwanda Defence
Forces in the regions of Ituri and Kanyabayonga. The
same sources also describe the dispatch of Rwandan
army helicopters to support the forces of the Union des
patriotes congolais and the Rassemblement congolais
pour la démocratie (RCD)-Goma. These allegations are
false, bereft of all truth, totally baseless and the utter
fabrication of those who, under the cover of civil
society, wish to sully the image of Rwanda and to serve
the interests of divisive groups defending ideological

S/PV.4775

causes based on ethnic hatred and the exclusion of
Rwandophone Congolese or of Congolese who bear
some physical resemblance to the Rwandese. The
Government of Rwanda is involved neither from anear
nor from afar with the events taking place in Ituri, as
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and its patrons would have us believe. The
question of Ituri is an internal political issue of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Thus, answers to
the question must be sought primarily within that
country. The Government of Rwanda has neither sent
soldier to the Democratic Republic of the Congo since
the total withdrawal of the Rwandan Defence Forces of
5 October 2002, nor offers military support to any rebel
group in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
When the Government of Rwanda decided in late
1996 to combat the regime of the late Field Marshal
Mobutu and subsequently to send troops into the
territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
August 1998, its decision was in fact a solution of last
resort, following its repeated disappointment at seeing
the international community fail to answer its many
appeals to respond to my country’s security concerns.
The presence of the Rwandan army in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo up until November
2002 certainly managed to contain the attacks of the
ex-FAR and Interahamwe militias of sorry memory and
to stop them from crossing the borders. That presence
was beneficial to the populations of the border
provinces of Gisenyi, Kibuye and Cyangugu, who were
living under the threat of those forces, whose avowed
objective was to recapture power in Kigali and
complete the 1994 genocide. In such circumstances, the
Government of Rwanda was committed to honouring
its primary legitimate responsibility of protecting its
population and territory and to avert the threat of
renewed genocide.
At the request of the international community,
and following the signing of the Pretoria Agreement on
30 July 2002 between the Governments of Rwanda and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Government of Rwanda withdrew all its forces. I
would recall that the withdrawal operations began on
17 September and were complete by 5 October 2002.
This total withdrawal was recognized in a statement
issued by the Third Party Verification Mechanism, as
contained in document S/2002/1206 of 28 October
2002.

Ever since the signing of the Pretoria Agreement
and the ensuing withdrawal of the Rwanda Defence
Forces, the Government of Rwanda has tirelessly
extended its hand to the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in order to seek solutions that
would be satisfactory to our countries and in the
interests of all.
However, we must note that the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has made no
gesture on the ground towards re-establishing a climate
of trust between our respective Governments. Indeed,
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has maintained its support for the former
Rwandan Army forces and the Interahamwe militias. In
order to establish an alibi, that Government and its
patrons quickly spread the rumour that the Rwanda
Defence Forces had never fully withdrawn, thus
justifying their attitude and the reoccupation of the
territories of South and North Kivu, with the support of
the Interahamwe, the ex-FAR, the Mai Mai rebels and
Mbusa Nyamwisi’s RCD-Kisangani/Mouvement de
libération.
Given the prevailing political situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, my delegation
would ask the Council to pressure the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to behave like
responsible politicians who honour their commitments
towards their neighbours and the international
community; to persuade the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to respect the
Lusaka and Pretoria Agreements in all their provisions,
in particular those relative to Rwanda’s security
concerns; to pressure the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to stop supplying
weapons and ammunition to the ex-FAR and the
Interahamwe militias; to remind the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo that it must comply
with the various resolutions of the Security Council
calling on it to cut off all moral, political, logistic and
financial support for the ex-FAR and the Interahamwe
militias and to sunder its solidarity with the
genocidaires; to persuade the Government not to shirk
its governmental responsibilities and not to seek
scapegoats to explain its inability to unite the
Congolese and its political and military failures vis-àvis the RCD-Goma; sufficiently to pressure the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to accept the establishment of a truly inclusive
Government and a power-sharing arrangement in

5

S/PV.4775

accordance with the Sun City Agreement; to ask the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to pull its forces back from the eastern part of the
country to the positions they held before the
withdrawal of the foreign armies, in compliance with
the various agreements; and to strengthen the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and provide it with a clear
mandate so as to prepare it to step in once the Interim
Emergency Multinational Force has completed its task.
With respect to political developments in
Burundi, my Government commends the initiative of
the African Union, which decided to send an African
force to assist in restoring trust among the belligerents
and to help Burundi implement the disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation and reintegration (DDRR)
process. However, the Government of Rwanda
continues to be concerned at the persistent refusal of
the leaders of certain rebel factions of the Front pour la
défense de la démocratie (FDD) and the Parti pour la
libération du peuple hutu/Forces nationales pour la
libération (PALIPEHUTU/FNL) to join the Arusha
peace process. We earnestly ask the Security Council to
put the necessary pressure on those groups to bring
them to see reason and to respect the agreements and
protocols signed in Arusha.
To conclude, my delegation, on behalf of my
Government, would like to reiterate its keen gratitude
to the mission of the Security Council and the Council
as a whole for its resolve to find solutions to the
complex questions that our region faces.
We hope that the Council, in its wisdom,
combined with the resolve of the international
community and the countries concerned by the crisis in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, will arrive at a
response to the various parties’ concerns, taking into
account the previously signed agreements of Lusaka,
Pretoria and Sun City.
The Government of Rwanda remains committed
to supporting the multinational force charged with
restoring peace in Ituri. To that end, the Government of
Rwanda will spare no effort in associating itself with
all countries of the region that desire peace, and with
the international community, in order to find peaceful
solutions for the crises haunting Central Africa, in
particular the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Burundi.

6

The President (spoke in Russian): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I invite her to take
a seat at the Council table and to make her statement.
Mrs. Booto (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
(spoke in French): Allow me to congratulate you, Sir,
on behalf of my delegation, for the effective way in
which you are guiding the work of the Council for the
current month, and we thank you for convening today’s
meeting. I would particularly like to thank SecretaryGeneral Kofi Annan, who, since the outbreak of the
war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, has been
personally committed to the search for ways to restore
peace in the country. My congratulations and thanks
also go to the members of the Security Council, who,
under the enlightened leadership of Mr. Jean-Marc de
La Sablière, the Permanent Representative of France,
visited Central Africa from 7 to 16 June 2003 to carry
out the mission that is the topic of the report just now
presented by the Ambassador of France. I am
convinced that the correct implementation of the
report’s recommendations will clear the way to peace
and enable the Congolese parties to overcome the
remaining obstacles in order fully to implement the allinclusive agreement on the transition in the country,
signed in Pretoria in December 2002.
Since the signing on 2 April 2003 in Sun City of
the final document on the inter-Congolese political
negotiations, my country has spared no effort to
implement its share of obligations. It will be recalled
that on 7 April 2003, the head of State, General Major
Joseph Kabila promulgated the Constitution of the
transition and took office as President of the Republic
for the period of transition. After taking office, he
promulgated a decree granting amnesty for all acts of
war and offences of political expression and opinion.
He also suspended the court of military orders.
We must also note the unwavering resolve of my
Government to accelerate the movement towards
transition through the recent appointment of the first
President of the Supreme Court and the State
Prosecutor of the Republic, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the global and all-inclusive
agreement.
Finally, I would like to remind the Council that to
make the establishment of the transitional institutions
irreversible, since 14 April 2003 the President of the
Republic has convened in Kinshasa the first meeting of

S/PV.4775

the Commission national de suivi tasked with preparing
the establishment of the new institutions.
However, the dynamic of war, which has become
permanently installed in the east, hinders the search for
a political solution. In fact, the obstacles to the peace
process continue. I think the Council was informed of
that during its mission’s visit to my country. It does not
seem to us to be difficult to identify the authors behind
those obstacles. The observable lack of progress on the
problem of the structure of, and the distribution of
appointments in, the integrated Congolese army are the
result of the intransigence of certain elements, in
particular the Rassemblement congolais pour la
démocratie-Goma (RCD-Goma), whose endless
demands risk jeopardizing the entire process. Once it
had obtained the Ministry of Defence, RCD-Goma then
wanted control of the army.
The mission of the Council will undoubtedly
recall that during its passage through Kinshasa, RCDGoma forces decided to launch a large-scale offensive
in the east, taking control of the town of
Kanyabayonga. That behaviour is not only a violation
of the all-inclusive agreement; it also constitutes a
brake on the establishment of the transitional
institutions. We can only deplore the fact that the
resumption of hostilities initiated by RCD-Goma has
jeopardized the chances for success of the DDRR
operations led by the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC). It is important for the Security Council to
maintain pressure on the leaders of RCD-Goma and
their supporters, in particular the Rwandese
Government, so that the RCD-Goma will honour their
commitments in accordance with the global and allinclusive agreement and so that the Rwandan
Government will desist from exercising its negative
influence on the RCD-Goma and all other Congolese
parties. No one is unaware of the negative role that
Rwanda plays in that part of my country. No lie uttered
by the representative of Rwanda could conceal the
truth.

jeopardizing progress at the national level. The
political process undertaken by the Ituri pacification
commission has stagnated as a result of the renewed
hostilities between the Hema and the Lendu in the city
of Bunia. The explosive situation prevailing there led
the Security Council to authorize the deployment until
1 September 2003 of an Interim Emergency
Multinational Force. Resolution 1484 (2003), which
gave that force a mandate, underlines the strictly
limited and temporary mandate of the Force, while the
situation in Bunia requires a successful long-term
solution.
That is why my Government, echoing the request
made to the Council by the inhabitants of Bunia and by
the Democratic Republic of the Congo as a whole, calls
for the invocation of Chapter VII in order to change
and to extend MONUC’s mandate in order to restore
the peace and then maintain the peace.
In order to put an end to the cycle of violence in
Ituri, in the Kivus and in the rest of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, my Government would like to
recall the need for a mechanism to address the issue of
impunity, in keeping with paragraph 7 of Security
Council resolution 1468 (2003), adopted on 20 March
2003.
The Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo fully supports the recommendations in the
report of the Security Council mission and hopes that
the Council will take a decision so that it is binding in
its application.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now call on
the representative of the United Republic of Tanzania.
Mrs. Mulamula (United Republic of Tanzania):
Mr. President, Tanzania would like to join others in
welcoming you and the members of the Council back
from the important mission you undertook in the Great
Lakes region, which included a visit to Dar es Salaam,
Tanzania. I hope you had the time to enjoy the bright
sunshine in Dar es Salaam, which contrasts with the
wet weather in New York.

We hope that the interest generated by the visit of
the Security Council mission will be maintained so that
the trouble-makers can be prevented from derailing the
process of the country’s normalization, for the people
of the Congo aspire to peace and reconciliation.

We also want to thank His Excellency Mr. JeanMarc de La Sablière, head of the Security Council
mission team, for his leadership role and the oral
briefing on the team’s findings.

I would like to stress that the situation in the east
of the country is a cause of ongoing concern and risks

As they say, “seeing is believing”. There is no
doubt that the visit offered you an opportunity to assess
the situation on the ground and to contemplate decisive

7

S/PV.4775

measures to help the fledgling and still fragile peace
process, both in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and in Burundi. We welcome the fact that the mission
had an opportunity to meet all the key players,
including the heads of State and the parties to the
raging conflict in the region. We see a ray of hope on
the horizon, given the commitment shown by the
Council and, of course, the regional leaders, to see that
impunity is not tolerated and that peace prevails in that
war-torn region.
We find comfort in the fact that the Council,
when determined to act, can act swiftly. We hope the
momentum created in deploying an interim
multinational force in Bunia will be followed by the
deployment of a robust peacekeeping force. The
position of the Government of the United Republic of
Tanzania was stated clearly by my President, His
Excellency Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, when he met the
mission. Needless to say, for the record, while the
countries in the region recognize their responsibility
and that of the Congolese and Burundi people in
bringing lasting peace to the region, their efforts alone,
however determined, will not be sufficient to stay the
course of peace. This is why our leaders expect their
efforts to be complemented by decisive actions and the
support of the international community in the true
spirit of partnership for peace.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2003/566)
offers a comprehensive roadmap, so to speak, towards
peace-building in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, particularly by reinforcing the presence of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and its
mandate. There is not a single doubt, at least from all
the statements made before the Council, that there
cannot be a military solution to ending the violence and
lawlessness in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and elsewhere.
It is apparent from the Secretary-General's report
that the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
resettlement and reintegration (DDRRR) programme is
crucial for the peace process to remain on course. The
challenge to the Council, therefore, is not to let the

8

momentum ebb, but to move expeditiously to empower
the MONUC force to ensure viable and sustained peace
and security in the volatile areas, as recommended by
the Secretary-General.
The prospects for lasting peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will largely depend on the
degree to which this Council can stand up to the
process. Any delay can only be detrimental to the
peace process to which all parties have committed
themselves. It is our hope that the political groundwork
that has been laid will be sustained, both in Burundi
and in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We urge
the Council to walk an extra mile along the path to
peace and stability in the Great Lakes region.
In conclusion, let me reiterate what President
Mkapa asked of the Council as the way forward. His
first suggestion was to look into the possibility of a
non-aggression pact or similar mechanism that could
promote mutual trust and dispel suspicion. Secondly,
the spirit of the New Partnership for Africa's
Development (NEPAD) should be advocated to
encourage and support good governance and
accountability in order to prevent some of the problems
we face in the Great Lakes region from recurring.
Thirdly, there is a need to promote, support and
increase contacts among nations. Such contacts may
include professional organizations and civil society,
both of which could foster greater tolerance among
Governments. Fourthly, better endowed countries could
explore the possibility of helping to avoid wars by
halting the proliferation of arms into potentially
explosive parts of the world.
By addressing these four suggestions, we believe
that the Council would be taking decisive action in
addressing the root causes of the problems facing the
region.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
further speakers on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.
