IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

present--to report as promptly as possible on measures taken
to bring the offender to justice and eventually to communicate, in accordance with its laws, the final outcome of the
proceedings against the offender, and on measures adopted
with a view to preventing a repetition of such violations;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate to all
States, upon receipt, the reports received by him pursuant
to paragraph 7 above, unless the reporting State requests
otherwise;
9. Also requests the Secretary-General to invite States
to inform him of their views with respect to any measures
needed to enhance the protection, security and safety of
diplomatic and consular missions and representatives;
10. Further requests the Secretary-General, when a serious violation has been reported pursuant to paragraph 7
(a) above, to draw the attention, when appropriate, of the
States directly concerned to the reporting procedures set
forth in paragraph 7 above;
l l. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session a report on the
state of ratification of, and accessions to, the instruments
referred to in paragraph 5 above, as well as the reports
received and views expressed pursuant to paragraphs 7
and 9 above, and invites him to submit any views he may
wish to express on these matters;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled ''Consideration of
effective measures to enhance the protection, security and
safety of diplomatic and consular missions and representatives: report of the Secretary-General".
107th plenary meeting
16 December /982

37/109.

Drafting of an international convention against
the recruitment, use, financing and training of
mercenaries

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the need for strict observance of the
principles of sovereign equality, political independence, territorial integrity of States and self-determination of peoples,
as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and developed in the Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, 28
Recalling its resolutions, particularly resolutions 2395
(XXIII) of 29 November 1968, 2465 (XXIII) of 20 December 1968, 2548 (XXIV) of 11 December 1969, 2708 (XXV)
of 14 December 1970, 3103 (XXVIII) of 12 December 1973
and its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, as well
as Security Council resolutions 405 ( 1977) of 14 April 1977,
419 (1977) of 24 November 1977, 496 (1981) of 15 December 1981 and 507 (1982) of28 May 1982, in which the
United Nations denounced the practice of using mercenaries, in particular against developing countries and national
liberation movements,
Recalling in particular its resolution 36/76 of 4 December
1981, by which it renewed the mandate of the Ad H oc
Committee on the Drafting of an International Convention
against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of
Mercenaries, composed of thirty-five Member States,
Having considered the report of the Ad Hoe Committee
on its second session, 29
21
29

Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

Official Records of the General Assembl_v, Thirty-seventh Session,
Supplement No. 43 (N37/43 and Corr. I).

269

Recognizing that the activities of mercenaries are contrary
to fundamental principles of international law, such as noninterference in the internal affairs of States, territorial integrity and independence, and seriously impede the process
of self-determination of peoples struggling against colonialism, racism and apartheid and all forms of foreign
domination,
Bearing in mind the pernicious impact that the activities
of mercenaries have on international peace and security,
Considering that the progressive development and codification of the rules of international law on mercenaries
would contribute immensely to the implementation of the
purposes and principles of the Charter,
Taking account of the fact that, although the Ad Hoe
Committee has made substantial progress, it has not yet
fulfilled its mandate,
Reaffirming the need for the elaboration, at the earliest
possible date, of an international convention against the
recruitment, use, financing and training of mercenaries,
l. Takes note of the report of the Ad Hoe Committee
on the Drafting of an International Convention against the
Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries
and the progress made, especially during its second session;
2. Decides that the Ad Hoe Committee shall continue
its work, with the goal of drafting, at the earliest possible
date, an international convention against the recruitment,
use, financing and training of mercenaries;
3. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee, in the fulfilment
of its mandate, to consider the suggestions and proposals
of Member States, bearing in mind the views and comments
submitted to the Secretary-General and those expressed at
the thirty-seventh session of the General Assembly during
the debate in the Sixth Committee devoted to the consideration of the report of the Ad Hoe Committee; 30
4. Requests the Secretary-General to make available to
the Ad Hoe Committee at its third session any up-to-date
and relevant documentation on the subject;
5. Also requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Ad Hoe Committee with any assistance and facilities it may
require for the performance of its work;
6. Decides that the Ad Hoe Committee shall hold its
third session for four weeks, from 2 to 26 August 1983;
7. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to submit its report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled "Report of the Ad
Hoe Committee on the Drafting of an International Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries' ' .
107th plenary meeting
16 December 1982

37/110.

Review of the multilateral treaty-making
process

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that multilateral treaties are an important
means of ensuring co-operation among States and an important primary source of international law,
Conscious, therefore, that the process of elaboration of
multilateral treaties, directed towards the progressive development of international law and its codification, forms
an important part of the work of the United Nations and of
the international community in general,
"'Ibid., Thirty-seventh Se,·.,·ion, Sixth Committee, 9th-15th, 53rd and
56th meetings.

270

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

Aware of the heavy burden which active involvement in
the process of multilateral treaty-making places upon
Governments,
Convinced that the most rational use should be made of
the finite resources available for the elaboration of multilateral treaties,
Aware that the Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee has been reviewing certain aspects of multilateral
treaty-making,
Taking note of the reports of the Secretary-General submitted to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth, 31 thirtysixth,32 and thirty-seventh 33 sessions, including the replies
and observations made by Governments and international
organizations on the review of the multilateral treaty-making
process,
Having considered the report of the Working Group on
the Review of the Multilateral Treaty-making Process, 14
established pursuant to General Assembly resolution 36/ 112
of 10 December I 981, and noting that the Working Group
will require more time to fulfil its mandate as provided in
paragraph 2 of that resolution,
Taking into account the statements made at the current
session in the debate in the Sixth Committee, 15
1. Decides to reconvene the Working Group at its
thirty-eighth session with the aim of completing the examination of the matters referred to in paragraph 2 of resolution 36/112;
2. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to prepare and publish as soon as possible new editions of the
Handbook of Final Clauses 36 and the Summary of the Practice of the Secretary-General as Depositary of Multilateral
Agreements, 37 taking into account relevant new developments and practices in that respect;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled "Review of the multilateral treaty-making process".
107th plenary meeting
16 December 1982

37/111.

Report of the International Law Commission

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its thirty-fourth session, 38
Emphasizing the need for the progressive development
of international law and its codification in order to make it
a more effective means of implementing the purposes and
principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations and
in the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations 39 and
to give increasing importance to its role in relations among
States,

31

A/35/312 and Corr. I and Add. I and 2 and Add.2/Corr. I.
A/36/553 and Add. I and 2.
33
A/37/444 and Add. I.
34
A/C.6/37/L.29.
35
See Official Record.5 of the General Assemblv, Thirtv-sevellfh Se.uion,
Sixth Committee, 65th and 66th meetings.
·
36
ST/LEG/6.
37
ST/LEG/7.
38
Official Records of the General Assembl\'. Thirtv-seventh Session.
Supplement No. JO (A/37/10).
·
·
39
Resolution 2625 (XXV). annex.
32

Recognizing the importance of referring legal and drafting
questions to the Sixth Committee, including topics which
might be submitted to the International Law Commission,
and of enabling the Sixth Committee and the Commission
further to enhance their contributions to the progressive
development of international law and its codification,
Welcoming the establishment of general objectives and
priorities which will guide the study by the International
Law Commission of the topics on its programme of work
within the term of office of Commission members elected
at the thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly,
Recalling the need to keep under review those topics of
international law which, given their new or renewed interest
for the contemporary international community, may be suitable for progressive development and codification of international law and therefore may be included in the future
programme of work of the International Law Commission,
1. Takes note of the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its thirty-fourth session;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the International Law
Commission for the work accomplished at that session
and, in particular, for having completed the final reading
of the draft articles on the law of treaties between States
and international organizations or between international
organizations;
3. Recommends that, taking into account the comments
of Governments, whether in writing or expressed orally in
debates in the General Assembly, the International Law
Commission should continue its work aimed at the preparation of drafts on all the topics in its current programme;
4. Expresses its satisfaction with the conclusions and
intention of the International Law Commission concerning
its procedures and methods of work, as reflected in paragraphs 266 and 270 of its report;
5. Reaffirms its previous decisions concerning the increased role of the Codification Division of the Office of
Legal Affairs of the Secretariat and approves the conclusions
reached by the International Law Commission4<> concerning
summary records of its meetings and the application to its
documentation of the thirty-two-page limit, as well as the
request made by the Commission in paragraph 272 of its
report;
6. Appeals to Governments and, as appropriate, to international organizations to respond as fully and expeditiously as possible to the requests of the International Law
Commission for comments and observations on its draft
articles and questionnaires and for materials on topics on
its programme of work;
7. Reaffirms its wish that the International Law Commission will continue to enhance its co-operation with intergovernmental legal bodies whose work is of interest for
the progressive development of international law and its
codification;
8. Expresses the wish that seminars will continue to be
held in conjunction with sessions of the International Law
Commission and that an increasing number of participants
from developing countries will be given the opportunity to
attend those seminars;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the International Law Commission, for its attention, the records
of the debate on the report of the Commission at the thirtyseventh session of the General Assembly and to prepare and
distribute a topical summary of the debate.
107th plenary meeting
16 December 1982
411
Official Records of the General Assemblv, Thirtv-seventh Session.
Supplement No. II! iA/37110). paras. 267-269 ·and 27f
