U NI TEDN ArID N S

SECURITY
C OUN Cl L

Distr.
GENERAL
S/37 l 2
30 October 1956
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LE'1:TER DATED 30 OCTOm:R 1956 FROM TEE REPRESENTATIVE OF EGYPT ADDRESSED
TO TEE PRESIDENT OF Tflli} SEOURITY COUNCIL

I have. the honour to transmit herewith to Your Excellency the text of
a letter addressed by the-Minister for ~orelgnAffairso:f Egypt to Your Excellency:
"At 4:30p.m. Greenldch time, -the Egyptian Ambassador in London was handed
a note by the British GoYernment in which an ultimatum was given to the Government
of Egypt to.
(a) stop all warlike actions by land, sea and air;
(b)

withdraw all Egypt.:i.an military forces ten miles from the Suez Canal;

(c)

accept occupation of Egyptian territory by :Sriti6h and French forces

of key positions at Port Said, Ismailia and Suez.
The ultimatum demands an answer by 6 :30a.m. on the thirty-first of October
instant, Cairo ttme, failing Which the Governments of the United Kingdom and
France will intervene in whatever strength they.may deem necessary to secure
compliance.
The G~rernments of the United Kingdom and of France are taking as a pretext
for their act~ o.ns the present. fighting within Egyptian territory between the
attacld!1g armed forces from Israel and the defending forCes of Egypt.•
Neither this nor any other pretext can possibly justify actions taken by
the British and French Gove.rnments.
This threat of force''bY the British and French Governments and the imminent
danger of, within a few hours from now, British and French a,!'Illed forces, in
flagrant Violation of the rightso:t' Egypt and of the Charter of the United·NatioDs,
occupying Eg;yptian territory, impel the Government of Egypt to request the
Secu!'ity Council to be ilmnediately convened to consider tMs Br! t1ah-French
act of aggression.

56-28654

8/5712

English
Page 2
In the meantillle.and until theSe~ue:tty Council has taken the necessary
measures, Egypt he.s no ~hoice but to defend itself and safegu.ard i ts rightl!~
against ,such aggression.
Sincerely yours,
Mabmoud Fawzi

.~o~eign Minister of Egypt."

I have the honour to request that the contents of this letter be circulated
,
as an official .Securi ty Council .dqCt1!ll~,nt.
J; have the honour" to'requeRt that the .Securi ty Council be convened this

evening to consider th,J,S le'bte;r.
Please acc(~'Pt, E~,~cel1ency" etC.
(Signed)
-n----.~

Omar Loutfi

1?-e:rmE:ment Representative of Egypt
to the .United Nations
