38

General Assembly-Twenty-second Senion

preparation of the draft declaration on social development and invites the Economic and Social Council
and the Commission for Social Development to continue to give high priority to this task ;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Commission for Social Development the summary
records of the discussions held during the current
session of the General Assembly on the item entitled
"World social situation", together with the statements,
in extenso, of the Director of the Social Development
Division, so that they can be taken into consideration
particularly in connexion with the preparation of the
draft declaration on social development;
B. Decides to accord high priority at its twenty-third
session to the item on the world social situation.
1625th pleno;ry meeting,
11 December .1967.

2294 (XXII). Continuation of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees,1
Recalling its resolution 1783 (XVII) of 7 December
1962, in which it decided to review, not later than at
its twenty-second session, the arrangements for the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees with a view to determining whether the Office
should be continued beyond 31 December 1968,
Concerned at the ever-increasing number of refugees,
particularly in Africa,
Recognizing the continuing need for international
action on behalf of refugees,
Considering the valuable work which has been performed by the Office of the High Commissioner in
providing international protection for refugees and in
promoting permanent solutions for their problems, with
the joint participation of Governments, international
organizations and voluntary agencies,
Commending the High Commissioner for the efforts
he has made in finding satisfactory solutions of problems affecting groups of refugees who are his concern,
Taking note of the recommendation of the Economic
and Social Council in its resolution, 1253 (XLIII) of
1 August 1967 to the effect that the High Commissioner
be invited to attend the meetings of the Inter-Agency
Consultative Board of the United Nations Development
Programme,
N otin_q further the recommendation of the Executive
Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme
inviting the High Commissioner to participate in the
inter-agency activities and in the concerted efforts made
by the United Nations organs to attain the goals of the
United Nations Development Decade,
Expressing its concern at the difficulties with which
the High Commissioner is faced in financing his programme of assistance,
I. Decides to continue the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for a further
period of five years from 1 January 1969;
1 Official Records of the Genrral Assembly. Twenty-second
Session, SupPlement No.11 (A/6711) and Suprlcnunt No. ILi
(A/6711/ Add.1/Revl ).

2. Requests the High Commissioner to pursue his
activities of protection and assistance and to continue
to make every possible effort to facilitate the repatriation, local integration or resettlement on a voluntary
basis of the refugees who are his concern, bearing in
mind the ever-increasing number of refugees in Africa;
3. Invites the High Commissioner to continue to
report to and be guided by the Executive Committee
of the High Commissioner's Programme with regard
to refugee situations, in accordance with the Committee's terms of reference ;
4. Decides that the High Commissioner be invited
to attend the meetings of the Inter-Agency Consultative
Board of the United Nations Development Programme
and to participate in the preparatory work of the second
United Nations development decade;
5. Urges States Members of the United Nations and
members of the specialized agencies to lend their
support to the humanitarian task of the Office of the
High Commissioner and to consider increasing their
annual voluntary contributions to the High Commissioner's Programme;
6. Further invites those Member States which have
not yet done so to accede to the 1951 Convention
relating to the Status of Refugees 2 and to the 1967
Protocol to the Convention ;8
7. Further requests the Economic and Social Council
to consider as soon as possible the advisability of enlarging the membership of the Executive Committee
of the High Commissioner's Programme, in order to
give at least one additional African country the possibi 1ity of participating in the work of the Committee;
8. Decides to review, not later than at its twentyseventh session, the arrangements for the Office of the
High Commissioner with a view to determining whether
the Office should be continued beyond 31 December
1973.
.
1625th plenary meeting,
11 December 1967.

2295 (XXII). Elimination of all forms of religious
intolerance
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1781 (XVII) of 7 December 1962 and 2020 (XX) of 1 November 1965,
Bearing in mind the decisions of the Third Committee
(a) Not to mention any specific examples of religious
intolerance in the draft International Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of
Discrimination based on Religion or Belief,4
( b) To amend the title, the preamble and article I
of the draft Convention proposed by the Commission on
Human Rights, 6
Having been unable to complete the consideration of
the draft Convention owing to its heavy agenda and the
lack of time,
Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189 (1954), No. 2545.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Twmty/irst Session. Supplement No. 11A (A/6311/Rev.l/ Add.1), part
one, para. 2.
4 lbid., Twenty-second Session, Annexes, agenda item 54,
document A/6934, para. 21.
6 l/Jid., paras. 26, 72 and 90.
2 United

3 See
