United Nations

A/RES/63/151

General Assembly

Distr.: General
11 February 2009

Sixty-third session
Agenda item 55 (c)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2008
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/63/424)]

63/151. Follow-up to the Second World Assembly on Ageing
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 57/167 of 18 December 2002, in which it endorsed the
Political Declaration 1 and the Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing, 2002, 2
its resolution 58/134 of 22 December 2003, in which it took note, inter alia, of the
road map for the implementation of the Madrid Plan of Action, and its resolutions
60/135 of 16 December 2005, 61/142 of 19 December 2006 and 62/130 of
18 December 2007,
0F

1F

Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 3
2F

Recognizes the successful conclusion of the first review and appraisal of
1.
the Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing, 2002,2 and its results at the
international, regional and national levels;
Encourages Governments to pay greater attention to building capacity to
2.
eradicate poverty among older persons, in particular older women, by
mainstreaming ageing issues into poverty eradication strategies and national
development plans, and to include both ageing-specific policies and
ageing-mainstreaming efforts in their national strategies;
Encourages Member States to strengthen their efforts to develop national
3.
capacity to address their national implementation priorities identified during the
review and appraisal exercise, and invites Member States that have not done so to
consider a step-by-step approach to developing capacity that includes the setting of
national priorities, the strengthening of institutional mechanisms, research, data
collection and analysis and the training of necessary personnel in the field of ageing;
Also encourages Member States to overcome obstacles to the
4.
implementation of the Madrid Plan of Action by devising strategies that take into
account the entirety of the human life-course and foster intergenerational solidarity
in order to increase the likelihood of greater success in the years ahead;
_______________
1
Report of the Second World Assembly on Ageing, Madrid, 8–12 April 2002 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.02.IV.4), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
2
Ibid., annex II.
3
A/63/95.

08-47985

A/RES/63/151

5.
Further encourages Member States to place particular emphasis on
choosing national priorities that are realistic, feasible and have the greatest
likelihood of being achieved in the years ahead, to develop targets and indicators to
measure progress in the implementation process and to present their views on the
outline of the strategic implementation framework contained in the report of the
Secretary-General3 so that they can be reflected in the final draft of the framework
to be presented to the Commission for Social Development at its forty-seventh
session, in February 2009;
Recommends that Member States increase awareness-raising of the
6.
Madrid Plan of Action, including by strengthening networks of national focal points
on ageing, working with the regional commissions and enlisting the help of the
Department of Public Information of the Secretariat to expand media coverage on
ageing issues;
Invites Governments that have not done so to designate focal points for
7.
handling follow-up of national plans of action on ageing;
8.
Invites Governments to conduct their ageing-related policies through
inclusive and participatory consultations with relevant stakeholders and social
development partners, in the interest of developing effective policies creating
national policy ownership and consensus-building;
Stresses that, in order to complement national development efforts,
9.
enhanced international cooperation is essential to support developing countries in
implementing the Madrid Plan of Action, while recognizing the importance of
assistance and the provision of financial assistance;
10. Encourages the international community to support national efforts to
forge stronger partnerships with civil society, including organizations of older
persons, academia, research foundations, community-based organizations, including
caregivers, and the private sector, in an effort to help to build capacity on ageing
issues;
11. Calls upon Governments to ensure, as appropriate, conditions that enable
families and communities to provide care and protection to persons as they age and
to evaluate improvement in the health status of older persons, including on a
gender-specific basis, and to reduce disability and mortality;
12. Encourages Governments to continue their efforts to implement the
Madrid Plan of Action and to mainstream the concerns of older persons into their
policy agendas, bearing in mind the crucial importance of family intergenerational
interdependence, solidarity and reciprocity for social development and the
realization of all human rights for older persons, and to prevent age discrimination
and provide social integration;
13. Encourages the international community to enhance international
cooperation to support national efforts to eradicate poverty, in keeping with
internationally agreed goals, in order to achieve sustainable social and economic
support for older persons;
14. Encourages the international community and the relevant agencies of the
United Nations system, within their respective mandates, to support national efforts
to provide funding for research and data-collection initiatives on ageing in order to
better understand the challenges and opportunities presented by population ageing
and to provide policymakers with more accurate and more specific information on
gender and ageing;
2

A/RES/63/151

15. Recommends that Member States reaffirm the role of United Nations
focal points on ageing, increase technical cooperation efforts, expand the role of the
regional commissions on ageing issues and provide added resources for those
efforts, facilitate the coordination of national and international non-governmental
organizations on ageing and enhance cooperation with academia on a research
agenda on ageing;
16. Reiterates the need for additional capacity-building at the national level
in order to promote and facilitate further implementation of the Madrid Plan of
Action, as well as the result of its first review and appraisal cycle, and in that
connection encourages Governments to support the United Nations Trust Fund for
Ageing to enable the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat
to provide expanded assistance to countries, upon their request;
17. Recommends that ongoing efforts to achieve the internationally agreed
development goals, including those contained in the United Nations Millennium
Declaration, 4 take into account the situation of older persons;
3F

18. Requests the Secretary-General to translate the Guide to the National
Implementation of the Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing 5 into all
official languages of the United Nations so that it can be used more effectively by
Member States, and encourages Member States to translate the Guide into their
respective languages when appropriate;
4F

19. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at
its sixty-fourth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution,
including information on the promotion and protection of human rights as they
pertain to older persons.
70th plenary meeting
18 December 2008

_______________
4
5

See resolution 55/2.
United Nations publication, Sales No. E.08.IV.2.

3
