General Assembly-Fifth Session

48

18. The Secretary-General shall provide the High
Commissioner with all necessary facilities within budgetary limitations.
19. The Office of the High Commissioner shall be
located in Geneva, Switzerland.
20. The Office of the High Commissioner shall be
financed under the budget of the United Nations. Unless
the General Assembly subsequently decides otherwise,
no expenditure, other than administrative expenditures
relating to the funci:ioning of the Office of the High Commissioner, shall be borne on the budget of the United
Nations, and all other expenditures relating to the activities of the High Commissioner shall be financed by voluntary contributions.
21. The administration of the Office of the High Commissioner shall be subject to the Financial Regulations of
the United Nations and to the financial rules promulgated
thereunder by the Secretary-General.
22. Transactions relating to the High Commissioner's
funds shall be subject to audit by the United Nations
Board of Auditors, provided that the Board may accept
audited accounts from the agencies to which funds have
been allocated. Administrative arrangements for the custody of such funds and their allocation shall be agreed
between the High Commissioner and the Secretary-General in accordance with the Financial Regulations of the
United Nations and rules promulgated thereunder by the
Secretary-General.

*

* *
In accordance with the terms of the above Statute, the
General Assembly at its 325th plenary meeting on 14
December 1950, on the nomination of the Secretary-General, elected by secret ballot Mr. G. f. van Heuven Goedhart (Netherlands) to the office of United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees.

429 (V).

Draft Convention relating to the Status
of Refugees

The General Assembly,
Considering that, by its resolution 362 ( IV) of 22
October 1949, it approved the recommendation of the
Special Committee on Methods and Procedures that
the General Assembly might decide to convene a conference ~f plenipotentiaries to study, negotiate, draft,
and possibly sign conventions that had been drawn up
by conferences in which all Members of the United
Nations had not been invited to take part,

Considering the desirability of enabling the governments of States not Members of the United Nations to
participate in the final stages of the drafting of the Convention18 relating to the Status of Refugees, as prepared
by the Ad H oc Committee on Refugees and Stateless
Persons and the Economic and Social Council,
1. Decides to convene in Geneva a conference of
plenipotentiaries to complete the drafting of and to sign
both the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees
and the Protocol1° relating to the Status of Stateless
Persons;

2. Recommends to governments participating in the
conference to take into consideration the draft Conven18 See documents E/1850-E/AC.32/8 and E;l850-E/AC.32/
8/Annex.
19
See document E/1850-E/AC.32/8.

tion submitted by the Economic and Social Council and,
in particular, the text of the definition of the term
"refugee" as set forth in the annex hereto;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to take the steps
necessary for the convening of such a conference at the
earliest possible opportunity;

4. Instructs the Secretary-General to invite the
governments of all States, both Members and non-members of the United Nations, to attend the said conference
of plenipotentiaries;

5. Calls upon the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, in accordance with the provisions
of the Statute of his Office, to participate in the work
of the Conference.
325th plenary meeting,
14 December 1950.
ANNEX

Draft Convention relating to ~
Statu11 of Refugeesa.
Chapter I
ARTICLE 1

A. For the purposes of the present Convention, the
term "refugee" shall apply to any person who:
(1) Since 1 August 1914 has been considered a refugee under the Arrangements of 12 May 1926 and 30
June 1928 or under the Conventions of 28 October 1933
and 10 February 1938, the Protocol of 14 September 1939
or the Constitution of the International Refugee Organization;
Decisions as to eligibility taken by the International
Refugee Organization during the period of its activities
shall not prevent the status of refugee being accorded to
persons who fulfil the conditions of paragraph 2 of the
present article;
( 2) As a result of events occurring before 1 January
1951, and owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted
for reasons of race, religion, nationality or political
opinion, is outside the country of his nationality and is
unable or, owing to such fear or for reasons other than
personal convenience, is unwilling to avail himself of the
protection of that country; or who, not having a nationality and being outside the country of his former
habitual residence, is unable or, owing to such fear or for
reasons other than personal convenience, is unwilling to
return to it;
In the case of a person who has more than one nationality, the above term "the country of his nationality"
shall mean any of the countries of which he is a national,
and a person shall not be deemed to be lacking the protection of the country of his nationality if, without any valid
reason based on well-founded fear, he has not availed
himself of the protection of one of the countries of which
he is a national.
B. The present Convention shall cease to apply to any
person falling under the terms of section A if:
( 1) He has voluntarily re-availed himself of the protection of the country of his nationality; or
(2) Having lost his nationality, he has voluntarily
re-acquired it; or
a Text of chapter I, article 1, as amended by the General Assembly at its 325th plenary meeting.

Resolutions adopted on reports of the Third Committee
( 3) He has acquired a new nationality, and enjoys the
protection of the country of his new nationality; or

49

artll"k persons in other categories, including such as may
he n·cumrnnHkd Ly the (;encral Assembly.

( 4) He has voluntarily re-established himself in the
country which he left or outside which he remained owing
to fear of persecution; or
( 5) He can no longer, because the circumstances in
connexion with which he has been recognized as a refugee
have ceased to exist, claim grounds other than those of
personal convenience for continuing to refuse to avail
himself of the protection of the country of his nationality.
Reasons of a purely economic character may not be invoked; or
( 6) Being a person who has no nationality, he can no
longer, because the circumstances in connexion with which
he has been recognized as a refugee have ceased to exist
and he is able to return to the country of his former
habitual residence, claim grounds other than those of personal convenience for continuing to refuse to return to
that country.
C. The present Convention shall not apply to persons
who are at present receiving from other organs or agencies of the United Nations protection or assistance.
D. The present Convention shall not apply to a person who is recognized by the competent authorities of the
country in which he has taken residence as having the
rights and obligations which arc attached to the possession
of the nationality of that country.
E. The provisions of the present Convention shall not
apply to any person with respect to whom there arc serious
reasons for considering that (a) he has committed a crime
specified in article VJ of the London Charter of the International Military Tribunal; or ( b) he falls under the
provisions of article 14, paragraph 2, of the Universal
Declarationb of Human Rights.

F. The Contracting States may agree to add to the
definition of the term "refugee" contained in the present
"See resolution 217 A (III).

430 (V).

Problems of assistance to refugees

'J'he (;eneral Assembly,
1 f m·i11g tal.:en cognizance of the communication 20 addressed to it by the General Council of the International
l{efugee Orgai1ization on 13 October 1950 in amplification of its memorandum of 20 October 1949 addressed
to the fourth session of the General Assembly,

J l avinq noted that the General Council of the International Refugee Organization has decided to continue
operations until 30 September 1951,
l. ])ccidcs to address an urgent appeal to all States,
whether or not :'.\lembcrs of the United Nations, calling
upon them to assist the International Refugee Organization in its efforts to resettle refugees remaining under
its care and particularly those in need of permanent
custuclial care ;

) llccidcs. in the absence of definite data, to postpcmt· until its sixth session the examination of the problem ot assistance raised bv the above-mentioned communications, in the light "of a further communication
on the subject \Yhich the International Refugee Organization is invited to ,;ubrnit and of the observations
which tht' 1 !igh Commissioner will make in his report
tu the sixth ses:-;icm of the Ccneral Assembly.
325th plenary meeting,
14 lJecr·mber 1950.
20 See () fficwl Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Session, Third Committee, Annexes, Agenda item 32, document
A/(: 3/5·!0
