OFFICIA
THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR

MEETING: 5 JANUARY

1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2185) . . , . . . . . , . . . , . . +. . . +. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Statement by the President . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . : . . . .
Adoption of the agenda , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , , . , . . . . . . . I . . . . . . . . . . , . , . . . . .
Letter dated 3 January 1980 addressed to the President of the Security Council
by the representatives of Australia, the Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belgium, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark, the
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji, Germany, Federal
Republic of, Greece, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, Indonesia, Italy, Japan,
Liberia, Luxembourg, Malaysia, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, Portugal,
Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Spain, Suriname, Sweden,
Thailand, Turkey, Uganda, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, the United States of America, Uruguay and Venezuela
(S/13724 and Add.1) . , . . . . . . , . . . . , . . , , . . . . . . . . , . . , ,. , . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,. .

SlPV.2185

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters com{:‘bined with fiq$s.
Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
.A>;% Nati$s docuqent.
.‘\ i
I,
$f<:..
’
‘J
Docu$..nts of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
7, .+
:’ ,,,.
.,.‘~~arterl~“‘$rrllylenlcnts of the OfJicicrl Records of the Security Cocrrfcil. The date
..$*
., of the+$o”cument indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which informati$:&bout it is given.
i*:“’
,:+, The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
p:s3Jstem adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolrrtiorzs u/7d
qbecisions
qf the 5’rclrrit.y Corrmd.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2185th MEETING
Held in New York on Saturday, 5 January 1980, at 11 a.m.
Pwsidcnt:

Mr. Jacques LEPRETTE

(France).

Pre.sc~~t: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.

Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

agenda (S/Agenda/2185)

of the agenda

Letter dated 3 January 1980 addressed to the
President of the Security Council by the representatives of Australia, the Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Belgium,
Canada, Chile, China,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark, the Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji,
Germany, Federal Republic of, Greece, Haiti,
Honduras,
Iceland,
Indonesia,
Italy, Japan,
Liberia, Luxembourg, Malaysia, the Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, the Philippines,
Portugal,
Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore,
Spain, Suriname,
Sweden, Thailand,
Turkey,
Uganda, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern
Ireland, the United States of
America, Uruguay and Venezuela (S/13724 and
Add. I)

Statement by the President

I. The PRESIDENT
(itlterprettrfion
from Fwnch):
Members of the Security Council, as the year 1980
begins I should first of all like to extend personally
my best wishes both to the countries which you
represent-with
which France
has consistent relations
of confidence-and
to you and your colleagues. The
role of the Security Council appears more essential
than ever to the smoqth running of the Organization,
and I am convinced that I shall always find support
and advice from you as I attempt to carry out successfully the tasks entrusted to us during this month of
January.
I.3 I wish to thank our colleagues from Bolivia,
Czechoslovakia,
Gabon, Kuwait and Nigeria who
have *just left us after two years of particularly active
and effeclive participation,
as evidenced by the
Council’s work during these last few weeks. I believe

that I am reflecting the views of all of us here today
in expressing to them our gratitude and best wishes
for the successful continuation of their respective
careers,
3. To this tribute to those who are leaving, I shall
add one addressed to my predecessor, our President
for December, Mr. Chen Chu. It is a pleasant duty for
me to stress the mastery with which he directed our
debates throughout a most busy period of the Council’s
history. Because of his experience in international
affairs and his personal qualities, Mr. Chen Chu was
able to conduct our meetings in accordance with his
country’s best diplomatic traditions.
4. Finally, I would welcome the presence here today
of the representatives of the German Democratic
Republic, the Philippines, the Niger and Tunisia. All
are well known to us, and we have had many occasions at the United Nations to appreciate their SOW&=
,firir*p. There seems no doubt but that they will make
an essential contribution to the Council in the years
to come. I thus welcome them most cordially.
Adoption of the agenda

5: The PRESIDENT
(intcrpretotim
Jimr French):
The Council has before it the provisional agenda for
this meeting in document S/Agenda/2185. I shall now
call on any representatives who wish to speak on the
adoption of the agenda.
6. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (i,rt~,p~etrrtio,?Jj.om Russion): Mr. President, indeed 1 want to speak on the question of the
adoption of the agenda. But first of all, I should like
to welcome you, an eminent diplomat of France,
and to wish you success in the exercise of your responsible functions as President of the Security Council.
I should like to express the hope that your outstanding
diplomatic talents and experience will be displayed to
the utmost in the course of the consideration of those
extremely complicated questions which will of course
be facing the Council during its work under you1
presidency in January.
7. It is a particular pleasure for me to welcome the
new members of the Security Council, especially the
representative of the fraternal German Democratic
Republic, a new non-permanent member of the Council. The German Democratic Republic is successfully
building a society of developed socialism in close and
mutual co-operation
with other socialist States.

condemns attempts on the part of certain external
forces to exploit-for
the purpose of waging a
slanderous campaign against the people and Govern‘merit of Afghanistan-the
request of the Government of Afghanistan to the Soviet Union for the
affording of urgent political,
moral, economic and
military assistance. This statement reads Direr lrlirr:

Through a consistent struggle against imperialism and
colonialism and against all forms of exploitation and
national and racial oppression, and for the freedom
and independence of peoples, the German Democratic
Republic has earned widespread gratitude and recognition and well-deserved authority and standing in the
world, There can be no doubt that the German Democratic Republic will make a most valuable contribution
to the work of the Council.

“The Government
of the. Democratic
Republic
of Afghanistan will not permit anyone to encroach
upon the inalienable right of the Afghan people to
do everything possible to protect the achievements
of the April revolution, the territorial integrity and
the national independence ‘of,the country. No one
can deprive a sovereign State the right to selfdefence, enshrined in Article 51 of the Charter of the
United Nations, nor prevent it from turning for
necessary assistance to those’ dountries with which
it has appropriate international, treaties. The Government and people of AfghaniStan view the campaign
being waged against them as interference in their
internal affairs and as an attempt to prevent them
from taking the course indicated by the April
revolution.”

8. I should also like to welcome most cordially the
representatives of the Niger, Tunisia and the Philippines and to wish them success in the implementation
of the responsible tasks to be performed by the
Security Council.
9. At the same time, we cannot fail to express our
concern at the fact that as a result of the behindthe-scenes manauvrings of the United States, which
is not concealing its wish to hinder the election of
Cuba to the Security Council, this United Nations
body, which bears the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of peace, still does not have its full
complement of 15 members.
10. On behalf of the delegation of the Soviet Union,
I should also like to express my sincere gratitude .to
the representatives of the outgoing non-permanent
members of the Security Council-the
Czechoslovak
Socialist Republic,
Bolivia,
Gabon, Kuwait and
Nigeria-for
their valuable contributions
to the work
of the Council.

14. As the members of the Council are well aware,
from the first day of the victory of the April 1978
revolution,
Afghanistan became the target of various
acts of provocation and designs by imperialist
and
reactionary
forces. Throughout
a lengthy period of
time, those forces carried out flagrant acts of intervention in Afghanistan’s
internal affairs, including
the use of armed force. The purpose of that intervention was to overthrow the popular democratic
regime in Afghanistan and restore the old rkgime in
that country and transform it into a weapon of their
own aggressive policy.

11. The ,delegation.-of the Soviet Union most vigorously objects to the consideration
in the Security
Council of the so-called question of the situation in
Afghanistan, as is proposed in the letter dated 3 January
of this year from the representatives
of the United
States, the United Kingdom, China and the countries
supporting them. The proposal to involve the Council
in the consideration of the events occurring in Afghanistan is entirely unfounded and inadmissible,
inasmuch
as it would be tantamount to intervention
on the part
of the United Nations in questions relating exclusively
to the domestic competence of the people and Government of that country. The events in Afghanistan are
the internal affair of Afghanistan and relations between Afghanistan and the Soviet Union are based
on the relevant mutual treaty obligations.

15. The Afghan people and its armed forces rebuffed
all those acts of aggression and actively defended the
sovereignty,
independence
and national dignity of
Afghanistan.
However, acts of aggression and of
military
provocation
and subversive
activity
by
external forces against Afghanistan continued on an
ever larger scale. Armed formations
and weapons
continued
to be infiltrated
into the territory of
Afghanistan,
and imperialist
and reactionary forces
did everything
possible to prevent the building of
a new life in that country.

12. As is pointed out in the telegram from the
Foreign Minister of Afghanistan, Mr. Shah Mohammad
Dost, dated 3 January 1980, addressed to the President
of the Security Council [S/13725], the Government of
Afghanistan most vigorously
protests against the
proposal for the consideration
in the Council of the
question of the situation in Afghanistan, describing
such consideration as “direct and clear interference in
its internal affairs”.

16. Over the last two years, the Government
of
Afghanistan repeatedly appealed to the Soviet Union
for support, including the affording of military assistance, in order to repel armed intervention
from outside. The decision of the Soviet Union to send a limited
military contingent
to Afghanistan-exclusively
for
those purposes-was
taken in response to those
repeated requests by the Government of Afghanistan
and based on the appropriate provisions of the Treaty
of Friendship,
Good Neighbourliness
and COoperation
between the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics and the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan
of 1978.’

13. We should also like to draw the attention of
members of the Security Council to the statement of
the Government
of the Democratic
Republic
of
Afghanistan dated 31 December 1979, which vigorously
2

17. Both the request of the Government of Afghanistan and the decision of the.Soviet Union to meet that
request are fully in keeping with the right, enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations, of States to
individual or collective self-defence. No one, not even
the Security Council, can cast doubt on the legitimate
right of Afghanistan to appeal to friendly countries
for help, and particularly
to those countries with
which it has appropriate international agreements.

23. The German Democratic
Republic very much
regrets that the thirty-fourth
session of the General
Assembly has not so far been able to elect the
fifteenth member of the Security Council, as it is
supposed to do in accordance with the Charter.
Unfortunately,
certain States did not want to renounce
their narrow, short-sighted
policy, although their
candidate, after about 150 ballots, had not received
even half of the votes of the Members of the United
Nations. It is well known that in the situation which
has consequently
arisen, certain permanent members of the Security Council are not without blame. It
is a situation which in’no way promotes the enhancement of the authority of this important organ of the
United Nations.

18. Attempts to wage a campaign of slander around
the question of the grantmg. by the Soviet Union of
assistance to Afghanistan,. can be viewed only as
attempts to prevent the people of Afghanistan from
taking the course that was. opened up for it by the
April 1978 revolution.

24. The fact that one seat of the group of Latin
American States-or
in this particular case, it would
be more correct to say one seat belonging to the nonaligned States in the Council-remains,
if only
temporarily,
unoccupied does not help to enhance the
effectiveness of the United Nations. We call upon all
who cherish the noble ideals of the United Nations to
do everything possible to see to it that the General
Assembly, at its thirty-fourth
session, is able to conclude successfully the election of the fifteenth member of the Security Council, in accordance with the
Charter and the well-tried practice which has proved
itself since the adoption on 17 December 1963 of
Assembly resolution 1991 A (XVIII).

19. As regards the proposal that the Security Council
consider the situation in Afghanistan, it is in keeping
only with the interests of those imperialist and hegemonistic circles which are carrying out armed intervention in Afghanistan’s internal affairs. Obviously,
in putting forward this question, those circles are
attempting to divert attention from their attempts to
change by force the democratic regime established in
Afghanistan and to deprive .the people of Afghanistan
of the achievements they have won as a result of the
April revolution. The present attempt to involve the
Security Council in a discussion of the question of the
situation in Afghanistan demonstrates that some people
still cherish the hope of re-establishing in the world
the cold-war atmosphere, which, as they see it and
according to their calculations, will make it easier
for them to achieve their imperialist and hegemonistic
designs.

25. Since this is the first time I have spoken in the
Council, I should like to thank the many.,Members of
the United Nations that voted in favour of my country’s
membership in the Security Council. We regard that
convincing vote of confidence as an expression of faith
in the peaceful foreign policy of our socialist State.

20. In the light of those circumstances, the Soviet
delegation calls upon the members of the Security
Council to display good sense and circumspection.
and to prevent the use of the Security Council for
unsavoury purposes which have nothing whatsoever
in common with the tasks of maintaining international
peace and security.
21.

Mr. FLORIN

26. I should like to assure you, Mr. President, that
the German Democratic Republic will consistently be
guided-and
this apphes of course to its capacity as
a member of the Security Council-by
its policy-a
policy of principle-of
peace, disarmament,
the
deepening and expanding of the process of detente, the
elimination
of all forms of colonialism,
racism and
opcwtheid, and the peaceful coexistence of States with
different social systems. The purposes and principles
of the Charter have been and remain the foundation
of our actions. Indeed, as the General Secretary of
the Central Committee
of the Socialist Unity Party of
Germany and President of the Council of State of the
German Democratic Republic, Mr. Erich Honecker,
stated in a New Year’s message: “For the happiness
of peoples what we need above all is peace; peace is
the most valuable thing of all”.

Democratic Republic)
Mr. President,
on
behalf of the delegation of the German Democratic
Republic, I should like to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of January, In you the Council has a
President whose diplomatic skills are very well known.
I am very happy to point out that there exists a very
good and promising relationship between the German
Democratic Republic and France.

(interpwtotiou

ji-0117

(German

Russian):

22. I should like to thank all those who have congratulated my delegation, which is taking part for the
first time in a meeting of this important body as the
representative of a non-permanent
member of the
Security Council. For its part, the delegation of the
German Democratic Republic would like to congratulate the delegations of the Philippines,
Tunisia and
the Niger on their election as non-permanent members
of the Security Council.

27. On the basis of the fact that the Security Council, within the United Nations system, bears particular
responsibility
for the maintenance
of peace, the
delegation of the German Democratic Republic will
participate in the common search for political solutions to international
conflicts and disputes, and also
in the search for measures to strengthen international
3

fighting off foreign intervention. All this has occurred
in accordance with the Treaty of Friendship, Good
Neighbourliness
and Co-operation signed on 5 December 1978,’ which states, in article 4:

security. We will bend every effort to implement
consistently ‘the decisions of ihe Council. This is all
the more necessary since, on the threshold of the
new decade, there still persist dangerous international
conflicts, and, in spite of the efforts of the socialist
and other peace-loving States, the arms race is still
continuing;
there still exist today such anachronisms
as the vestiges of colonialism, apartheid and racism,
which threaten the security of peoples.

“The High Contracting Parties, acting in a spirit
of the traditions of friendship and good-neighbourliness and in the spirit of the Charter of the United
Nations, shall consult with each other and shall,
by agreement, take the necessary steps to safeguard
the security, independence and territorial integrity
of the two countries. In the interest of strengthening
their defensive capacity, the High Contracting
Parties shall continue to develop their co-operation
in the military field.”

28. Convinced that the Security Council can and
must take effective decisions to ensure peace throughout the world, we wish to express our desire constructively to co-operate with all delegations on the
Council in the performance of the tasks enjoined upon
us by the Charter.

That Treaty and the limited military assistance granted
by the Soviet Union on the basis of it are both in
keeping with the Charter of the United Nations,
which confirms the inalienable right of States to
individual or collective self-defence.

29. So far as the questions raised in document
S/13724 are concerned, the request for an urgent
meeting of the Security Council is in our view totally
unfounded. The Democratic Republic of Afghanistan
poses no danger whatsoever either to international
peace and security or to neighbouring States-still
less to those which are situated thousands of kilometres away from that country and yet have signed
this letter. The request for a discussion of the situation in Afghanistan is direct interference in the internal
affairs of that country and is in contradiction with the
Charter.

33. The developqents in Afghanistan and the relations between Afghanistan and the Soviet Union are
exclusively
the business of the Governments
concerned. There is no juridical basis whatsoever for the
request made in document S/13724 to convene a
meeting of the Security Council. Furthermore
that
request is itself tantamount to interference in the
internal affairs of States Members of the United
Nations,
something which the German Democratic
Republic most vigorously repudiates.

30. In a telegram from the Foreign Minister of the
Democratic
Republic
of Afghanistan [ibid.], transmitted to members of the Council, the Government
of that country categorically protests the discussion
in the Council of the situation in Afghanistan. The
delegation
of the German Democratic
Republic
supports that protest and cannot agree to the Security
Council’s being used for interference in the internal
affairs of a Member of the United Nations.

34. Mr. KAISER
(Bangladesh): Mr. President, in
view of the constraints of time, my delegation reserves
the privilege of extending our felicitations to so distinguished a President as you and to the new members,
and also of paying a tribute to the retiring members,
at a later stage when I take part in the proceedings.

In order to justify the requests contained in
document
S/13724, certain assertions have, as we
know, been made. In this regard, the delegation of the
German Democratic Republic would like to highlight
certain facts.
31.

35. Bangladesh is a signatory to the letter submitted
by 50 Members States requesting an urgent meeting
of the Council. The Government of Bangladesh has
in a statement declared that it viewed recent developments in Afghanistan with deepest concern and
considered the situation to pose a serious threat to
international
peace and security. I myself had occasion
to repeat that view in the Council itself on 31 December 1979 [218&h n~cting]. In the circumstances, my
delegation believes that the discussion of. this agenda
item is both urgent and necessary.

32. Immediately
after the April 1978 revolution in
Afghanistan, imperialist agents and other reactionary
forces of all sorts attempted from outside, by means
of armed force, to block the route to progress for the
Afghan people, to prevent the implementation
and
exercise of their right to self-determination
and to
create in Afghanistan
a rkgime which would be
obedient to imperialistic
circles. This, of course, was
resisted
by the patriots of Afghanistan, who were
eager to create a new life in an independent, progressive Afghanistan State. Since foreign attempts at
intervention
were being intensified, the Government
of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan repeatedly
appealed to the Government
of the Soviet Union for
military assistance. Now the Government of the Soviet
Union, in response to those requests, has sent to
Afghanistan a limited military contingent the sole task
of which is to assist the people of Afghanistan in

36. Mr. ALCARD (Norway): I have asked to speak
merely to support the point of view just expressed
by my colleague from Bangladesh. We are meeting
here today on the basis of a letter to the President of
the Security Council signed by one third of the
membership
of the Organization, and, in my opinion,
it is the duty of this organ to debate the question
before us,
37. Mr. CHEN Chu (China) (trcrmlation jkm Chiflese): The recent massive invasion of Afghanistan
4

by the Soviet Union is a naked act of aggression.‘It
grossly tramples upon the basic principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and constitutes a grave
threat to international peace and security. The Chinese
delegation firmly refutks the absurd statement the
Soviet representative has just made to justify his
country’s own acts of aggression, and considers that
the Security Council should remove the disturbances
caused by the Soviet representative and immediately
proceed with the consideration of the question before
us.

tb Afghanistan to participate in the discussion of this
question, and the fact that we have raised no formal
challenge to the credentials of the person present here
for this purpose, should of course in no way be taken
to imply that the United Kingdom Government recognizes the new rkgime in Afghanistan as the Government of that country. We do not; and we greatly
regret that Afghanistan cannot participate here through
the medium of a representative genuinely reflecting
the will of the people of that country and that, instead,
the Council should hear a member of a rkgime imposed
as a result of foreign armed intervention.
But to us
what is important is for the Council to proceed with
the least possible delay to a full consideration of the
substance of the matter.

38. The PRESIDENT
(interpretrrtio/q jbrn French):
In the light of the consultations which members of the
Council have held on this matter and the views which
have been expressed here and which will be contained
in the records, may I take it that the agenda is adopted?

41.

Mr. MATHIAS
(Portugal) (interpretation
from
My delegation would like to stress that the
decision we have just taken with regard to the presence,,
here in our work of the representative of Afghanistani.
can in no way be taken to mean any recognition on
our part of the Government that has assumed power
in Kabul in circumstances which underlie this very
meeting of the Council.

French):

The rrgeruln WI/S rrclopted.

Letter dated 3 January 1980 addressed to the President
of the Security Comicil by the representatives of
Australia,
the Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belgium, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Denmark, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji, Germany, Federal Republic
of, Greece, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, Indonesia,
Italy, Japan, Liberia, Luxembourg, Malaysia, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, Portugal, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore,
Spain, Suriname,
Sweden, Thailand,
Turkey,
Uganda, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, the United States of America,
Uruguay and Venezuela (S/13724 and Add.1)

(United States of America):
0$2. Mr. McHENRY
I should like to say at this stage that the fact of our
meeting today is a reflection of the concern of the
international community over events in Afghanistan.
We join others in recording the view that in not
objecting to the request of Afghanistan to be heard,
we are in no way according status to the rkgime that
has been put in place there by foreign troops.
43. Mr. CHEN Chu (China) (tr.uns/ntion fiwn Chinese): In the view of the Chinese delegation, the
permission for the representative of Afghanistan to
participate in and address today’s meeting can in no
way be interpreted as acquiescence in the situation
created by Soviet armed intervention in Afghanistan.

39. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
fionz French):
I should like to inform the members 6f the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives
of Afghanistan, Australia, Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia, Democratic Kampuchea, Egypt, Japan, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Pakistan, Poland, Saudi Arabia and
Singapore, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda.
In accordance with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.

44. Mr. KAISER (Bangladesh): We have noted the
comments of previous speakers. In fact, the question
at issue is under consideration by my Government.
But in view of the gravity of the situation, we should
like the debate to proceed urgently and without
hindrance-but
without prejudice to the outcome of
the deliberations on the question by my Government.
45. Mr. ALGARD (Norway): The decision we have
just taken in no way prejudices my Government’s
position with regard to the events in Afghanistan.
46. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics)
(inteyretation
from
Russirrn):
The
Soviet delegation sees no basis right now for replying
to the absurd statements which have been made with
regard to the authority of the legitimate Government
of Afghanistan. I should like merely to stress that the
Soviet delegation considers that the Security Council
has taken a correct decision in inviting the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan to take part in our

40. Sir Anthony PARSONS (United Kingdom): The
absence of objection by my delegation to the invitation

work.

5

(itlterpretation
j~otn French):
47, The PRESIDENT
The Security Council is meeting today in response to
the letter dated 3 January 1980 addressed to the
President of the Security Council by the representatives ,of 50 Member States [S/13724 arm’ Add.11.
The representative of Somalia has also signed the
letter [see ~/13724IAt/lf-21.

Although we did not have the good fortune to serve
in the Council under his presidency, we are the
beneficiaries of the masterful manner in which he
conducted the Council’s deliberations.
His performance not only reflected well on him personally, but
also attested to the wisdom and culture for which
the country he represents ‘is ‘known.

.I 48. Members of the Council have before them also
the text of a letter dated 31 December 1979 from the
representative of China to the Secretary-General
[,s/137/7], the text of a letter dated 4 January 1980 to
the President of the Security Council from the representative of Afghanistan [S/13725] and the text of a
letter dated 4 January 1980 from the representative of
Democratic Kampuchea
to the Secretary-General
[S//3727].

53. My country becomes ,a member of the Security
Council at a time when issues of justice among nations
and growing threats to the disadvantaged and lessdeveloped nations are shaking the foundations of the
international
order. My delegation, and the Government and the people we represent, are mindful of the
special heavy responsibility we bear, along with the
other non-permanent members, to protect the interests
of the vast majority of the world’s peoples, whom we
represent, for it is they who will suffer most should
we fail to discharge our obligations during these times
of crisis.

49, Mr. YANG0 (Philippines):
Mr. President, my
delegation acknowledges with deep appreciation
the
warm words of welcome extended to my country,
as an incoming member of the Security Council, by
you and by the representatives of the Soviet Union,
the German Democratic Republic and Bangladesh.

54. But at the same time, we are also aware that
these issues are themselves a test of the effectiveness
of the Council on questions concerning the maintenance of international peace and security. As the sole
and final arbiter on these questions under the Charter,
it is imperative that the Council demonstrate its competence to resolve these issues through peaceful
means as provided under Chapter VI of the Charter.
Hence, we consider it of the utmost importance that
the Council perform its task with care and circumspection in every instance, so that when the time
comes to take action it can do so with decisiveness
and with authority.

SO. As this is the first time we have taken our seat

in this august body since the 196Os, I want to avail
myself of this occasion to thank ail those who made it
possible for my country to become a member again
and to assure everyone that we consider membership
in the Council to be an honour and privilege that
carries with it a heavy responsibility
to the world
community. We are committed
to discharge this
responsibility under the Charter of the United Nations,
and to extend our full co-operation to all the members
of the Council. To this end I should like to begin by
wishing everyone a happy New Year, with the fervent
hope that the coming year will bring success to our
endeavours,

55. We have before us a matter of great urgency,
a matter which compels the Council to act wisely and
decisively. My delegation welcomes this meeting of
the Council to consider the situation in Afghanistan,
because we believe that the Council is duty-bound
to examine all situations and conditions that have an
important and potentially injurious bearing on international peace and security. Coming as we do from a
developing country, we are among those who have a
high stake in the continuing effectiveness of the
Council, whose judgements and decisions should, we
believe, be beyond reproach, sacrosanct and respected
by all.

51. To you, the representative of France, as you take
your seat as the President of the Security Council
for this month, I want to extend our felicitations and
our best wishes for a successful tenure, and our
assurances to you of our unstinted co-operation. We
have every reason to believe that you. will need the
fullest support and co-operation of everyone in the
Council, for this is a time of world crisis when decisions of the Council will be a test of its relevance to
the world community and of its ability to perform its
role in the peaceful solution of problems involving
international peace and security that may come before
it. Fortunately, you bring to the presidency a wealth of
knowledge and experience of the United Nations
which, 1 am certain, will stand the Council in good
stead.

56. International
law-such as those precepts and
principles and statutes embodied in the Charter and
decisions of the United Nations-cannot
be enforced
except through voluntary acts of goodwill among
nations and a sense of participation
in a universal
consensus. Such a consensus, and the moral suasion
that it affords, can be possible only by the airing of
issues and discussion that the various forums in the
United
Nations, principally
the Security Council,
afford everyone, strong and weak alike. To my mind,
this is the first step in the resolution of any issue. The
situation in Afghanistan is such a case.

52. 1 should like to take this opportunity
also to
express our admiration and our warm congratulations
to Your predecessor, Mr. Chen Chu of the People’s
RePublic of China, on the great skill with which he
steered the Council through a most difficult period.
6

57. The question is, so serious that we shoul‘d not ’
risk the possibility. of the Council’s making hasty
judgements. It is therefore imperative that we acquaint
ourselves with all the facts and circumstances surrounding the events .that are taking place in Afghanistan. I am confident,,however,
that as soon as all the
facts are presented before us, the Council will be able
to act with dispatch, and its decision will then be
received with the due respect it deserves, Meanwhile,
I wish to assure you, Mr. President, and the members
of the Council, that a’s we assume our seat here, we
intend to manifest our country’s unwavering commitment to the princi+zs
that are enshrined in the
Charter-a
commitmeht
that we have consistently
upheld since the Organiiation’s
founding. We believe
that it is of the highpst importance at this time to
adhere to the principles of non-interference among
nations and of respect for each other’s sovereignty
and independence, as well as for the territorial integrity
of nations. We fully subscribe to the belief that if a
disputation should arise, it should be settled solely
through peaceful means, preferably through the
machinery of the United Nations, and that the use of
armed Forces should in no instance be resorted to.
But if armed intervention is shown to have occurred,
and continues to persist, the very first step open to
Member States is to call for a cessation of hostilities
and for the withdrawi of foreign armed forces, as the
United Nations has done a number of times in the past.
58. It is our view that in disputes between States,
especially between nuclear and non-nuclear States, the
Security Council affords the best forum for the peaceful solution of issues. When there arises a situatio,n
in which the peace, stability and security of any State
is threatened, the Council can and should act in the
best interests of all parties concerned, without overlooking the interests of the world community.
59. In the final analysis, it is our grave responsibility
not to allow any dispute involving any State to escalate
into a conflict that would bring the nuclear Powers into
aggressive confrontation with one another, for the
consequences would indeed be irreparable for us all.

presidency of the Security Council for the month
of
January. We are confident that your rich and deep
diplomatic skill and qualities will greatly facilitate the
work of the Council. With your great country, Pakistan
enjoys close and continuous relations offriendship and
co-operation.
64. I wish also to pay a tribute to the President
of
the Council for the month of D,ecember 1979, Mr. Chen
Chu, who steered the proceedings of the Council with
ability and wisdom. With our great neighbour, China,
we have traditional ties of close friendship and COOPeration, and China has always extended to Pakistan
resolute support in its just struggle to safeguard
its
national independence and State sovereignty.
65. Permit me also to congratulate the new member’s
that have been elected to the Security Council-the
German Democratic Republic, the Niger, the Philippines and Tunisia. We also express our deep app,recisrtion to the retiring members of the Council-Bolivist,
Czechoslovakia, Gabon, Kuwait and Nigeria-for
their valuable contributions to the work of the Council
66. Pakistan joined the other Member States
in
requesting this meeting because the people
arid
Government of Pakistan feel deeply concerned over
the grave situation in Afghanistan resulting from the
armed intervention by outside forces in that country
The recent introduction into Afghanistan of foreign
troops, numbering, according to the latest reports.
nearly 50,000, constitutes a serious violation of the
norms of peaceful coexistence and the sacrosanct
principles of the sovereignty of States and noninterference in their internal affairs, enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations. This external military
intervention in Afghanistan poses a serious threat
to
peace apd stability in our region and, indeed,
the
entire world.
67. The people and Government of Pakistan have
profound sentiments of fraternity and brotherhood
towards the people of Afghanistan. Since time
immemorial the two peoples have together struggled
in
the cause of maintaining their freedom and indeperxdence. In this spirit, Pakistan has always extended
its hand of friendship and co-operation to Afghanistan
and has consistently followed a policy of developing:
cordial relations with that country on the basis of OUIcommon heritage of faith and culture, our shared
objectives and aspirations as developing non-aligned
countries, and mutual adherence to the principles
of
peaceful coexistence.

60. I should like to reserve our right to speak again
should the need arise.
61. The PRESIDENT
(inteyretotim
frwn French):
The next speaker is the representative of Pakistan.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
62. Mr. NAIK
(Pakistan):
Mr. President, I am
grateful to you and to the members of the Council
for affording me this opportunity
to express the
views of my Government at this urgent meeting, which
has been convened at the request of 51 States Members of the United Nations.

68. That policy remained unaltered following
the
change of Government in Kabul in April
1978 _
Pakistan was the first Islamic country to recognize
the new rtgime headed by the late President
Noor
Mohammad Taraki. ThePresident ofpakistan, General
Mohammad Zia-ul-Haq, was the first Head of State
to
visit Kabul on his own initiative to have exchanges
with the new Afghan leaders. The President
of

63. May I take this opportunity to express our deep
gratification at seeing you Mr. President assume the
7

those false and tendentious charges and has on many
occasions reaffirmed its policy not to allow or encourage the use of Pakistan’s territory for subversive and
hostile activities against any State.

Pakistan also offered the Government of Afghanistan
the resources and technical skills available in Pakistan
for the successful implementation
of CkVelOpITIent,
projects in Afghanistan. Subsequently, the Government of Pakistan manifested its goodwill by taking
extraordinary
measures to facilitate the transit of
goods through Pakistan to enable the new Afghan
Government
to overcome the economic difficulties
facing
it. Whenever required, Pakistan has also
extended relief assistance to Afghanistan as a token of
our friendly feelings towards the people of that
country.

,73, Our scrupulously rnainta$ed
policy of noninterference and neutrality towards Afghanistan is also
consistent with Pakistan’s record of defending the
universally recognized rights of the people of every
country, big or small, to determine their internal
affairs in accordance with their own free will and
without interference or dictation by any external
Power. It is our profound conviction that disregard
for’this basic principle of international relations would
undermine the aspirations of the international
community to create and maintain q civilized world order.

69. This policy of co-operation and friendship was
reiterated
more than once by the President and the
Government
of Pakistan in formal communications
and contacts with the Afghan Government as well as
in public statements. I shall now quote from President
Zia-ul-Haq’s
address delivered on 6 September 1979
at the Sixth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries in Havana:

74. Since the last week of Dk.&mber 1979, Afghanistan has been subjected to an’ ,&xternal military intervention of the gravest proportions.
This massive
military intervention has been justified on the pretext
of protecting Afghanistan from a hypothetical outside
interference.
This is a gross misrepresentation
of
actual events. The latest developments in Afghanistan are well known. They are as follows.

“With our neighbour Afghanistan, Pakistan has
age-old ties ofhistory, culture and faith. The Government of Pakistan has consistently sought the establishment ofgood-neighbourly
relations with Afghanistan on the basis of the principles of peaceful
coexistence-namely,
respect for each other’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity, non-aggression,
equality and mutual benefit and non-interference in
each other’s internal affairs.”

75. First, as widely confirmed by reports in the
international
press for more than a year, the uprising
by the people of Afghanistan is spontaneous and is
spread throughout the length and breadth of the
country. It is an entirely internal phenomenon
of
Afghanistan’s current political crisis, and it is inconceivable that it could have been prompted or sustained
by any outside Power, especially Pakistan.
The
problem of Afghan refugees is also not of Pakistan’s
making. As the President of Pakistan made clear in
his statement on 30 August 1978, what the Government of Afghanistan was required to do was to create
such conditions in its country as could enable the
Afghan refugees to return to their homes with honour
and with a sense of security.

70. Unfortunately,
however, the development
of
mutual trust such as we had desired was inhibited by
a large influx into Pakistan of Afghan refugees seeking
shelter in our territory following the violent changes
and the instability in their homeland.
Since April
1978, there has been an increasing flow of Afghan
refugees into our country. According to the latest
figures indicated by United Nations sources, by
1 January 1980, the number had reached 387,575.
71. This influx of refugees has directly affected
Pakistan and imposed a considerable burden on our
already strained and scarce resources, But we have
not shirked and we cannot shirk providing them with
asylum and the basic necessities of life, which we
regard as our humanitarian,
Islamic and internationalist
responsibility.
Our humanitarian
concern
for the Afghan refugees is fully in keeping with
universally accepted values and principles.

76. Secondly, the international press first reported
the movement of Soviet troops to the Afghan border
on 21 December 1979. On 26 December, there were
reports that a rapid and large-scale influx of Soviet
troops into Afghanistan had taken place on the preceding day, that is, on Christmas. On 27 December,
President
Hafizullah
Amin
was dislodged
and
executed along with members of his family. It was
not until 28 December that a statement, attributed to
the new Afghan rkgime and quoted by the Soviet news
agency TASS mentioned for the first time that the
Afghan Government
had invoked the Treaty of
Friendship,
Good Neighbourliness
and Co-operation
of December 1978,’ and that it had approached the
Soviet Union to request military aid to counter the
alleged interference and provocations
of external
enemies of Afghanistan. Obviously, such a request
should have emanated from the Government
of
Hafizullah
Amin, who headed the Afghan Government until the arrival of the Soviet troops in Kabul,

72. Certain quarters have been making baseless
allegations against my country, to the effect that it has
been providing arms and training to those refugees to
instigate and promote insurgency against the Government of Afghanistan. It is a matter of deep regret that
our humanitarian
concern for the afflicted Afghan
People uprooted from their homeland should have
been misconstrued as alleged interference by Pakistan
in the internal affairs of Afghanistan. The Government
of’ Pakistan has repeatedly and categorically refuted
8

It does not stand to loeic that a Government
have invited foreign troT>ps to liquidate itself.

should

depends the survival of Afghanistan as an independent
country and indeed the survival of other small and
peace-loving nations. He has urged the great Powers,
especially the Soviet Union, to recognize their responponsibility for maintaining the peace and security of
the world, to leave Afghanistan alone and to respect
its sovereignty and independence, as is their sacred
duty under the Charter of the United Nations. This
plea has been voiced by an individual, but speaks for
the millions of indomitable Afghans who are resisting
external intervention in their country.

77. Pakistan has- been’ watching with concern the
continued instability over the past two years in our
neighbouring
country of Afghanistan. During that
period, there were thret changes of rkgime in that
country. Each change led to increased instability and
greater bloodshed. The last change, brought about
by a massive introduction
of foreign troops into
Afghanistan, presents a qualitatively
different situation. It has added a new international dimension to
the crisis in Afghanistan.

82. The Security Council, which has the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security, must respond to this grave situation and
must call for the immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of all foreign troops from Afghanistan. It must
call for the creation of conditions which could enable
the people of Afghanistan to decide democratically
their internal affairs without foreign interference or
domination. It must call for respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and independence of Afghanistan
and for strict non-interference in the internal affairs
of that country. It must also call for the creation
of stable and tranquil conditions which can enable
the Afghan refugees to return voluntarily
to theil
homeland with a sense of security.

78. We have always firmly opposed external military
intervention, which, in our view, cannot be justified
on any pretext and under any circumstances. Our
concern is now all the more profound since the country
which has been subjected to military intervention this
time is an Islamic country which is our immediate
neighbour, a member of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and one of the founding members of the
non-aligned movement. In an official statement issued
on 29 December 1979, the Government of Pakistan
therefore expressed the hope “that the far-reaching
negative consequences of such foreign intervention
would be clearly realized and that the foreign troops
would be removed from Afghan soil forthwith”.

83. It is Pakistan’s earnest hope that the people of
Afghanistan, who have a glorious tradition of freedom
and independence and who are passing through a
tragic period of their history, will be able to achieve
internal peace and stability without external interference or domination.

79. Pakistan is not alone in expressing its concern
over the external military intervention in Afghanistan.
This outrageous action against a sovereign, independent State has aroused the indignation of people
who love freedom throughout the world. A great
majority of nations, including many countries of the
Islamic world and of the non-aligned movement, shareour concerns and sentiments. They, have issued
statements expressing their opposition to the external
military
intervention
in Afghanistan.
The strong
feelings of the international community in that regard
are indicated by the number of countries which have
joined in the request for the convening of this urgent
meeting of the Security Council.

-‘841’- The PRESIDENT
(i,lterprettrtim jim~ French):
The next speak&r is Mr.,..Shah Mohammad Dost, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs df flie Democratic Republic of Afghanistan. I invite him to take a place at
the Council t&le and to make.his statement.
85. Mr. DOST
(Afghanistan):
Mr,
President,
despite the strong objection of my delegation to the
convening of the Security Council, I should like to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presiclency
of the Council for the month of January.

80. Any attempt to impose a solution of the internal
political crisis in Afghanistan by the use of force and
the despatch of foreign troops is bound to be counterproductive and will have negative consequences. It
will aggravate the situation and prolong the agony of
the Afghan people. Only yesterday, in the corridors
of the United Nations, we heard an echo of the pain
and anguish through which the people of Afghanistan
are passing at this ti’me. A renowned Afghan personality, Mr. Tabibi, who is a member of the International Law Commission and who has been a cabinet
minister of the Afghan Government, resigned from
his post in protest against the violation of the sovereignty and independence of his country.

86. We are here to record our protest and disquiet
at the convening of the Security Council as a result
of a wide-ranging,
pressure-filled
campaign
and
approaches by world imperialism
and international
reaction, which seem to have been able to rally a
number of authors for this unwarranted undertaking.
No matter how many votes the authors of this
unjustified initiative
scraped up for the contrived
appeal on this score, such an action still remains
objectionable.
Bringing such issues to this forum
constitutes a clear departure from the established
practice of the Council and a disturbing example of
misinterpreting
the relevant provisions of the Charter
and other rules of international law.

81. Mr. Tabibi made an impassioned appeal to the
world community to raise its voice in the defence of
his country, since on such international
support
9

87. The recent developments
in Afghanistan ire
domestic issues, which are not of the nature covered
by Article 34 of the Charter and not to be brought UP
for the consideration of the Security Council. TO allow
such consideration
would be to accept the diversion
of world public opinion from the real threats to
world peace and security posed by imperialist antipeace designs and activities.
88. The convening of this meeting of the Council
therefore in our view constitutes open interference in
the internal affairs of Afghanistan,
contrary to the
provisions of Article 2, paragraph 7, of the Charter.
89, Following the victory of the great revolution of
the people of Afghanistan on 27 April 1978, which
liberated the Afghan people from the tyranny of a
medieval type of rkgime connected with imperialism
and international
reaction
and which transferred
political power from the exploiting
classes to the
exploited
in the country,
drastic revolutionary
measures were taken in the interest of the working
people of the country and aimed at totally eliminating
the vestiges of economic and social backwardness
and feudalistic relationships from the socio-economic
structure of the country. Unfortunately,
but understandably, imperialism
and the war monger circles
related to it, as part of their large anti-peace and antipeoples designs and conspiracies,
increased their
armed attacks and infiltrations
into Afghan territory,
causing the loss of the lives of thousands of innocent
women, children and old people. This situation continued until 27 December 1979. To supplement this
carefully planned conspiracy and these plots against
our people and revolution,
on 16 September 1979,
Hafizullah Amin, playing into the hands of American
imperialism,
cowardly engineered a plot, with the
helping hand of anti-revolution
and anti-people
reactionary elements, which resulted in the assassination of the late Noor Mohammad
Taraki, the founder
of the People’s Democratic Party of Afghanistan and
President of the Revolutionary
Council, by Amin and
his terrorist band.

.&an, if they so desire, and, see for themselves what
the new rkgime is doing there, in the space of only a
few days since it took power, and how the situation
has improved compared w’@ that during the period of
the despotic rhgime.
8’
93. Amin and his clique ‘did not care at all for the
established standards of human conduct or human
rights. He let loose a reiin of terror and bloodshed
in the country similar to ‘rlie atrocities committed by
Pol Pot and his fallen clique. In such circumstances
and before such miscondtibt,
the gains of the April
revolution were being seriously threatened and the
principles of our revolution, were distorted for Amin’s
fascist personal ambitions’ in the interest of impeI1
rialism.
,’
94. As the oppression. of the Amin rhgime reached
its inhuman height inside the country, foreign aggression, armed attacks by groups from abroad and interference in the internal -affairs of the Democratic
Republic of Afghanistan continued and considerably
intensified against our sacred soil and the April revolution, the Afghan National Liberation Army rose, as
I have said, on 27 December 1979, against Amin’s
tyranny and overthrew his fascist rCgime.
95. Having toppled the despotic rbgime of Amin, his
accomplices and their reign of terror, the great national
democratic
Saur revolution
entered a new phase
geared towards safeguarding the gains of the Saur
revolution and reflecting the aspirations of the majority
of the Afghan people, thus putting the Saur revolution
in the right direction. The new Government is putting
an end to mass repression and persecution in the
country and is vigorously
restoring democratic
institutions.
96. Inspired by the values of this new gain of the
great Saur revolution,
the new’ Government of the
Democratic Republic of Afghanistan considers it its
historical national duty to,expand and consolidate the
progressive social and political pillars of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan.

90. In the wake of increasing foreign interference in
the internal affairs of Afghanistan and armed attacks
on Afghan territory, the conspiratorial
coming to
power of Hafizullah Amin opened a new dark era of
fascist oppression
in Afghanistan,
which brought
infinite suffering and bloodshed to the Afghan people.

97. It is neither my intention nor desire to record
rhetoric or exaggerations in the proceedings of the
Council about what the new Government has done
since it came to power on 27 December 1979, or what
it intends to do in the future for the well-being of the
Afghan people. However, I consider it miy duty to
state the following.

91. During Amin’s fascist rkgime, arbitary arrests
and imprisonments,
torture, inhuman and degrading
treatment of political prisoners under various pretexts
and in various forms had become daily practice, a fact
which has been reported and confirmed by several
international
organizations,
among them Amnesty
international a

98. Immediately
after the victory of the second phase
of the great Saur revolution, Babrak Karmal, General
Secretary of the Central Committee of the People’s
Democratic Party of Afghanistan, President of the
Revolutionary
Council and Prime Minister of the
Democratic
Republic
of Afghanistan,
declared
general amnesty, on behalf of the Central Committee
of the Party and the Revolutionary
Council, for all
political prisoners, irrespective of any consideration

92. At this juncture, I should like to invite such
international
organizations as Amnesty International
and the International
Red Cross to come to Afghani10

-

as to class, faith, language, tribe, nationality, ideology,
or political
or organizational
orientation,
of the
political prisoners, ,, who were gaoled indefinitely
without trial, enduring the most shocking inhuman
and degrading treatmen{ and torture by the oppressive
regime of Amin, whom President Carter called “the
legitimate President’,‘,. These political prisoners, who
are being released by the thousands, include party
members, anti-tyranny
and patriotic
clergy and
spiritual people, toiling workers, peasants, intelligentsia, progressivej :educated people and other
national elements held, on various baseless charges.

102. In the past, whenever Afghan Governments had
felt that the independence,
national sovereignty and
territorial
integrity of Afghanistan were threatened
from outside that country, Afghanistan had turned
to our great neighbour in the north, the Soviet Union,
for assistance, including military aid. In accordance
with the unanimous decision of the Loya GCIXCIS,
or the grand national assemblies comprising the elected
representatives and representing all strata and the will
of the Afghan people, the Government was authorized
to seek military assistance from the Soviet Union to
eliminate the threats to the country’s independence,
national sovereignty and territorial integrity.

99. At present an atmosphere of confidence, security
and faith has returned. to the country. Other measures
of the new Government include the following: abolition of all anti-democratic and inhuman laws, arbitrary
arrests, persecutions $and searches; respect for the
principles of Islam, freedom of conscience, religious
belief and performance of religious rites, protection
of the family, observance of the principle of lawful
possession of property, lincluding private property;
restoration of individual rights and security for all and
peace and revolutionary, order in the country; creation
of favourable conditions for the implementation
of
democratic rights and freedoms, including freedom of
the press and of assembly and the right to form progressive patriotic parties, mass organizations and
public demonstrations;
the right to work and education; freedom and privacy of correspondents; freedom
of travel inside the country, and the right to legal
protection of the home,

103. The Government
of the Democratic
Republic
of Afghanistan, like that of any other country in the
world, has the inherent right of individual or collective
self-defence and to request aid from a friendly country, in accordance with the provisions of Article 51
of the Charter of the United Nations, in the wake of
continued
armed attacks and interventions
from
abroad.
104. As a matter of fact, these acts of armed attacks
and interference in the internal.affairs
of my country
from abroad compelled the Government of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan to apply Article 51 of
the Charter in self-defence.
105. I should like to emphasize that when foreign
interference and armed attacks against Afghanistan
from abroad cease, there will be no need for limited
contingents of Soviet armed forces on Afghan soil
and they will immediately withdraw from Afghanistan.

100. With reference to the presence in Afghanistan
of limited contingents of armed forces of the Soviet
Union, I should like to emphasize that those contingents have been sent to Afghanistan in response to
a request by the Afghan side, initially made during the
official visit of the late Noor Mohammad Taraki to
Moscow in December 1978, when Amin was also
present, and in conformity with the provisions of the
Treaty of Friendship, Good Neighbourliness
and Cooperation, signed in Moscow between the leaders of
the two countries on 5 December 1978.’ That request
for military assistance was repeated by the Government of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan
during Amin’s rule. A request for Soviet assistance,
including military aid, was also made by the new
Government, and we are grateful to the Soviet Union
for its positive response.

106. The history of Afghanistan is a good witness
to the courageous struggle of the Afghan people for
freedom and independence.
They will never compromise on their national independence
and sovereignty.
107. The 62 years of traditional and sincere friendship, good-neighbourliness
and mutually
beneficial
co-operation
between Afghanistan
and the Soviet
Union have constituted
an excellent example of
friendship and co-operation among States in the world,
based on the principles of mutual respect for one
another’s independence,
national
sovereignty
and
territorial integrity. These relations of sincere friendship have contributed positively to peace in the region
and in the world. The long and brilliant record of
exemplary friendship between Afghanistan and the
Soviet Union leaves no room for doubt or concern by
the people of Afghanistan
about the friendly and
peaceful attitude of the Soviet Union towards the
Afghan people and their country.

101. The main purpose of this limited military assistance is to remove the threats posed from abroad to
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Afghanistan and to repel foreign armed attacks and
acts of aggression against our country. The dispatch
of limited contingents of armed forces of the Soviet
Union had nothing to do with the developments of
27 December 1979, including the change of Government and its leaders, which are entirely an internal
matter of Afghanistan.

108. The new Government
has officially reaffirmed
its strict adherence to the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and to the policy of active and
positive
non-alignment.
The Government
of the
Democratic
Republic of Afghanistan is desirous of
11

maintaining
friendly
countries, particularly
Moslem countries.

I iij. We shall not allow the Security Council to be
used for propaganda purposes under the pretext of
imaginary threats to world peace and security. Let us
utilize our strength and potentialities together for the
realization of the ideals of the Charter so that the right
of peoples and nations, big’ or small, to genuine
freedom and independence
will always remain
paramount.

relations with all peace-loving
with its neighbours and the

109. The Democratic
Republic of Afghanistan, as a
non-aligned country, will continue its efforts for further
strengthening friendly relations and co-operation with
all its fellow non-aligned
countries, including those
countries which have joined in the request for the
convening of this meeting of the Security Council,
as well as countries
not joining in this request.
as a member of the non-aligned
Afghanistan,
will continue
its active contribution
movement,
towards the further consolidation of the movement
and its anti-colonial
and anti-imperialistic
character.

117. The PRESIDENT
(hterpretation
jbotn French):
I thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan
for the kind words he has addressed to me. The next
speaker is the representative of Japan, whom I invite
to take a place at the Couficil table and to make
his statement.

110. The new Government of Afghanistan will continue firmly to support the liberation struggle of
peoples and their national liberation movements.

118. Mr. NISIBORI
(Japan): Mr. President, I should
like, first of all, to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of January. It is indeed fortunate that, particularly at this crucial time,“g man with your experience and abilities will be gtiiding the work of the
Council. On this occasion I &&Id also like to express
my gratitude to the outgoing President, Mr. Chen Chu,
who so skilfully presided over the Council in December. During the course of that month, my delegation
was twice afforded the opportunity to present its views
on another serious issue. Now, once again, my delegation is grateful for being permitted to speak on the vital
issue which is at present under deliberation.

111. The new Government of Afghanistan has firmly
set the lofty goals for the Saur revolution aimed at
building a prosperous society in the country with the
unreserved support and staunch determination
of the
Afghan people. No power can divert us from the right
course the Afghan people has chosen for itself.
112. We understand
that some Western countries
and other reactionary
circles are trying to create a
wedge between the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan and the Islamic
countries. Their attempts will
certainly fail. The fraternal Islamic countries know
that it was during the oppressive Amin’s rule that most
of our patriotic religious,leaders
and compatriots were
eliminated.
It was he and his followers who firmly
stood against Islam and the lofty tenets of Islam. The
new Government
has full respect for Islam and the
freedom of Islamic rites in the country.

119. Recognizing
that the present situation
in
Afghanistan poses a threat to international peace and
security, Japan joined other countries in urging that
the matter be brought before the Security Council
as soon as possible. The fact that 51 countries signed
the letter requesting this meeting demonstrates the
seriousness with which the problem is regarded by the
international
community.

113. During Amin’s
rule some Western countries
expressed concern about the killing and mass murder
of innocent Afghan people. Today, when that dictator
has met his fate, they cry for him, This is clearly a
doubled-faced attitude.

120. My Government’s
views on the Afghanistan
situation were clearly outlined in a statement made
by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Saburo Okita,
on 29 December 1979, which is summarized as follows:

114. The presence of limited contingents
of the
armed forces of the Soviet Union shall not be used by
the United States and other circles for seeking to
preserve and expand the world military system of
imperialism
nor as a pretext for strengthening
its
military presence in various parts of the world,
particularly
in the Indian Ocean, as well as for
expediting the provision
of military equipment
to
Pakistan, thus creating a situation of crisis, without
any consideration
for its implications for peace in the
region and in the world.

“The deployment
by the Soviet Union of its
military troops in Afghanistan is not only inconsistent with the position of the Japanese Government
but contrary to international justice and is utterly
deplorable. The Government of Japan expresses its
deep concern that the recent military action by the
Soviet Union will harm international
peace and
security.
“The Japanese Government strongly urges that
the Government
of the Soviet Union cease immediately its armed intervention in Afghanistan, and
act from the standpoint of respect for the independence and sovereignty of that country. The internal
problems of Afghanistan should be solved by the
people of Afghanistan themselves.”

11.5. The reason imperialist countries and reactionary
circles are misinterpreting
the purpose of the presence
of the limited contingents of the armed forces of the
Soviet Union is that their conspiracies against the
people of Afghanistan
have been exposed and foiled.
12

121. We note that the Soviet Union has offered an
explanation of the origins and development
of the
present situation by referring particularly to Article 51
of the Charter of the United Nations. Such an explanation does not in any way convince the international
community, nor does it justify the Soviet actions in
Afghanistan. Therefore, we strongly urge that the
Soviet Union immediately withdraw its military troops
from Afghanistan.
L

graph 1, of the Charter, one of the primary purposes
of the Organization is:
“To maintain international peace and security,
and to that end: to take effective collective measures for the prevention and removal of threats to
the peace, and for the suppression of acts of aggression or other breaches of the peace, and to bring
about by peaceful means, and in conformity with the
principles of justice and international law, adjustment or settlement of international disputes or situations which might lead to a breach of the peace.”

122. The internal problems of Afghanistan should be
solved by the Afghan people themselves. It should be
emphasized at this time. that the principles of nonintervention
and the right to self-determination
are
among the cardinal norms of the contemporary international community and,,indeed, are the main pillars of
the Charter.
I

127. The invasion of Afghanistan is a flagrant violation of the principles of international law, the Charter
of the United Nations and the principles for which
the Organization stands. It runs contrary to accepted
norms of international
relations and international
morality. It constitutes a threat to international peace
and security which could lead to a serious aggravation
of the international situation. This action is an infringement upon the sovereignty, political independence
and territorial integrity of Afghanistan. It is a clear
intervention in the domestic affairs of another country
and constitutes disregard of the right of each people to
choose its political, economic and social regime freely
and without any external interference. It is a violation
of the principle of sovereign equality among States
and of the principle of non-use of force in international
relations.

123. My delegation whole-heartedly
welcomes the
prompt convening of this meeting. We believe that the
Security Council, whose primary responsibility is the
maintenance
of international
peace and security,
would enhance the prestige of the United Nations by
taking effective and appropriate steps with regard
to this matter.
124. The PRESIDENT
(inte~p~elation.~om
French):
The last speaker for this meeting is the representative
of Egypt. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

128. The invasion and the occupation of Afghanistan
constitute a breach of the principle of non-intervention,
to which the Soviet Union itself professes to subscribe. It will be recalled that at the twentieth session
of the General Assembly, the Soviet delegation took
the initiative of introducing an item entitled “The
inadmissibility
of intervention in the domestic affairs
of States and the protection of their independence
and sovereignty”. In introducing that item on 3 December 1965, Mr. Fedorenko said in the First Committee:

125. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt) (interpretation
.fionr French): Sir, I should like first of all to convey to
you, on behalf of the Egyptian delegation, our most
sincere congratulations
on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
January 1980. I am pleased to see an eminent representative of France, a nation friendly to Egypt,
presiding over the deliberations of the Council during
a difficult and delicate period. Your exceptional
qualifications
are a guarantee for all of us that the
work of the Council will be carried out successfully.
I am very happy also to express our appreciation to
your predecessor, Mr. Chen Chu, for his important
contribution last month. I avail myself of this opportunity to extend most sincere congratulations to the
new members of the Security Council.

“The peace-loving countries must combine their
efforts to remove from international
relations
arbitrary conduct and interference in the affairs
of others. It was imperative to protect the small
countries against the aggressive attacks of the
rapacious imperialists. Under its Charter, the first
duty of the United Nations was the maintenance of
peace and security. Guided by the principle of
peaceful coexistence of States with different social
systems, the founders of the United Nations had
undertaken to refrain from the threat or use of force
against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State, or in any other manner
inconsistent
with the purposes of the United
Nations.“2

126. Egypt joined the group of countries which
requested this emergency meeting of the Security
Council to consider the grave situation in Afghanistan.
We believe that cardinal principles and basic provisions
of the Charter have been violated by a Member State
of the Organization., Egypt, together with the overwhelming majority of Members, firmly adhering to the
principles of international law governing coexistence
among States, regards the situation in Afghanistan
with deep concern. Egypt considers this situation a
threat to international peace and security in the region
and the whole world. As stated in Article 1, para-

129. Later, the General Assembly by its resolution 2131 (XX), overwhelmingly adopted the Declarntion on the Inadmissibility
of Intervention
in the
Domestic Affairs of States and the Protection of Their
13

Independence
and Sovereignty, paragraph 1 of which
stipulates that:
“No State has the right to intervene, directly 01
indirectly,
for any reason whatever, in the internal
or external affairs of any other State. Consequently,
armed intervention
and all other forms of interference or attempted threats against the personality
of the State or against its political, economic and
cultural elements are condemned.”
Paragraph

5 states:

“the socialist countries and the non-aligned countries
are at one in agreeing that therk:i’s not and cannot be
any place in international life for.aggression, dictation
and interference in the affairs of,.,other countries”.4
135. I cannot but agree with that statement of the
Foreign Minister of the Soviet Unjqn. But I would like
to remind the Soviet Delegatibn,bf the stand of the
non-aligned countries in this ,regard by quoting from
the Final Declaration of the, Sixth Conference of
Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries held in Havana in September 1979:
L‘,,. The Sixth Conference, p’f Heads of State or
Government appealed to all peoples of the world
to participate in efforts to free the world from war,
the policy of force, blocs and bloc politics, military
bases, pacts and interlocking alliances, the policy
of domination
and hegemony, inequalities
and
oppression, injustice and poyerty and to create a
new order based on peaceful coexistence, mutual
co-operation and friendship, an order in which each
people may determine its ‘dwn future, attain its
political sovereignty and promote its own free
economic and social develbpment, without interference, pressures or threats’of any kind.“s

“Every State has an inalienable right to choose
its political,
economic, social and cultural systems,
without interference in any form by another State.”
130. The same principle was reaffirmed in General
Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV), entitled “Declaration on Principles
of International Law concerning,
Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations”.
131. Those United Nations resolutions, and many
others, state the obvious--that is, that no State or
group of States has the right to intervene, directly or
indirectly, for any reason whatever, in the internal or
external affairs of any other State.
132. The principle of non-use of force in international
relations is the corner-stone of the system articulated
by the Charter to regulate inter-State conduct, as
stated in its Article 2, paragraph 4, as well as in General
Assembly resolutions
2160 (XXI) and 2625 (XXV).
The Assembly,
upon a Soviet initiative,
adopted
resolution 32/150 to establish a “Special Committee
on Enhancing
the Effectiveness of the Principle of
Non-Use of Force in International Relations”,
with
the goal of drafting a world treaty on the non-use of
force in international
relations.

136. Those are cardinal principles of contemporary
international relations, It is therefore intolerable that
any State may make exception, in adhering to them
under any pretext, for without such adherence we
shall be back to the dark ages’.
137. The Soviet delegation introduced at the thirtyfourth session of the General Assembly, as an urgent
and important question, a request for the inclusion
of a new item entitled “Inadmissibility
of the policy
of hegemonism in international relations”.
138. On 25 September 1979, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of. the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
categorically stated:

133. The Soviet delegation, in that Special Committee, on 22 August 1978 introduced a draft treaty”
which states in article I, paragraph 1, that:

“The Soviet Union believes that in present-day
conditions
the elimination
from the conduct of
international
relations of any manifestation of the
policy of hegemonism, that is, the desire of some
States to dominate other States and peoples, is
becoming one of the most important aspects of the
struggle for detente and peace. The policy of hegemonism leads to the creation of hotbeds of tension
and destabilizes the international situation.“6
,
139. Annexed to that document was the Soviet draft
resolution, which requested the strict observance by
all States of the principles on which the United Nations
was based. It also noted that the policy of hegemonism,
that is to say, the desire of some States to dominate
other States and peoples, is in flagrant contradiction
to these principles and first and foremost the principle
of the sovereign equality of ,States. The same draft
resolution condemned the policy, of hegemonism and

“The High Contracting Parties shall strictly abide
by their undertaking not to use in their mutual relations, or in their international relations in general,
force or the threat of force against the territorial
integrity or political independence of any State, or
in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes
of the United Nations.”
Paragraph

3 of the same article reads as follows:

“NO
consideration
may be adduced to justify
resort to the threat or use of force in violation of the
obligations
assumed under this Treaty.”

134. In this regard, the Soviet Minister for Foreign
Affairs had said previously, at the twentieth session
r of the General Assembly, on 24 September 1965, that:
14

declared that no State or gro,up of States should ever,
under any circumstances and ‘for any reason whatsoever, claim hegemony in’international
affairs or seek
a position of domination either in the world as a whole
or in any of its regions.
I , $’
140. In his speech delivered to the First Committee
on 16 October 1979,’ the’ Soviet representative
warned-to
use his own wor&-against
the dangers
of a policy of hegemonism,wliich
resides in the fact
that it disregards the rights *of peoples and, in the first
instance, of peoples of’ small and medium-sized
developing countries, and. it rules out democratic
principles,
upon which international
relations are
being built today.
‘,.‘, (’ ,

certain ideological
regime against the will of its
people, their religion and their culture. The great
people of Afghanistan have from time immemorial
stood against any foreign domination, and certainly
they will not today accept any kind of foreign
occupation.
145. In my statement to the Security Council on
2 December 1979, I said: “As a Moslem and a representative of a Moslem country, I must confess that all
Moslems are concerned and even disturbed by certain
adverse propaganda which Islam is receiving at
present.” [2176th

“From the very first days of its existence, the
Soviet State resolutely came out against the imposition of the will of one State upon other countries
and peoples and against, anybody acting in hege,
monistic fashion and someone else being subordinated to the will of the .first.”

31.1

147. It was the grave situation in Afghanistan and its
serious implications for the Moslem countries, the nonaligned movement and the international community
at large that prompted the Egyptian Ministry of Foreign
Affairs on 28 December 1979 to issue the following
statement:

At this juncture I would respectfully wish to ask the
representative of the Soviet Union if the course of
action now being followed by.his country in Afghanistan constitutes a departure .from the declared and
traditional position of the USSR.

“The Arab Republic of Egypt strongly and
resolutely condemns the Soviet military intervention
in Afghanistan which is considered:

142. It is not long-in fact, it is less than one monthsince the Soviet delegation cast an affirmative vote on
the draft resolution presented by a group of members
of the non-aligned movement on the same item, calling
upon States to refrain in their international relations
from military, political, economic and any other form
of coercion, denouncing the use or threat of uSe of
force, all forms of foreign aggression, occupation,
domination and interference, as well. as the creation of
spheres of interest and the division of the world into
antagonistic political and military blocs [General Asresolution

pnrn.

146. Today I must say that the attempt to subjugate’
the deeply’ rooted Moslem nation of Afghanistan
through an alien ideology against its free will is a
further reason for concern, I am sure, for all 800 million Moslems throughout the world. We believe that
the international
community,
and in particular the
50 Moslem countries, should mobilize all efforts to
stand behind the legitimate struggle of the people of
Afghanistan.

141. In the same statement,’ .‘a(,
;‘he Soviet representative
said:

sembly

meeting,

“1. A flagrant violation of the Charter of the
United Nations and the principles of international
law, which call on all States not to intervene in the
internal affairs of other States;
“2. A new attempt to impose a Marxist regime
on the people of Afghanistan, the purpose of which
is to destroy this people’s personality and pure
Islamic identity-a
matter Egypt cannot tolerate
owing to Egypt’s cardinal responsibilities towards
the Islamic world;

34/103].

143. We find ourselves regretfully compelled to
state that the Soviet invasion of brotherly Afghanistan
is nothing but a manifestation of the policy of hegemonism in that sensitive region of the world. Using
the words, the logic and the deductions of the Soviet
delegation in the deliberations on this item on hegemonism, we find no excuse for such a flagrant violation
of the principles and provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations-an
act that has undoubtedly created
a hotbed of tension that will systematically endanger
international peace and security.

Furthermore,
the Egyptian People’s Assembly on
31 December unanimously issued another statement
that denounced the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and
expressed the grave concern of the Egyptian people
regarding it.

144. The fact is that Afghanistan, a Moslem nonaligned and peace-loving nation with a great history
and civilization,
is faced with an invasion from its
super-Power neighbour aimed’at imposing by force a

148. In conclusion, my delegation firmly believes
that the United Nations has a special role to play in
safeguarding the sovereignty, political independence
and territorial
integrity of all countries, especially

“3. An attempt to weaken the non-aligned
movement by detaching Afghanistan from it and
forcing Afghanistan into the Soviet bloc.”

15

will be consistent with the Spviet initiatives presented
throughout the years to the United Nations.

smaller countries. To discharge its Primary responsibilities, this august body should take the necessary
measures, comprising the following elements: first, the
immediate, total and uticdnditional withdrawal-of
the
Soviet armed forces from Afghanistan;
secondly,
termination by the Soviet.Union Of its interference in
the internal affairs of Afghanistan; -thirdly, respect
for the sovereign right of the people of Afghanistan to
determine their future and to choose their own
political, social and economic system free from foreign
intervention.

The meeting

NOTES
I To
No.

149. We are sure that the leaders of the Soviet Union
are aware of the dangerous impact on world peace and
security of their action and the serious consequences
resulting therefrom. We hope that the Soviet attitude

.-..

rose clt 2.40 p.m.

.

16

be printed

17976.

in

“United

Nations,

Tw~ty

Serie.s”,

under

HOWTOORTAINUh?TEDNATXOXSPUDLICAI'IOSS
Unitad
Nations
publicntionl
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York irr Geneva.

COMMENTSEPROCURER

may bc obtained
your. bookstore

LES

or

from
bookstores
and distributors
write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

PUBLlCATlONSDESNATIONSUNIES

Les pubIicntions
des Nations
Unies sent en venle
dnns les librairiea
et lea agences
ddpositaires
du monda entier. Inforrnez-vous
aup&
de votre libraire ou adresaez-vous
A : Nations
Unies. Section
des ventes, New York ou Gcnbve.
XAIC

IlOJIYrIHTb

W3AAlKRfI

OITAIIH

3AH.llH

OD’bE~HHEHHbIX

HAWUi

J.fJ~a?inn OpraHH3nUHW
Obzeunxemsrs
Hau~il
YCMIIO xynnrb
a XHHYKRE.IX: Maraax~ax
H areHTcTaax
BO acex pailopiax
x~pn.
Hanoflilfe
cnpanKs
06 HsqaHHax
a
sawex
xnnmnoht
Mara3nne
nnv n:imn-re
no anpecy
: OpranH3aqHn
Obzefiff~emfb~x
HaqsR,
CexqHa no nponame
HsnaHHA, HEXB-RO~K
WIM Xeueaa.

COMOCONSEGUlRPUBLICAClONRSDELAS

NACIONESUNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidaa
estan en venla en librerlas
y casas distribuidoras
en todas partes
de1 mundo.
Consulte
a su librero
o dirfjaee
a: Naciones
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

-...,I

Litho in United

Nations,

New

York

00400

8%61462~Dcccmilw~

3-s
