Resolution• adopted on the reports of the Seeond Committee

the regional economic commissions, the Economic and
Social Office in Beirut, the appropriate specialized
agencies and the Interna•tional Atomic Energy Agency,
to study the possibility of intensifying international industrial co-operation in furtherance of the purpose and
functions of the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization, taking into account the existing experiences and forms of such co-operation ;
4. Requests the Executive Director of the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization to report
on the implementation of the present resolution to the
Industrial Development Board at its third session.
1626th plenary meeting,
12 December 1967.

2300 (XXII). Multilateral food aid
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2096 (XX) of 20 December
1965 and 2155 (XXI) of 22 November 1966 on the
programme of studies on multilateral food aid, and
also the recommendation contained in annex A.11.6 of
the Final Act adopted by the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development at its first session, 28
Noting with appreciation the progress report of the
Secretary-General, 29
Taking note of the Food Aid Convention, which
forms part of the International Grains Arrangement
1967 and embodies, inter alia, the principle that food
aid benefits food-exporting developing countries as
well as food-deficit developing countries,
Stre;sing the need for ensuring the effective coordination of all food aid programmes while duly safeguarding the trade interests of the food-exporting and
food-importing countries, especially the developing
countries, and domestic agriculture in recipient countries,
1. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the Director-General of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, in consultation
with the executive heads of other interested international agencies and programmes, and bearing in mind
the need to safeguard duly the trade interests of the
food-exporting and food-importing countries, especially
the developing countries, and domestic agriculture in
recipient countries :
(a) To continue the programme of studies on multilateral food aid called for in General Assembly resolution 2096 ( XX) , in the light of the views concerning
the world food problem expressed at the fourteenth
session of the Conference of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, at the twentysecond session of the General Assembly and at the
second session of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development;
( b) To give particular attention, in the next phase
of the study, to the problems of the co-ordinatioa of all
food aid programmes and to review and assess the
adequacy of existing multilateral institutional arrangements for handling, in case of need, a substantially increased volume of food aid, including the possibility of
modifying such arrangements;
28 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, vol. I, Final Act and Report (United
Nations publication, Sales No.: 64.II.B.11), p. 32.
21 Official Records of the Economi, aNd s,,cial COffflcil, Forty-

third Stssion, Annezts, agenda items 2 and 13, documents
E/4352 and Add.I.

19

2. Invites the Governments concerned to make use
of multilateral facilities in implementing the Food Aid
Convention ;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to include information on the implementation of the present resolution in the final report to ·be submitted by him in
pursuance of resolution 2096 (XX).
1626th plenary M1etmg,
12 DeceMb1r 1967.

2301 (XXll). Food produetlon
The General Assembly,
Stressing the need to combat effectively the world
food shortage through the intensification of food production in the developing countries by means of multilateral and national action with a view to solving their
immediate and long-term food problems,
Noting the recent progress achieved in the production of a:bundant rice yields through the ·scientific application of the latest technology in increasing rice production, including the advances made in this regaTd
during the International Rice Year,
Realizing that through the application of the latest
technology the production of rice as the staple food
cereal of many of the developing countries could be
increased to a large extent to meet their basic food
needs and to alleviate the world food crisis in the
future,
l. Invites Member States, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, other United
Nations bodies, and the governmental and non-governmental agencies concerned with agricultural production
and food aid to intensify their efforts to increase production of the staple food cereals, particularly rice,
through the aforementioned application of· the latest
technology, taking into account the trade interests of
the food-exporting and food-importing countries, especially the developing countries ;
2. Invites the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations to submit a report to the Economic and Social Council on the progress made in
this field.
1626th plenary num,sg,
12 December 1967.

2305 (XXll). United Nadou Development
Decade
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2218 (XXI) of 19 December 1966 on the United Nations Development Decade,
Recalling also its resolqtion 2087 (XX) of 20 December 1965 on the financing of economic development,
Recalling further its resolution 2158 (XXI) of
25 November 1966 on permanent sovereignty over
natural resources, .
Endorsing Economic and Social Council resolution
1260 (XLIII) of 3 August 1967, in which the Council noted with satisfaction that the Committee for
Development Planning had given preliminary thought
to the preparation· of guidelines and proposals for the
next decade,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 1261 (XLIII) of 3 August 1967 on a review of
past experience and of possibilities for future action in
the field of economic development, .
