S/PRST/2012/8

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 March 2012
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6744th meeting of the Security Council, held on 29 March 2012, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
the Middle East”, the President of the Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the Yemeni-led peaceful transition
process to a just and democratic political system. It notes the recent progress,
including the 21 February elections which occurred in a largely peaceful
manner and with an encouraging level of turn-out and the 25 February transfer
of power to President Abd Rabbuh Mansour Hadi, as per the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative and Implementation Mechanism. The Security Council
reaffirms its commitment to the unity, sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Yemen.
“The Security Council expresses concern at the recent deterioration in
cooperation among political actors and the risks this poses to the transition.
The Security Council reaffirms its resolution 2014 (2011), and calls upon all
political actors in Yemen to remain committed to the political transition,
constitutional order, to play a constructive role in the process and to reject
violence.
“The Security Council notes that the second phase of the transition
should focus on the holding of a Conference for National Dialogue,
restructuring of the security forces, tackling the unauthorised possession of
weapons outside the control of the state, passing legislation on transitional
justice to support reconciliation, Constitutional reform, electoral reform and
the holding of general elections in 2014. The Security Council emphasises the
need for these political processes to be conducted in an inclusive manner
involving the full participation of the different segments of Yemeni society,
including the regions of the country, the major social groups and the full and
effective participation of women.
“The Security Council emphasises the importance of a well planned and
peaceful preparatory process for the Conference for National Dialogue and
therefore urges the quick formation by the Yemeni Government of an inclusive
Preparatory Committee involving the major constituencies. In the context of a
genuinely inclusive process, the Security Council reminds the Yemeni
Government and other actors of the need to release those protesters arbitrarily
detained during the crisis.
12-27959 (E) 290312

*1227959*

S/PRST/2012/8

“The Security Council expresses its strong concern about intensified
terrorist attacks, including by Al Qaida, within Yemen. It condemns such
terrorist attacks in the strongest terms and supports the efforts of the Yemeni
Government to combat terrorism in compliance with all their obligations under
international law, in particular international human rights, refugee and
humanitarian law. It expresses deep condolences to the families of the victims
in the March attacks in Abyan, southern Yemen.
“The Security Council notes the formidable economic and social
challenges confronting Yemen, which have left many Yemenis in acute need of
humanitarian assistance. It welcomes the expansion of the humanitarian
response capacity by UN agencies and partners, while noting its concern that
the 2012 Humanitarian Response Plan is significantly underfunded, and urges
renewed and sustained support by donors for the Plan. The Security Council
also urges all parties to facilitate full, safe and unimpeded access for
humanitarian actors to reach people in need of humanitarian assistance.
“The Security Council notes with appreciation the planned 23 May
Friends of Yemen Ministerial meeting in Riyadh and calls for the international
community to maintain its active support to help the Yemeni government meet
the forthcoming political, security, economic and humanitarian challenges. The
Security Council looks forward to an action plan set out by the Yemeni
authorities, in close cooperation with all the parties in Yemen and in a spirit of
dialogue, on how these challenges could be addressed with the support of the
international community. They affirm their view that the Friends of Yemen
have a particularly important role to play by bringing together the main
international actors in a common endeavour to support Yemen’s overall
transitional plans during the next two years.
“The Security Council reiterates that all those responsible for human
rights violations and abuses, including acts of violence, should be held
accountable. The Security Council also notes with concern that children
continue to be recruited and used by armed groups and certain elements of the
military and calls for continued national efforts to discourage the use and
recruitment of child soldiers.
“The Security Council reiterates its call to all parties to remain fully
committed to the success of the transition and welcomes the continued
engagement of the good offices of the Secretary-General and his Special
Advisor, Jamal Benomar. It welcomes the Secretary-General’s intention to
dispatch a team of experts to monitor the implementation and provide advice
to the parties in consultation with the government of Yemen; and supports the
intention of the United Nations to focus its political engagement through a
small presence in Yemen of officials working closely alongside the UN
Country Team in order to support Yemeni efforts to organise a National
Dialogue process that is inclusive, transparent and participatory, and will work
in coordination with partner Missions, with the Yemeni government to adopt
transitional justice legislation, carry out constitutional reform and offer
support up to and including the general elections in 2014. The Security
Council remains closely engaged on the situation in Yemen and will continue
to closely follow the next steps towards a peaceful political transition of power.”

2

12-27959
