IL

37

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Ma~n Committee

5. Determines once more that all actions taken by Israel to give effect to its decision relating to the occupied
Syrian Arab Golan are illegal and invalid and shall not
be recognized;

6. Reaffirms its determination that all relevant provisions of the Regulations annexed to the Hague Convention IV of 1907, 76 and the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 August 1949, continue to apply to the Syrian
territory occupied by Israel since 1967, and calls upon
the parties thereto to respect and ensure respect for
their obligations under these instruments in all circumstances;
7. Determines once more that the continued occupation of the Syrian Arab Golan since 1967 and its annexation by Israel on 14 December 1981, following Israel's
decision to impose its laws, jurisdiction and administration on that territory, constitute a continuing threat to
international peace and security;
8. Strongly deplores the negative vote by a permanent member of the Security Council which prevented
the Council from adopting against Israel, under Chapter VII of the Charter, the "appropriate measures" referred to in resolution 497 (1981) unanimously adopted
by the Council;
9. Further deplores any political, economic, financial, military and technological support to Israel that
encourages it to commit acts of aggression and to consolidate and perpetuate its occupation and annexation
of the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem, and the other occupied Arab territories;
10. Firmly emphasizes once more its demand that Israel, the occupying Power, rescind forthwith its illegal
decision of 14 December 1981 to impose its laws, jurisdiction and administration on the Syrian Arab Golan,
which resulted in the effective annexation of that territory;
11. Reaffirms once more the overriding necessity of
the total and unconditional withdrawal by Israel from
the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including
Jerusalem, and the other occupied Arab territories,
which is an essential prerequisite for the establishment
of a comprehensive and just peace in the Middle East;
12. Determines once more that Israel's record, policies and actions confirm that it is not a peace-loving
Member State, that it has persistently violated the principles contained in the Charter and that it has carried
out neither its obligations under the Charter nor its
commitment under General Assembly resolution 273
(III) of 11 May 1949;
13. Calls upon all Member States to put an end to
the flow to Israel of any military, economic, financial
and technological aid, as well as human resources,
aimed at prolonging Israeli occupation of the Arab territories or encouraging Israel to pursue its aggressive
policy against the Arab countries and the Palestinian
people;
14. Urges non-member States to act in accordance
with the provisions of the present resolution;
76
See Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, The Hague
Conventions and Declarations of 1899 and 1907 (New York, Oxford
University Press, 1915).

15. Calls upon the specialized agencies and other
international organizations to conform their relations
with Israel to the terms of the present resolution;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-sixth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
67th plenary meeting
13 December 1990
C

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 36/120 E of 10 December
1981, 37/123 C of 16 December 1982, 38/180 C of 19
December 1983, 39/146 C of 14 December 1984, 40/168
C of 16 December 1985, 41/162 C of 4 December 1986,
42/209 D of 11 December 1987, 43/54 C of 6 December
1988 and 44/40 C of 4 December 1989, in which it determined that all legislative and administrative measures and actions taken by Israel, the occupying Power,
which had altered or purported to alter the character
and status of the Holy City of Jerusalem, in particular
the so-called "Basic Law" on Jerusalem and the proclamation of Jerusalem as the capital of Israel, were null
and void and must be rescinded forthwith,
Recalling Security Council resolution 478 (1980) of20
August 1980, in which the Council, inter alia, decided
not to recognize the "Basic Law" and called upon those
States that had established diplomatic missions at Jerusalem to withdraw such missions from the Holy City,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General of 15 October 1990, 73
1. Determines that Israel's decision to impose its
laws, jurisdiction and administration on the Holy City
of Jerusalem is illegal and therefore null and void and
has no validity whatsoever;
2. Deplores the transfer by some States of their diplomatic missions to Jerusalem in violation of Security
Council resolution 478 (1980), and their refusal to comply with the provisions of that resolution;
3. Calls once more upon those States to abide by the
provisions of the relevant United Nations resolutions,
in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-sixth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
67th plenary meeting
13 December 1990
45/145.

Law of the sea

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions, including resolution 44/26 of 20 November 1989, regarding the law of
the sea,
Recognizing that, as stated in the third preambular
paragraph of the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea,59 the problems of ocean space are
closely interrelated and need to be considered as a
whole,
Convinced that it is important to safeguard the unified character of the Convention and related resolutions adopted therewith and to apply them in a manner

General Assembly-Forty-flRh Session

38

consistent with that character and with their object and
purpose,
Emphasizing the need for States to ensure consistent
application of the Convention, as well as the need for
harmonization of national legislation with the provisions of the Convention,
Considering that, in its resolution 2749 (XXV) of 17
December 1970, it proclaimed that the sea-bed and
ocean floor, and the subsoil thereof, beyond the limits
of national jurisdiction (hereinafter referred to as "the
Area"), as well as the resources of the Area, are the
common heritage of mankind,
Recalling that the Convention provides the regime to
be applied to the Area and its resources,
Recalling with satisfaction the expressions of willingness to explore all possibilities of addressing issues, as
referred to in the statements made at the end of the
meeting of the Preparatory Commission for the International Sea-Bed Authority and for the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, held in New York from
14 August to 1 September 1989, in order to secure universal participation in the Convention, 77
Recognizing the need for co-operation in the early
and effective implementation by the Preparatory Commission of resolution II of the Third United Nations
Conference on the Law of the Sea, 78
Noting with satisfaction the progress made in the Preparatory Commission since its inception, including the
registration in 1987 as pioneer investors of the lnstitut
franr;ais de recherche pour !'exploitation de la mer
(IFREMER), the Government of India, Deep Ocean
Resources Development Co., Ltd. (DORD) and
Yuzhmorgeologiya, whose applications were submitted
by the Governments of France, India, Japan and the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics respectively, bearing in mind that such registration entails both rights and
obligations,
Recalling with satisfaction the designation by the Preparatory Commission of reserved areas for the Authority from the application areas submitted by the pioneer
investors pursuant to resolution II,
Noting the submission to the Preparatory Commission of an application by the Government of China on
behalf of the China Ocean Mineral Resources Research and Development Association (COMRA) for
registration as a pioneer investor under resolution II, 79
Noting also the increasing needs of countries, especially developing countries, for information, advice and
assistance in the implementation of the Convention and
in their developmental process for the full realization
of the benefits of the comprehensive legal regime established by the Convention,
Concerned that the developing countries are as yet
unable to take effective measures for the full realization
of these benefits owing to the lack of resources and of
the necessary scientific and technological capabilities,
Recognizing the need to enhance and supplement the
efforts of States and competent international organiza77 See N44/650 and Corr.I, paras. 156 and 158.
18

Official Records of the Third United Nations Conference on the
Law of the Sea, vol. X:VII (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.84.V.3), document NCONF.62/121, annex I.
79
LOS/PCN/113.

tions to enable developing countries to acquire such capabilities,
Recognizing also that the Convention encompasses all
uses and resources of the sea and that all related activities within the United Nations system need to be implemented in a manner consistent with it,
Noting with appreciation the initiative of the Secretary-General to promote dialogue aimed at achieving
universal participation in the Convention,80
Deeply concerned at the current state of the marine
environment,
Mindful of the importance of the Convention for the
protection of the marine environment,
Noting with concern the use of fishing methods and
practices that can have an adverse impact on the conservation and management of marine living resources,
Recalling that States have a duty to take, or co-operate with other States in taking, such measures for their
nationals as may be necessary for the conservation of
the living resources of the high seas,
Conscious of the urgent need to increase the scientific knowledge of the marine environment,
Taking note of activities carried out in 1990 under the
major programme on marine affairs, set forth in chapter 25 of the medium-term plan for the period 19841989 and extended for the period 1990-1991, in accordance with the report of the Secretary-General,81 as
approved in General Assembly resolution 38/59 A, and
the report of the Secretary-General,82
Recalling its approval of the financing of the expenses
of the Preparatory Commission from the regular budget
of the United Nations,
Taking special note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral prepared in pursuance of paragraph 20 of
General Assembly resolution 44/26, 82
1. Recalls the historic significance of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea as an important
contribution to the maintenance of peace, justice and
progress for all peoples of the world;

2. Expresses its satisfaction at the increasing and
overwhelming support for the Convention, as evidenced, inter alia, by the one hundred and fifty-nine signatures and forty-five of the sixty ratifications or accessions required for entry into force of the Convention;
3. Invites all States to make renewed efforts to facilitate universal participation in the Convention;
4. Calls upon all States that have not done so to consider ratifying or acceding to the Convention at the earliest possible date to allow the effective entry into force
of the new legal regime for the uses of the sea and its
resources;
5. Calls upon all States to safeguard the unified
character of the Convention and related resolutions
adopted therewith and to apply them in a manner consistent with that character and with their object and
purpose;
80
See N45/721 and Corr.I, para. 14.
81
N38/570 and Corr.I and Add.I and Add.1/Corr.l.
82
N45/72 I and Corr. l.

II.

6. Also calls upon States to observe the provisions
of the Convention when enacting their national legislation;
7. Notes the progress being made by the Preparatory Commission for the International Sea-Bed Authority and for the International Tribunal for the Law of the
Sea in all areas of its work;
8. Notes with satisfaction the Understanding on the
Fulfilment of Obligations by the Registered Pioneer Investors and their Certifying States adopted by the Preparatory Commission on 30 August 1990;83
9. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his efforts in support of the Convention and for
the effective execution of the major programme on marine affairs set forth in chapter 25 of the medium-term
plan for the period 1984-1989 and extended for the period 1990-1991 and requests him to take into account
the prospective entry into force of th~ Conv~ntion ~nd
the increased needs of States for assistance m the implementation of the Convention in the medium-term
plan for the period 1992-1997;
10. Also expresses its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for the report prepared in pursuance of paragraph 20 of General Assembly resolution 44/268 and
requests him to carry out the activities outlined therein,
as well as those aimed at the strengthening of the legal
regime of the sea, special emphasis being placed on the
work of the Preparatory Commission, including the implementation of resolution II of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea;
11. Welcomes regional efforts by developing countries to integrate the ocean sector in national development plans and programmes through the process of international co-operation and assistance, in particular
the recent initiatives mentioned in the report of the
Secretary-General; 84
12. Calls upon the Secretary-General to continue to
assist States in the implementation of the Convention
and in the development of a consistent and uniform approach to the legal regime thereunder, as well as in
their national, subregional and regional efforts towards
the full realization of the benefits therefrom, and invites the organs and organizations of the United Nations system to co-operate and lend assistance in these
endeavours;
13. Urges interested Member States, in particular
States that have advanced marine capabilities, to review
relevant policies and programmes in the context of the
integration of the marine sector in national development strategies, and to explore prospects for intensifying co-operation with developing States, including
States of regions active in this field;
14. Requests the competent international organizations, the United Nations Development Programme,
the World Bank and other multilateral funding agencies, in accordance with their respective policies, to intensify financial, technological, organizational and
managerial assistance to the developing countries in
their efforts to realize the benefits of the comprehensive legal regime established by the Convention and to
strengthen co-operation among themselves and with
donor States in the provision of such assistance;
83
LOS/PCN/L87, annex.
84

39

Resolutions adopted without reference to• Malo Committee

See N45/721 and Corr.I, paras. 16-19.

15. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General
submitted pursuant to paragraph 13 of General Assembly resolution 44/26, in which were identified the needs
of States in regard to the development and management of ocean resources and the measures currently
taken by States and by the competent international organizations in responding to those needs, 85 and requests
the Secretary-General to transmit that report to all
Member States and competent international organizations, agencies and bodies for their review and to take
their comments into account in the preparation of the
report to be submitted to the Assembly at its forty-sixth
session;
16. Approves the decision of the Preparatory Commission to hold its ninth regular session at Kingston
from 25 February to 22 March 1991 and to hold a summer meeting in New York in 1991;
17. Recognizes that the protection of the marine environment will be significantly enhanced by the implementation of applicable provisions of the Convention;
18. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for the study on marine scientific research submitted pursuant to paragraph 19 of General Assembly resolution 44/26, 86 in which it was underscored that
research and monitoring needs in the field of marine
science call for enhanced international co-operation in
order to provide a sound basis for resource management and the protection and preservation of the marine
environment and for the study of the influence of the
oceans on the global environment;
19. Reiterates its call to States and other members of
the international community to strengthen their co-operation in the conservation of marine living resources,
including the prevention of the use of fishing methods
and practices that can have an adverse impact on the
conservation and management of marine living resources;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-sixth session on developments pertaining to the Convention and all related activities and on the implementation of the present resolution;
21. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its forty-sixth session the item entitled "Law of the sea".
68th plenary meeting
14 December 1990
45/176.

Policies of apartheid of the Government of
South Africa
A

INTERNATIONAL EFFORTS TO ERADICATE APARTHEID

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Declaration on Apartheid and its Destructive Consequences in Southern Africa, contained
in the annex to its resolution S-16/1 of 14 December
1989, and its resolution 44/244 of 17 September 1990,
85
86

N45/712.
N45/563.
