UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.3291
13 October 1993
ENGLISH

PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE THREE THOUSAND
TWO HUNDRED AND NINETY-FIRST MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York,
on Wednesday, 13 October 1993, at 6.40 p.m.

President:

(Brazil)

Cape Verde
China
Djibouti
France
Hungary
Japan
Morocco
New Zealand
Pakistan
Russian Federation
Spain
United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland
United States of America
Venezuela

Mr. JESUS
Mr. LI Zhaoxing
Mr. OLHAYE
Mr. MERIMEE
Mr. ERDÖS
Mr. MOTOMURA
Mr. SNOUSSI
Mr. KEATING
Mr. MARKER
Mr. VORONTSOV
Mr. PEDAUYE

Members:

Mr. SARDENBERG

Sir David HANNAY
Mrs. ALBRIGHT
Mr. TAYLHARDAT

________________________________________________________________________________
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and
interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be
printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be
sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one
week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Office of Conference
Services, room DC2-794, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of
the record.
93-86879 (E)

S/PV.3291
2
The meeting was called to order at 6.40 p.m.
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The agenda was adopted.
THE QUESTION CONCERNING HAITI
REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL (S/26573)
The PRESIDENT:

I should like to inform the Council that I

have received letters from the representatives of Barbados, Belize,
Dominica, Grenada, Haiti, and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines in
which they request to be invited to participate in the discussion
of the item on the Council’s agenda.

In conformity with the usual

practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
those representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Longchamp (Haiti) took
a place at the Council table.
The PRESIDENT:

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm

welcome to the distinguished Ministers representing the States of
the Caribbean Community (CARICOM).
I invite the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Barbados,
His Excellency The Honourable Mr. Branford M. Taitt; the Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Belize,
His Excellency The Honourable Mr. Dean Barrow; the Minister for
External Affairs and Organization of Eastern Caribbean States Unity
of Dominica, His Excellency The Honourable Mr. Brian Alleyne; the
Attorney General and Minister of Legal Affairs of Grenada, Minister
Responsible for CARICOM Affairs of Grenada, Chairman of the
Standing Committee of Ministers Responsible for Foreign Affairs of
the Caribbean Community, His Excellency The Honourable
Mr. Francis Alexis; and the Minister for Foreign Affairs and

S/PV.3291
3
(The President)
Tourism of St. Vincent and the Grenadines, His Excellency
The Honourable Mr. Herbert Young, to take places at the Council
table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Taitt (Barbados),
Mr. Barrow (Belize), Mr. Alleyne (Dominica), Mr. Alexis (Grenada),
and Mr. Young (St. Vincent and the Grenadines) took places at the
Council table.
The PRESIDENT:

The Security Council will now begin its

consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the report of the
Secretary-General on the question concerning Haiti.

This report is

contained in document S/26573.
Members of the Council also have before them document S/26578,
which contains the text of a draft resolution prepared in the
course of the Council’s prior consultations.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to proceed to
the vote on the draft resolution before it.

If I hear no

objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
Before putting the draft resolution to the vote, I shall call
on those members of the Council who wish to make statements before
the voting.
Mrs. ALBRIGHT (United States of America):

This past

Monday, the military leaders of Haiti violated a solemn agreement.
That agreement sought to resolve peacefully the governmental crisis
in their country.

Armed demonstrators acting with police and

military support prevented United States troops on a United Nations

S/PV.3291
4
(Mrs. Albright, United States)
mission from entering Haiti.

These troops were invited into Haiti

by Haiti’s Prime Minister, Robert Malval.

America’s troops were

not sent to confront the military or police, but to provide
technical and training assistance.

The Governors Island Agreement

of 3 July 1993 called for this mission.
But my Government has said from the outset that our
participation depended upon the willingness of the Haitian military
to provide, as promised, a cooperative and secure environment.

We

have never suggested or threatened an intervention in Haiti over
the opposition of the military, nor has that course of action ever
been endorsed or proposed by Haiti’s elected President,
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.

This has never been - nor should it be -

some kind of gunboat diplomacy.

The events in Port au Prince on

Monday demonstrated a Haitian military capability that has never
been contested.

The force of the mob was used to delay a mission

that would never have been undertaken without their consent.

Some

in Haiti may think that a great victory has been won, but this
would be a dangerous delusion.
The day will come when democratic rule is restored to Haiti.
The Governors Island Agreement sought to ensure that the transition
would be peaceful, that recriminations would be minimal, and that
amnesty would be given to those who illegally ousted a
democratically elected President.

General Cédras and Police

Chief François have chosen a perilous, self-defeating and
dishonourable course.
devour them.

They are riding a tiger that may ultimately

We urge them to reconsider their actions now.

Another blow has been struck against Haitian democracy.
the vast majority of the Haitian people, I say this:
of nations remains with you.
you.

To

The community

The members of this Council are with

The Organization of American States is with you, and the

Caribbean Community is with you.

S/PV.3291
5
(Mrs. Albright, United States)
Today the Council votes to reimpose economic sanctions.
have not taken this decision lightly.

We

But we know that imposing

sanctions in New York has changed behaviour in Port-au-Prince.
Tough economic sanctions brought the Haitian military to the
bargaining table last July.

Our hope is that today’s renewal of

sanctions will provide another wake-up call to those who seek to
extinguish the democratic flame in Haiti.
I want to thank my colleagues on the Council who have
cooperated in this quick action.
My Government will take firm measures to enforce this
resolution.

We will direct travel and financial sanctions against

individuals obstructing the agreement.

We will maintain the

pressure for democratic change in every manner possible, short of
an armed intervention that no one wants.

We will continue to

explore every avenue for a peaceful solution.
In closing, let me say to the Council and to the people of
Haiti that the United States is committed to the return of Haitian
democracy.

Achieving that goal will not be easy.

Our preferred

course is not the stick of sanctions but the carrot of economic and
technical assistance.
choice.

Today the Haitian military left us no

But when the day comes that democracy dawns again in Haiti

my Government stands ready to begin with you, the people of Haiti,
the job of rebuilding and revitalizing your country.
Mr. TAYLHARDAT (Venezuela) (interpretation from Spanish):
My delegation has taken note, with deep concern, of the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in Haiti in the light of the
latest events that have taken place in that country.

In this

report, submitted at the request of the Council, the SecretaryGeneral tells this body that the military authorities of Haiti have

S/PV.3291
6
(Mr. Taylhardat, Venezuela)
not carried out in good faith the commitments assumed in the
Governors Island Agreement.

That lack of compliance with the

obligations imposed in the Agreement obviously reflects a situation
that is a threat to peace and security in the region and requires
the Council to take action under Chapter VII of the Charter.
Accordingly, my delegation supports the reimposition of
sanctions on Haiti in view of the fact that, as was indicated, the
Armed Forces of Haiti, one of the parties to the Governors Island
Agreement, not only have not carried out their commitments in good
faith but have also placed obstacles in the way of the deployment
of the United Nations Mission in Haiti (UNMIH).
The report submitted to us by the Secretary-General is
eloquent in this respect, indicating that the Armed Forces have not
heeded the instructions given by the constitutional Government of
Haiti, thereby violating the principle of the subordination of the
Armed Forces to the civilian authorities and demonstrating a clear
and explicit lack of will to cooperate in the restoration of
democracy.
In these circumstances we believe that it is essential to send
an unambiguous signal to those who are challenging the authority of
the Security Council and the international community, which has
committed itself to guaranteeing the implementation of the
Governors Island Agreement.

Our purpose to assist in the return of

democracy to Haiti is firm and we will not hesitate to take all
measures to ensure that we attain that goal.
In conclusion, I should like to draw attention to the
importance my delegation attaches to the presence this afternoon at
this meeting of the distinguished Ministers and representatives of
a number of the countries of the Caribbean Community, which

S/PV.3291
7
(Mr. Taylhardat, Venezuela)
indicates the concern aroused in all of the countries of the region
by the situation prevailing in Haiti.
The PRESIDENT:

I now put to the vote the draft resolution

contained in document S/26578.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:

Brazil, Cape Verde, China, Djibouti, France,

Hungary, Japan, Morocco, New Zealand, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Venezuela
The PRESIDENT:

There were 15 votes in favour.

The draft

resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution 873 (1993).
I shall now call on those members of the Council who wish to
make statements following the voting.
Mr. MERIMEE (France) (interpretation from French):

It was

with deep regret that my delegation voted in favour of this
resolution under which the Security Council decides to reimpose
sanctions that had been lifted on 27 August last.

But, there was

no alternative, and my delegation is very pleased at the Council’s
extremely prompt action, which bears out its determination to
ensure that the process of peace and the restoration of legality in
Haiti, set in train by the Governors Island Agreement, is
successfully concluded.
France condemns those responsible for acts of intimidation and
violence which, contrary to the commitments they entered into, have
prevented the deployment of the United Nations Mission in Haiti
(UNMIH).
A few days are granted before the sanctions take effect.
France hopes that those in charge of the army and the police will

S/PV.3291
8
(Mr. Mérimée France)
use this time in order to decided to comply fully with the
Governors Island Agreement, which should lead to the reinstating of
the legal authorities and the return of President Aristide on
30 October.

If sanctions are to be lifted, those responsible for

the present impasse will have to give formal guarantees of their
full cooperation with the United Nations Mission in Haiti.

They

must demonstrate that they are committed to strict compliance with
the orders received from the constitutional Government.

Finally,

they must immediately implement points 7, 8 and 9 of the Governors
Island Agreement, which provides, in particular, that before the
return of President Aristide, the Commander-in-Chief of the Police
Forces and the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces should be
replaced.
It should be very clear that if these provisions are not
implemented within the necessary time frame, France will not
hesitate to adopt additional measures against those responsible for
the failure of the process.

France, however, would like to believe

that the interests of the Haitian people and reason will prevail.
Finally, I would recall that the French Government fully
supports the action of the Prime Minister, Mr. Robert Malval, and
that of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Dante Caputo.
Mr. PEDAUYE (Spain) (interpretation from Spanish):

Spain

has been following with great concern the serious events that have
taken place in the past few days in Haiti, and specifically the
harassment by the members of the Malval Government, the threats
against diplomats and foreign journalists, and the incidents which
prevented the disembarkation in Port-au-Prince of the components of
the United Nations Mission in Haiti.

These incidents, as indicated

in the Secretary-General’s report of 13 October 1993, made very

S/PV.3291
9
(Mr. Pedauye, Spain)
apparent the lack of any determination on the part of the Haitian
military authorities to carry out the commitments freely entered
into these forces are obliged to carry out the Governors Island
Agreement and the resolutions of the Security Council.
As was pointed out in the Presidential statement of
17 September and in Security Council resolution 861 (1993), failure
by those responsible for the military and security machinery in
Haiti to fulfil the commitments entered into would lead to the
imposition of sanctions.

The President of the Council repeated

this warning in his statement of 11 October.
The delegation of Spain indicated when resolution 861 (1993)
was adopted that the Council should be prepared to reimpose
sanctions as quickly as it had lifted them at that time, if
circumstances so required.

Unfortunately, that is what has

happened and, accordingly, the Council has been obliged to act with
the utmost speed.
The resolution we have just adopted offers a new and final
opportunity for the de facto authorities of Haiti to comply with
the Governors Island Agreement.

Otherwise, the Council will have

no alternative but to reconsider the situation with a view to
adopting additional measures.

S/PV.3291
10
(Mr. Pedauye, Spain)
The military and security authorities in Haiti would do well
not to ignore the resolutions of the Security Council and the
serious warning, which was issued by the President in his statement
of 17 September, that they will be held personally accountable for
the security of United Nations personnel in Haiti.
My delegation is firmly committed to the path embarked on for
the restoration of democracy to Haiti, and we trust that the
serious obstacles we are now facing can be resolved and that the
United Nations Mission in Haiti will be able to carry out its
mandate.

It is of the utmost importance that the international

community, represented by this Council, demonstrate its firm
determination to confront the challenges to the authority of the
United Nations which we have witnessed in recent days.
Those who believe that privileges can be maintained through
fear and terror are not only morally reprehensible but ignorant as
well.

In today’s world, no one can sit on a bayonet for very long,

to use the words of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General and
the Organization of American States (OAS), Mr. Dante Caputo, and
with them I shall conclude my statement.
The PRESIDENT:

I shall now make a statement in my

capacity as the representative of Brazil.
The Brazilian Government received with great apprehension the
news of the aggravation of the situation in Haiti over the past few
days.

We cannot but be extremely disappointed and concerned at the

fact that the commands of the Haitian Armed Forces and the police
are not complying with the provisions of the Governors Island
Agreement and, in particular, are not taking the measures that are
required for ensuring the safety and the freedom of movement of the
United Nations Mission in Haiti (UNMIH).
The events of 11 October when, by acts of intimidation and
violence, a ship carrying a contingent of UNMIH members was

S/PV.3291
11
(The President)
prevented from docking in Port au Prince, thus making it impossible
for UNMIH personnel to disembark, were extremely serious.

It was

and it is clearly the duty of the military and security authorities
in Haiti to ensure conditions for UNMIH personnel to arrive safely
in Haiti and afterwards to perform their tasks without any
obstacles.
The Organization of American States, through its Permanent
Council, has condemned the acts of intimidation of 11 October as
well as the lack of cooperation on the part of the military and
police authorities to enable to United Nations contingent to
disembark.

In resolution 861 (1993) adopted last August the

Security Council had already indicated that the measures of
sanctions which were then suspended would be reimposed should the
Haitian security authorities fail to implement in good faith the
provisions of the Governors Island Agreement.
Over the past few days the authorities responsible for the
armed forces and police have fallen far short of what was expected
of them in order to ensure the pursuance and successful conclusion
of the democratic process in Haiti.

The Council thus had to

respond appropriately but making it clear that it will continue to
support firmly the restoration of legitimacy, democracy and the
rule of law in Haiti.

To do otherwise would not be consistent with

the goals and principles of the Organization.
It is important that the authorities responsible for public
security in Haiti understand this.

We believe the resolution just

adopted leaves no doubt as to our determination, and Brazil
therefore hopes that the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative will be successful in their efforts to ensure the
necessary conditions for the work of UNMIH and for the continuation
of the democratic process as established in the Governors Island
Agreement.

S/PV.3291
12
(The President)
I now resume my function as President of the Security Council.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.

The

Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will

remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 7.05 p.m.
