S/PV.8041

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8041st meeting

Monday, 11 September 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alemu. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ethiopia)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Aboulatta
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
Colombia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2017/745)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-28091 (E)
*1728091*

S/PV.8041

Colombia

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of Colombia to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
and the President of the Security Council (S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2017/745)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Colombia to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jean Arnault,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Mission in Colombia, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

11/09/2017

The Congress, which elected the party’s new
leadership and executive secretariat and adopted its
political platform, took place exactly one year after
the declaration of the bilateral and definitive ceasefire,
on 29 August 2016. This gives us a measure of the
momentous developments that have taken place in the
past 12 months and of the intense political will that was
required from both sides to drive this process forward.
The resolution requested that the current mission
should begin provisional verification activities
anticipated by the Verification Mission, and the Council
will soon receive, together with the Mission’s last report,
our initial verification of the FARC’s reintegration and
the implementation of security guarantees in the areas
hardest hit by the armed conflict.
The Council also requested that we initiate
preparations now, including on the ground, to ensure
the smoothest possible transition to the Verification
Mission. Allow me therefore to supplement the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/745) on the size,
operational aspects and mandate of the new mission
with a summary of the measures taken since 10 July to
fulfil the Council’s request.

Mr. Arnault: I am grateful for the opportunity to
brief the Council on the implementation of its resolution
2366 (2017), of 10 July 2017, in which it which decided
to establish, at the request of the Government of
Colombia and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia-People’s Army (FARC-EP), the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, to begin its
activities in two weeks, on 26 September.

These include the establishment at all levels — local,
regional and national — of transitional teams with
civilian personnel and observers, who have begun
verification related to the new Mission’s mandate; the
identification of staffing needs for the next Mission and
the advertisement of priority positions pending approval
of the Secretary-General’s report by the Security
Council, and the decisions of the General Assembly;
and the careful selection of observers from the current
Mission who would be retained for the upcoming
mission so as to ensure adequate representation of
current contributing countries. In doing so, we have
placed special emphasis on retaining women observers
with both military and police background. This will
ensure an unprecedented percentage of women among
the observers of the Verification Mission.

But prior to doing so, let me underline what is,
politically speaking, the culmination of the ceasefire,
cessation-of-hostilities and weapons laydown process
that has unfolded since the signing of the Final Peace
Agreement on 24 November of last year, namely,
the formal transformation, after 53 years of armed
conflict, of the former Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia-People’s Army into a political party, whose
founding congress took place in Bogotá two weeks ago.

A deployment plan has also been finalized
that ensures an appropriate skill set, geographical
distribution and gender balance at the local, regional
and national levels. Reconnaissance visits have taken
place to all prospective team sites and sub-offices, in
particular with a view to identifying possible areas
of collocation with the United Nations country team.
Potential logistics contractors have been contacted
in connection with the new Mission’s transport and

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/745, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Arnault.

2/9

17-28091

11/09/2017

Colombia

accommodation needs. In addition, a request was
made to United Nations Headquarters for a series of
exemptions and measures to facilitate the smooth
transition between the two Missions.
Finally, in response to the Council’s call for
coordination with the United Nations system, we
have already put in place the joint working groups
on reintegration and security guarantees between the
Mission and the United Nations country team to ensure
full consistency between the implementation and the
verification sides of the United Nations in Colombia. In
summary, although the time frame was tight, the sum
total of these efforts carried out under the Council’s
authority have put us on track to start the Verification
Mission on time. It will be in a position to fulfil its
mandate on day one.
One pending issue is the settlement of accounts
deriving from the cost-sharing arrangements between
the United Nations and the Government of Colombia
related to the operation of the tripartite Monitoring
and Verification Mechanism. In cooperation with the
Colombian Government, United Nations Headquarters
and the Mission are working hard towards resolving
outstanding issues before the completion of our
Mission’s mandate.
As the Council is aware, last week, on 4 September,
the Government of Colombia and the National Liberation
Army reached agreement on a temporary ceasefire
that would start on 1 October and end on 12 January
2018. The ceasefire should be accompanied by a series
of measures aimed at improving the humanitarian
situation of communities in the conflict areas. The
agreement provides that the United Nations would
assist with the verification of the commitments made. I
met with both heads of delegations who have confirmed
their interest in the United Nations involvement and
members of the Mission have already engaged with the
technical commitmentission on the ceasefire. Further
discussions starting this week will hopefully enable
the Secretary-General to make recommendations to the
Council in the very near future.
In the past few days, before millions of Colombians
assembled in several cities, Pope Francis delivered
a very strong message in favour of reconciliation,
forgiveness and confidence in the future to a society
that bears the scars of decades of conflict and struggles
to imagine a Colombia free from ubiquitous, relentless
violence. Thankfully, over the past months the peace

S/PV. 8041

process between the Government and FARC-EP has
slowly but steadily tipped the scales in favour of hope.
We trust that the presence of the United Nations,
the work of the United Nations system and the support
of the Security Council can and should shore up further
the confidence of Colombian society in the stable peace
to which its citizens so ardently aspire.
The President: I thank Mr. Arnault for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank Special Representative
Jean Arnault for his comprehensive briefing this
morning and for the work he does on the ground
in Colombia. He can remain absolutely certain of
Sweden’s continued strong support for his efforts, for
the United Nations Mission in Colombia and for the
second Mission, as described in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2017/745).
We commend the strong commitment to peace of
both parties in Colombia and their efforts to overcome
challenges to the implementation of the Final Peace
Agreement. A sustained effort is now needed from the
State at the central, regional and local levels, as well
as the United Nations system and the international
community, in support of the Agreement. This must
include comprehensive rural reform, so that all
Colombians can share in the tangible dividends of peace.
The political, economic and social reincorporation of
former combatants into society is an integral part of
that process. Violence against human rights defenders
and community leaders demonstrates the urgent need
for the second United Nations Mission to also verify
the implementation of personal and collective security
guarantees, as requested by the parties.
We welcome the focus on the second Mission
having a strong presence locally and regionally, which
must be robust enough to allow proper verification of
security and reintegration. We also welcome the strong
emphasis on coordination and cooperation with the
United Nations country team, as we just heard. We
would also like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for the work that the Mission has
undertaken regarding the inclusion and participation
of women, which, as the report points out, has been
an important contributing factor for the success of
the Mission so far. Sweden is pleased to be able to
contribute to the current United Nations Mission and

17-280913/9

S/PV.8041

Colombia

it stands ready to continue to support the succeeding
Mission with personnel.
We welcome the recently announced ceasefire
between the Government of Colombia and the National
Liberation Army. The fact that the parties have
indicated an interest in having the United Nations
verify the implementation of the ceasefire is testimony
to the success of the current Verification Mission. The
United Nations and the Security Council must now
stand prepared to assist the parties moving forward.
We note the commitment by National Liberation
Army to cease the recruitment of minors. As Chair of
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, we
would like to highlight the Working Group’s conclusions
on Colombia from February this year which, inter alia,
encouraged the parties to ensure that child protection
is given due consideration as early as possible in the
peace process and that it is a core priority.
Peace in Colombia is now taking root. As the people
of Colombia and their leaders continue to consolidate
the gains made, we must all continue to stand by their
side. Sweden is committed to doing so.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to thank Mr. Jean
Arnault, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for his encouraging briefing and his good
work on the ground
We will soon witness the successful completion
of the first United Nations Mission in Colombia and
the laying down of arms process. We congratulate the
Colombian people for taking this historic step. Japan is
very pleased by the mutual confidence and good faith
demonstrated between the Government and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC) during
this process. We commend Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Arnault and his team, international
observers and civilian staff for their excellent work
in close coordination with the parties. The Council’s
decision to respond to the Colombian-initiated request
by establishing the United Nations Mission was the
right one.
We take note of the Secretary-General’s
recommendations on the United Nations Verification
Mission, based on consultations with the stakeholders.
Japan is ready to constructively discuss a draft
resolution. We note the importance of continued close
coordination between the Mission and the United
Nations country team and the seamless transition of the
4/9

11/09/2017

Missions. The whole-of-United Nations approach will
remain critical. Ultimately, long-term success depends
on the determination and commitment demonstrated by
the parties. We look forward to their continued efforts
during the second Mission’s deployment.
The social and economic reintegration process is
a delicate and challenging part of the peace process.
To guarantee genuine peace, FARC members who
have laid down arms must be able to fully participate
in economic and social life in Colombia as soon as
possible. Sufficient resources and security guarantees
are essential. FARC must also observe the Peace
Agreement and make efforts to fully reintegrate
into society.
We take note of the establishment of several legal
mechanisms at the national level for reintegration,
as well as for security. It is vital that they function
effectively and coherently on the ground, including
after the elections. Strong coordination efforts by the
Government are important to achieve maximum results.
Another piece of positive news is the temporary
ceasefire announcement between the Government and
the National Liberation Army on 4 September. We
welcome the ceasefire and strongly hope that it will lead
to productive peace negotiations between the parties as
well as bolster the current peace process, in general.
We appreciate the efforts made by the guarantors,
Brazil, Chile, Cuba, Ecuador, Norway and Venezuela,
as well as the Catholic Church. We look forward to their
continued support for the peace negotiations.
In conclusion, Japan reiterates its support for the
parties in implementing the Peace Agreement, and
once again commends the United Nations Mission in
Colombia for its vital work. Japan will continue to
support the people of Colombia through the efforts of
the second mission.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
am grateful to the Secretary-General for his report of
30 August (S/2017/745) and to Special Representative
Jean Arnault for the briefing he just delivered.
Moreover, we commend him on the efficient work that
he has carried out at the head of the United Nations
Mission in Colombia. The important announcement of
the Final Peace Agreement between the Government of
Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia — Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) on the
Bilateral and Definitive Ceasefire and the Cessation of
Hostilities and the Laying down of Arms for 102 days is
17-28091

11/09/2017

Colombia

generating hope that peace in Colombia, in addition to
being stable and lasting, will be comprehensive.
Following the adoption of resolution 2366 (2017)
on 10 July, establishing the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia and the culmination on 15 August
of the extraction of all weapons and the destruction of
all existing munitions in the 26 camps of the FARC-EP,
we have received encouraging news that underscores
steady progress in the consolidation of the peace process
in Colombia. It is extremely important that the United
Nations now give its full support so as to ensure a
successful political, economic and social integration of
the members of FARC-EP, and to implement measures
ensuring their security.
Without doubt, the report of the Secretary-General
once again reflects the commitment of the United
Nations to the peace process in Colombia, and shows
his receptiveness to the requests of the parties and
their readiness to take up without delay the verification
mandate with which it has been entrusted. It is
important to highlight that the report underlines that its
recommendations are the result of consultations held
with the Government of Colombia and the FARC-EP.
That is a key point because we must not forget that the
process must always be guided by the main stakeholders.
The detailed information provided with regard to
the mandates, size, structure and operational aspects
of the new Mission demonstrates the organization
and seriousness of the task that the United Nations
is carrying out, with the work that has already been
carried out by the current Mission and in cooperation
and continuous coordination with the United Nations
country team in Colombia, as well as the Government
of Colombia and FARC-EP.
We must now move towards implementing all
points of the Final Peace Agreement and enhance our
efforts to avoid delays and maximize interinstitutional
coordination so as to prevent any weakening of
confidence between the parties in the process, based on
respect for mutual obligations. We welcome the series
of mechanisms and measures that have already been
implemented for the reintegration of FARC-EP, and to
ensure that security measures are implemented, which
will benefit from the experience of the United Nations
system in thematic areas, such as gender issues, child
protection, human rights and ethnic and indigenous
issues. It is also important to know that the Mission
will be deployed with a view to ensuring its presence in

S/PV. 8041

the rural areas most affected by the conflict, which are
also those in which the reintegration of the members of
FARC-EP is taking place.
The commitments that have been assumed, upheld
and championed by the parties, the measures and
mechanisms that are already under way to ensure
the implementation of those commitments, and the
important role played by the United Nations Verification
Mission are elements that together reaffirm our
confidence in the establishment of stable and lasting
peace in Colombia, which we is now on the verge of
completion. Uruguay therefore call on everyone to
spare no effort to provide every form of assistance that
the stakeholders in the peace process have requested of
the Organization. As we have on previous occasions,
we reaffirm our support for the peace process in
Colombia and for the main stakeholders, in the hope of
seeeing the National Liberation Army become one of
the leading actors in that process.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Mission in Colombia Jean
Arnault for his comprehensive briefing and commend
his and the United Nations Mission’s contribution
to the successful completion of the first stage of the
Final Peace Agreement. Kazakhstan welcomes all
positive recent developments and major milestones
and achievements that occurred in fulfilling the peace
process in Colombia.
The transition of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia (FARC) from a rebel group to a political party
with a new leadership and new logo is a promising sign
to ending the decades-long conflict. The finalization of
the extraction of FARC weapons has nearly completed
the last stage in the process of laying down arms. We
welcome the extension of the mandate of the current
United Nations Mission for an additional two weeks to
conduct operations verifying the destruction of arms
caches until the Government of Colombia takes over
that task on 15 September.
Kazakhstan commends the recent announcement
of the ceasefire and cessation of hostilities between the
Government of Colombia and the National Liberation
Army. We believe that that will result in a longer-term
and more firm ceasefire leading to a lasting settlement
in Colombia. We hope that following the historic
bilateral ceasefire, the National Liberation Army will
cease its acts of kidnapping, attacks on oil pipelines and

17-280915/9

S/PV.8041

Colombia

atrocities committed against the civilian population,
while the Government of Columbia will do its best to
improve living conditions for the civilian population in
conflict areas and ensure the security of activist leaders
and citizens.
We join the Secretary-General in commending the
role of the guarantors, Brazil, Chile, Cuba, Ecuador,
Norway and Venezuela, as well as the Catholic Church
in supporting the much needed negotiations. We
believe that it is very important to ensure the successful
implementation of certain provisions of the Final Peace
Agreement, such as the political, economic and social
reintegration of former FARC rebels, personal and
collective security guarantees and comprehensive
programmes on security protection measures for
communities and organizations in conflict-affected
areas. We therefore emphasize the need for both parties
to continue to fulfil their obligations and commitments
under the provisions of the Final Agreement. We are of
the view that the United Nations Verification Mission
will ensure the full implementation of the peace accords
and secure the irreversibility of the peace process. It is
worth noting that the Verification Mission has taken
into account all of the shortcomings and drawbacks
encountered during the implementation of the first
mandate so as to ensure the success and efficiency of
the second mission.
We agree that recruiting a larger number of women
for the implementation of the peace process and further
deepening collaboration with the United Nations
country team to ensure a whole-of-United Nations
approach in Colombia are crucial for the efficiency
of the Verification Mechanism. We fully endorse the
Secretary-General’s recommendations with regard
to the effective deployment of the second mission in
Colombia in terms of geographical representation,
staffing and the mandate’s structure. Kazakhstan
extended its full support for the mandate of the second
mission when it co-sponsored resolution 2366 (2017)
reiterating its commitment to support the parties in
implementing the historic Final Peace Agreement
(see S/PV.7997).
Lastly, we realize that the Colombian peace process
is not only a guarantee of security and stability in the
western hemisphere, it is also a positive example to
countries around the world facing similar challenges
in the form of long, protracted conflicts. The fact
that the Government and the FARC approached the
United Nations about helping them to verify the Peace
6/9

11/09/2017

Agreements’ accomplishments makes us confident
that the parties are united in their desire to bring a
brighter future to Colombia and its people. Kazakhstan
would therefore like to congratulate the Government of
Colombia on its success in bringing peace and stability
to the country and to express its strong support for the
parties involved. We stand ready to join the multilateral
and regional efforts to accelerate the momentum of a
peace process that will ultimately result in stability,
progress and prosperity for all Colombians.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): We would like thank Mr. Jean
Arnault, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Mission in
Colombia, for sharing with the Security Council the
Secretary-General’s report on the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia (S/2017/745).
In the past few months, the Security Council, and
the international community as a whole, have seen the
peace process in Colombia make extraordinary progress.
The ceasefire has been consolidated, culminating
in the laying down of arms by the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo
(FARC-EP), followed this week by the destruction of
weapons caches. We note that both sides have taken
visible steps towards fulfilling the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace and have shown that they are determined to stay
the course, which gives us hope that this long-desired
peace can be achieved. We would like to once again
commend the Government and the leaders of the FARC
for the political leadership they have shown in achieving
this goal, and we should not neglect to mention the
third corner of this virtuous triangle, that is, the active
participation of the victims of the armed conflict. That
leadership, along with a bold approach and a spirit of
reconciliation, has made this an exemplary process for
the whole world.
We would also like to thank and pay tribute to
the United Nations Mission in Colombia, including
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and his entire team, for what they have achieved in a
short space of time. There can be no question that the
tripartite Monitoring and Verification Mechanism has
been fundamental to maintaining and strengthening
confidence between the Government and the FARC-EP
and could definitely be a model for conflict resolution
in other parts of the world.
17-28091

11/09/2017

Colombia

The men and women who have served as observers
in the Mechanism since its launch in 2016 have done
an impeccable job, for which we would also like to
pay them a sincere tribute — and, if I may, I would
like to single out the more than 50 Bolivian soldiers
who participated in the first mission. However, we
should not forget that there is still much work to be
done in response to one of the main focuses of the
Peace Agreement — transforming the standard of
living of the most vulnerable sectors affected by the
conflict and reducing the gap between rural and urban
areas. We welcome the efforts that the Government is
making in that regard by deploying security forces,
establishing the rule of law, promoting the provision of
goods and services to the affected areas and creating
a special new jurisdiction for peace. We also believe
that it will be very important to address the issues of
formalizing titles to land in rural areas and improving
social security coverage for farmers and peasants. We
hope that the international community can provide the
necessary cooperation.
As we know, the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia — the country’s second Mission — will be
responsible for verifying the political, economic and
social reintegration of the FARC’s more than 10,000
members, as well as the implementation of measures for
their safety and security, in accordance with paragraphs
3.2, 3.4 and 6.3 of the Final Agreement, which is
unquestionably a complicated part of the process.
Bolivia believes that the achievement of sustainable and
lasting peace in Colombia depends upon successfully
reintegrating the FARC-EP into civilian life. We believe
that both the Colombian Government and the FARC will
continue to demonstrate political leadership and firm
resolve to comply with the agreements and bring peace
to their country. For that, it will be essential to ensure
that the Security Council is united in support of the
Colombian process. In that regard, we have welcomed
the Secretary-General’s efforts and taken note of the
recommendations made for the second Mission. The
Council will meet in the next few days to discuss the
information in the report, and I am sure that we will
continue to work in the same spirit of unity.
Bolivia would like to take this opportunity
to welcome the new political party formed by the
FARC-EP, which represents a historic step for them
as they now legally enter political life. As President
Evo Morales Ayma said when we welcomed its
founding congress, we support peace, social justice and

S/PV. 8041

sovereignty for Colombia. Today, our revolutions are
democratic, achieved with votes, not weapons. We also
welcome the agreement reached between the Colombian
Government and the Ejército de Liberación Nacional on
implementing a temporary bilateral ceasefire, recently
announced at the Quito public peace dialogue table.
In conclusion, I would to recall the message of
reconciliation that Pope Francis dedicated to the young
people of Colombia during his recent visit there, when
he said that they can help to be
“the promise of a new beginning for Colombia that
leaves behind the floods of discord and violence,
a Colombia that wants to bear abundant fruits of
justice and peace”.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Today is one of those rare occasions when
a delay by the Security Council in adopting a draft
resolution is the result of positive developments
in events. We welcome the signing in Quito, on
4 September, of the agreement on a temporary ceasefire
between the Government of Colombia and the Ejército
de Liberación Nacional.
We appreciate the support of Brazil, Chile, Cuba,
Ecuador, Norway and Venezuela, the guarantor
countries for the peace process. Thanks to their services
as mediators, this important agreement has become a
reality and, in our view, is an important step towards a
permanent ceasefire. We hope that, in conjunction with
the successful conduct of the reconciliation process
with the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia
(FARC), it will bring us closer to a final settlement of
this decades-long internal conflict and the attainment
of civil peace in the country.
We thank Mr. Jean Arnault, Head of the United
Nations Mission in Colombia, for his briefing, and
consider his recommendations to be a helpful basis for
informed discussions on the so-called second special
political Mission, the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, which will start work as early as
26 September.
We welcome the successful progress in the peace
process, particularly the completion of the surrender
of weapons and the demobilization of insurgents under
United Nations supervision, which has paved the way
for transforming the FARC into a political force. We
hope that the parties will carry out their remaining
tasks in good faith and a timely manner, including

17-280917/9

S/PV.8041

Colombia

destroying arms caches and taking steps to achieve
the former combatants’ socioeconomic and political
reintegration. We expect the Verification Mission to
provide the necessary assistance for that. However, it
will be important to keep a close eye on the security
situation to ensure that no power vacuums arise. For
our part, we affirm our readiness to continue to fully
support the intra-Colombian peace process and the
people and the Government of Colombia as they work
to build a durable peace and development post-conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s meeting, and in particular Mr. Jean Arnault,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
his entire team, for their report (S/2017/745).
On behalf of President Juan Manuel Santos
Calderón, we would like to express our appreciation
to the Secretary-General and the Security Council for
the effectiveness of the work of the United Nations
Mission in Colombia, the first special political Mission
in our country, which will come to a successful end
on 25 September. A long time before we signed the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace, they made a bold bet on
peace in Colombia. That demonstration of confidence
gave our peace process a major impetus that not only
resulted in that Final Agreement but also enabled us to
move decisively towards implementing the agreements
on reintegrating the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) into
civil, economic, social and political life and achieving
security guarantees. In the light of the provisions of
resolution 2366 (2017), the Government of Colombia
acknowledges that the Mission is a United Nations
mission, in all respects, whose sole mandate is to
verify that both the Colombian State and the FARC-EP
comply fully with the commitments in items 3.2 and 3.4
of the Agreement.
The report (S/2017/745) presented by the Special
Representative acknowledges the progress made by the
Government in implementing the Peace Agreement. I
would now like to address some of the points that we
believe to be of greatest importance.
To ensure coordination among all national entities
responsible for implementing the Agreement and for
decision-making at the highest level, a post-conflict
8/9

11/09/2017

cabinet was established, led by the President himself,
who then appointed Vice-President Óscar Naranjo as
the interlocutor for the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia. Eighty-seven pieces of legislation
have been adopted, including five amendments to the
political Constitution, so as to provide a solid legal
structure to what was agreed upon and to form the basis
for the political reform that allowed the FARC-EP to be
registered as a political organization.
On 16 August, the so-called territorial areas for
training and reincorporation were established, where
activities are carried out to facilitate the initial phases
of returning the members of the FARC to civilian life
and to make a positive contribution to the surrounding
communities. The national council for reintegration
has held 44 meetings to lay the groundwork for planned
projects and decision-making among the parties.
Through decisions taken by council for reintegration,
three censuses were carried out in order to clearly
identify former combatants.
The socioeconomic census covered 10,015 people
and will provide the information required to facilitate
and structure the long-term process of reintegrating
members of the FARC into civilian life. The educational
census will allow us to start the process to help many
of them to become literate, through the implementation
of flexible educational models in the former 26 zones.
In all, 4,500 former members of the FARC-EP and
4,000 people in surrounding communities are taking
part. The health census will serve as the basis for the
development of a short- and medium-term strategy to
meet needs in that area.
An institutional resource matrix was also
established, which will allow for overall wellbeing and provide psychosocial support, pensions,
academic training, labour force and productivity
training, initiatives in the areas of the arts, culture
and sports and community endeavours. The process
to facilitate financial inclusion and membership in
the national pension scheme is being developed. A
total of 9,491 savings accounts have been opened for
former combatants to enable them to receive financial
support, in line with the provisions of the Agreement.
Up to 30 August, disbursements equivalent to nearly
$8 million had been made, and 3,840 national pension
scheme memberships had been finalized.
The national apprenticeship service has started
providing support covering financial education,
17-28091

11/09/2017

S/PV. 8041

Colombia

community project management, entrepreneurship,
solidarity-based economics, integrated solid waste
management and information and communication
technology. It is very important to note, as has been
highlighted here, that a special reintegration programme
for minors was established, known as “A Different Way
of Life”. It is a specialized programme that recognizes
them as victims, seeks the restoration of their rights,
comprehensive reparations and social and economic
reintegration. It provides support not just to the minors
themselves, but to their families, host communities and
relevant institutions.
The Government of Colombia is aware of the
immense challenge of carrying out those tasks and
the coordination it will require — that too has been
mentioned here. However, we remain willing and
we honour our decision to implement the Agreement
swiftly and efficiently so as to achieve the goal of stable
and lasting peace.
In conclusion, I am grateful for the expressions
of support following the recent announcement by my

Government and the Ejército de Liberación Nacional
to begin a temporary bilateral ceasefire on 1 October,
which will last for 102 days. In that regard, President
Santos Calderón has submitted a request to the
Secretary-General that the United Nations be part of
the oversight of the temporary agreement.
That piece of good news fills us with hope and
renews our faith in a Colombia where coexistence
prevails. That faith was mentioned here and by Pope
Francis yesterday before departing from his five-day
visit to Colombia. Peace is a duty that does not concede
defeat. It demands everyone’s commitment, despite
obstacles, differences and the various approaches
to achieve peaceful coexistence, and persists in the
struggle to foster the “culture of encounter”.
The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion of
the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

17-280919/9
