A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/48/31
24 January 1994

Forty-eighth session
Agenda item 143
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/48/612)]
48/31.

Report of the International Law Commission on the work
of its forty-fifth session

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International Law Commission on the
work of its forty-fifth session, 1/
Emphasizing the need for the progressive development of international
law and its codification in order to make it a more effective means of
implementing the purposes and principles set forth in the Charter of the
United Nations and in the Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations 2/ and to give increased importance to its
role in relations among States,
Recognizing the importance of referring legal and drafting questions to
the Sixth Committee, including topics that might be submitted to the
International Law Commission, and of enabling the Sixth Committee and the
Commission further to enhance their contribution to the progressive
development of international law and its codification,

________
1/
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-eighth Session,
Supplement No. 10 (A/48/10).
2/

Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

/...

A/RES/48/31
Page 2

Recalling the need to keep under review those topics of international
law which, given their new or renewed interest for the international
community, may be suitable for the progressive development and codification of
international law and therefore may be included in the future programme of
work of the International Law Commission,
Recognizing the role of the International Law Commission in the
fulfilment of the objectives of the United Nations Decade of International
Law,
Expressing its appreciation for the progress achieved by the
International Law Commission in its elaboration of a draft statute for an
international criminal court, 3/ and noting the constructive debate in the
Sixth Committee pertaining to this question,
Considering that experience has demonstrated the usefulness of
structuring the debate on the report of the International Law Commission in
the Sixth Committee in such a manner that conditions are provided for
concentrated attention on each of the main topics dealt with in the report,
and that this process is facilitated when the Commission indicates specific
issues on which expressions of views by Governments are of particular interest
for the continuation of its work,
1.
Takes note of the report of the International Law Commission on
the work of its forty-fifth session; 1/
2.
Expresses its appreciation to the International Law Commission for
the work accomplished at that session;
3.
Recommends that, taking into account the comments of Governments,
whether in writing or expressed orally in debates in the General Assembly, the
International Law Commission should continue its work on the topics in its
current programme;
4.
Takes note with appreciation of chapter II of the report of the
International Law Commission, entitled "Draft Code of Crimes against the Peace
and Security of Mankind", which was devoted to the question of a draft statute
for an international criminal court; 3/
5.
Invites States to submit to the Secretary-General by 15 February
1994, as requested by the International Law Commission, written comments on
the draft articles proposed by the Working Group on a draft statute for an
international criminal court;
6.
Requests the International Law Commission to continue its work as
a matter of priority on this question with a view to elaborating a draft
statute, if possible at its forty-sixth session in 1994, taking into account
the views expressed during the debate in the Sixth Committee as well as any
written comments received from States;

3/
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-eighth Session,
Supplement No. 10 (A/48/10), annex.

/...

A/RES/48/31
Page 3

7.
Endorses the decision of the International Law Commission to
include in its agenda the topics "The law and practice relating to
reservations to treaties" and "State succession and its impact on the
nationality of natural and legal persons", 4/ on the understanding that the
final form to be given to the work on these topics shall be decided after a
preliminary study is presented to the General Assembly;
8.
Notes the intentions of the International Law Commission for the
programme of work for the remainder of the current term of office of its
members, 5/ and in this connection requests the Commission to resume at its
forty-sixth session the consideration of the draft Code of Crimes against the
Peace and Security of Mankind and welcomes the Commission’s decision to
endeavour to complete in 1994 the second reading of the draft articles on the
law of the non-navigational uses of international watercourses;
9.
Expresses its appreciation for the efforts of the International
Law Commission to improve its procedures and methods of work;
10.

Requests the International Law Commission:

(a)

To consider thoroughly:

(i)

The planning of its activities and programme for the term of
office of its members, bearing in mind the desirability of
achieving as much progress as possible in the preparation of draft
articles on specific topics;

(ii)

Its methods of work in all their aspects, bearing in mind that the
staggering of the consideration of some topics might contribute,
inter alia, to a more effective consideration of its report in the
Sixth Committee;

(b)
To continue to pay special attention to indicating in its annual
report, for each topic, those specific issues on which expressions of views by
Governments, either in the Sixth Committee or in written form, would be of
particular interest for the continuation of its work;
11.
Takes note of the comments of the International Law Commission on
the question of the duration of its session, as presented in its report, 6/
and expresses the view that the requirements of the work for the progressive
development of international law and its codification and the magnitude and
complexity of the subjects on the agenda of the Commission make it desirable
that the usual duration of its sessions be maintained;
12.
Reaffirms its previous decisions concerning the role of the
Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat and
____________
4/

Ibid., Supplement No. 10 (A/48/10), para. 440.

5/

Ibid., para. 424.

6/

Ibid., para. 452.

/...

A/RES/48/31
Page 4

those concerning the summary records and other documentation of the
International Law Commission;
13.
Once again expresses the wish that seminars will continue to be
held in conjunction with the sessions of the International Law Commission and
that an increasing number of participants from developing countries will be
given the opportunity to attend those seminars, appeals to States that can do
so to make the voluntary contributions that are urgently needed for the
holding of the seminars, and expresses the hope that the Secretary-General
will continue to make every effort, within existing resources, to provide the
seminars with adequate services, including interpretation, as required;
14.
Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the International Law
Commission, for its attention, the records of the debate on the report of the
Commission at the forty-eighth session of the General Assembly, together with
such written statements as delegations may circulate in conjunction with their
oral statements, and to prepare and distribute a topical summary of the
debate;
15.
Recommends the continuation of efforts to improve the ways in
which the report of the International Law Commission is considered in the
Sixth Committee, with a view to providing effective guidance for the
Commission in its work;
16.
Also recommends that the debate on the report of the International
Law Commission at the forty-ninth session of the General Assembly commence on
24 October 1994.
73rd plenary meeting
9 December 1993
