S/2020/133

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 February 2020
Original: English

Implementation of paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013)
Twenty-fifth report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013), covers developments pertaining to missing Kuwaiti and thirdcountry nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, including the national archives, since
my previous report, dated 7 November 2019 (S/2019/865).

II. Recent activities with regard to the repatriation and return
of all Kuwaiti and third-country nationals or their remains
2.
The United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), in its capacity as
observer, attended the 111th meeting of the Technical Subcommittee and the
forty-ninth session of the Tripartite Commission, held on 3 and 5 December 2 019,
respectively, in Kuwait. At the meetings, participants were informed that Kuwaiti
forensic experts had continued their work on the identification of remains found in
March 2019 at a site in Samawah, Muthanna Governorate, and transferred to the
Kuwaiti authorities on 8 August 2019. This is a complex process, requiring further
identification and reassembly of remains before DNA comparisons can be made to
confirm the identity of individual missing persons.
3.
In January 2020, a team led by the Ministry of Defence of Iraq, with the
participation and support of the Iraqi Medico-Legal Directorate and the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), began excavation work at another potential
burial site in Samawah. The new site is located in the vicinity of the two sites from
which human remains were recovered in March 2019. The excavation was carried out
in line with the decision of the 110th meeting of the Technical Subcommittee, which
had called for further exploratory work at the new site on the basis of earlier
information provided to it by Kuwait. Analysis of contemporaneous satellite imagery
and witness information was conducted by ICRC and provided preliminary
indications that the new site could contain Kuwaiti remains. Following the excavation
mission to the new site, the Tripartite Commission announced, in a statement issued
on 30 January, the recovery of remains alleged to be of Kuwaiti citizens, including
civilians and prisoners of war. Forensic DNA analysis will be carried out to provide
concrete indications of the identity of these remains.

20-01708 (E)

240220

*2001708*

S/2020/133

4.
The team led by the Ministry of Defence of Iraq continued to follow up on sites
of interest, in particular those in Khamisiyah, Radwaniyah, Karbala’, Salman Pak,
Barjisiyah and Ninawa in Iraq and the naval base in Kuwait. On 18 November, the
Ministry issued a further public call for witnesses to come forward.
5.
Following analysis of satellite imagery related to 18 potential burial areas in
Iraq and Kuwait, ICRC listed, on the basis of coordinates previously provided by the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of
America, four areas of interest in Kuwait that could potentially contain the burial sites
of Iraqi missing persons. The sites had previously been investigated by a Kuwaiti
team under the auspices of the Technical Subcommittee. The Kuwaiti authorities will
organize exploratory missions to the sites, which can subsequently be further explored.
6.
During the 111th meeting of the Technical Subcommittee, the partici pants also
discussed two guidance documents drafted by ICRC on the transfer of human remains
and the protection of witnesses. The documents remained under review by the
Government of Iraq, and it is envisaged that they will be further discussed and
adopted at a forthcoming session of the Tripartite Commission.
7.
At the forty-ninth session of the Tripartite Commission, all members reiterated
their commitment to the missing Kuwaiti persons and third-country nationals file. It
was announced that further efforts would be undertaken to locate and analyse satellite
imagery and to explore the national archives for contemporaneous documents from
international coalition forces, documents that might provide further information on
potential burial sites.
8.
UNAMI continued to make preparations for the training of dedicated staff of
the Ministry of Defence of Iraq in the use of ground -penetrating radar, in cooperation
with geospatial expert trainers from the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi,
Italy. The training had been postponed because of the challenging political and
security situation in Iraq, but it is envisaged that the first segment could be conducted
in the first half of 2020.
9.
On 15 January, my Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs and
Electoral Assistance met with the Ambassador of Kuwait to Iraq, Salem al -Zamanan,
to discuss recent developments and activities related to the missing Kuwaiti persons
and third-country nationals file. My Deputy Special Representative affirmed the
unwavering commitment of UNAMI to the search for missing Kuwaiti persons and
third-country nationals. On 19 January, she visited Kuwait, where she met with the
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs, Khaled al-Jarallah, the Assistant Foreign
Minister for International Organizations, Nasser al-Hain, and the Executive Director
of the National Committee for Missing Persons and Prisoners of War, Rabi‘ al -Adsani.
She also visited the Forensic Criminal Institute of the Ministry of the Interior of
Kuwait, where the remains found at the site in Samawah in March 2019 are being
reassembled and analysed.

III. Recent activities with regard to the return of
Kuwaiti property
10. There were no new developments regarding the return of Kuwaiti property,
including the national archives. In her meetings with the Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kuwait, Khaled al-Jarallah, and the Ambassador of Kuwait to Iraq, Salem
al-Zamanan, my Deputy Special Representative underlined that UNAMI would
continue to follow up with the Government of Iraq on the return of missing Kuwaiti
property, including the national archives.

2/3

20-01708

S/2020/133

IV. Observations
11. The continued vigorous efforts by all parties concerned with regard to the file
on missing Kuwaiti persons and third-country nationals is reaping results. The
recovery of human remains from the second burial site discovered in Samawah,
which, on the basis of initial observations, may hold the remains of Kuwaiti citizens,
is encouraging. The Ministry of Defence of Iraq has, despi te recent challenging
developments in the country, demonstrated commendable perseverance and focus in
relation to this important humanitarian file. I also welcome the efforts of ICRC to
extract valuable information from contemporaneous satellite imagery, w hich has
yielded important new leads for the identification of further potential burial sites. I
hope that the DNA identification of these human remains will help bring relief to the
families and relatives of those who went missing during the war.
12. I note with appreciation the meticulous identification process currently being
undertaken by the Kuwaiti forensic experts, working to the highest standards of
accuracy and reliability. I hope that these efforts will shortly result in the provision
of long-awaited information that will help bring some form of relief and closure to
the families and relatives of those who went missing.
13. Concerning outstanding issues relating to missing Kuwaiti property, I renew my
call for the Government of Iraq to build on its successful efforts to identify and collect
Kuwaiti books in 2019 by taking all necessary steps to continue the search for further
missing Kuwaiti items, in particular the Kuwaiti national archives.
14. My Special Representative and Deputy Special Representative will continue to
do all they can to promote further progress on this file, working closely with the
Governments of Iraq and Kuwait, ICRC and other partners.

20-01708

3/3
