III.

Resolutiom adopted on tbe reports of tbe Flnt Committee

sovereign equality, non-intervention_ and non-interference in the mternal or external afiairs of other States,
the right of all States and peoples ~o det~rmine their
political systems and pursue economic, social and cultural development without intimidation, hin~ra!lce ?r
pressure, sovereignty over natural resources, mvtolability of international frontiers, non-use of force or threat
of force and non-recognition of situations brought about
by the threat or use of force, and the principle of peaceful settlement of disputes;
4. Reaffirms again its opposition to any threat or use
of force intervention and interference, aggression, foreign oc~upation or measures of political and _economic
coercion which attempt to violate the sovereignty, territorial integrity, independence and security of States or
their right freely to dispose of their natural resources;
5. Invites all States to reject any support for or encouragement of any form of intervention or interference
in the internal or external affairs of States for any reason
whatsoever and to refuse recognition I of situations
brought about by the threat or use of force;
6. Also calls upon all States to refrain from any act
which may hinder the continuation of the process of relaxation of international tension, impede the resolution
of the focal points of crisis and tension in various regions of the world, hamper the implementation of the
recommendation of the General Assembly at its tenth
special session on effective measures for halting the arms
race, particularly the nuclear arms race, and for disarmament, and postpone the implementation of the new
international economic order;
7. Reaffirms again the legitimacy of the struggle of
peoples under colonial and alien domination or occupation to achieve self-determination and independence,
and urges Member States to increase their support for
and solidarity with them and their national liberation
movements and to take urgent and effective measures for
the speedy completion of the implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples97 and other resolutions of the
United Nations on the final elimination of colonialism,
racism and apartheid;
8. Recognizes the advance that has been made in
the struggle of oppressed peoples for their emancipation
and the elimination of colonialism, neo-colonialism, racism in all its manifestations, racial discrimination, apartheid, alien domination and occupation;
9. Reaffirms the provisions of the Declaration of the
Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace98 and invites the permanent members of the Security Council and major
maritime users of the Indian Ocean to serve on the expanded Ad Hoe Committee on the Indian Ocean to prepare for the Conference on the Indian Ocean in 1981 ;
10. Commends the convening of the Conference on
Security and Co-operation in Europe, to be held at
Madrid in 1980, and expresses the hope that it will result in further strengthening the security and co-operation of States in Europe in all spheres, including reduction of armaments and armed forces and halting the
arms race in both the nuclear and conventional fields;
11. Welcomes the recommendation of the Sixth
Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries, held at Havana from 3 to 9 September 1979, 99 that, during 1980, a meeting should be
called of the Mediterranean non-aligned countries and
other Mediterranean countries participating in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe to be
01 Resolution

1514 (XV).

os Resolution 2832 (XXVI).

9 0 See A/34/542, annex, sect. I, para. 196.

67

held at Madrid, for the purpose of launching joint projects of co-operation and for the preparation of the
Conference;
12. Commends also the decision of the Sixth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries on transforming the Mediterranean into a
zone of peace and co-operation 100 and urges all S!ates
to co-operate in applying that decision on the bas.is of
the principles of respect for each State's sovereignty
and territorial integrity, the right of peoples to !Dake
their own decisions, non-intervention and non-mterference in internal affairs, and equal rights;
13. Considers that the implementation of the new
international economic order, assuring, through the
settlement of urgent international economic problems,
a speedy development of the developing countri_es, particularly the least developed ones, would contnbute to
the strengthening of international peace and security and
to the promotion of economic co-operation for development as an important prerequisite of peaceful and active
coexistence among States and requests all States, particularly the developed ones, to participate actively in the
efforts of the United Nations and in the global negotiations leading to that end;
14. Takes note of the reports of the SecretaryGeneral101 and, having in mind the important role that
the Declaration on the Strengthening of International
Security has played in international life since its adoption, requests the Secretary-General to prepare, with
the help of a group of governmental experts, 102 a report
to be submitted to the General Assembly at its thirtyfifth session on the extent of the implementation of the
provisions of the Declaration and on actions which
should be undertaken by the Assembly in order to secure
full compliance with the provisions of the Declaration;
15. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session an item entitled "Review of the
implementation of the Declaration on the Strengthening
of International Security".
103rd plenary meeting
14 December 1979

34/101.

Non-interference in the internal affairs of
States

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 31 /91 of 14 December 1976,
32/153 of 19 December 1977 and 33/74 of 15 December 1978 on non-interference in the internal affairs of
States,
Taking note of the reports of the Secretary-General,1°3
containing the views of Member States on ways by which
greater respect for the principle of non-interference in
the internal affairs of States can be assured,
Reaffirming that a declaration on non-interference in
the internal affairs of States would be an important contribution to the further elaboration of the principles for
strengthening equitable co-operation and friendly relations among States, based on sovereign equality and
mutual respect,
Noting that a number of Member States have expressed support for the preparation of such a declaration,
00 Ibid., para. 193.
101 A/34/192 and Add.1 and 2, A/34/193 and Add.1 and 2.
1° 2 Subsequently referred to as the Group of Governmental

1

Experts on the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Strengthening of International Security.
1o 3 A/34/192 and Add.1 and 2, A/34/193 and Add.I and 2.

68

General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session

Taking note of the draft declaration on the inadmissibility of intervention and interference in internal affairs
of States,1° 4
Considering that it was not possible to conclude negotiations on this draft in time for the adoption of such a
declaration at the thirty-fourth session,
1. Expresses the hope that negotiations will continue
and be intensified with a view to the adoption, at the
thirty-fifth session, of a declaration on the inadmissibility
of intervention and interference in the internal affairs
of States;
2. Decides to set up an open-ended ad hoe working
group of the First Committee at the commencement of
the thirty-fifth session with a view to elaborating and
finalizing the declaration;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session an item entitled "Review of the
implementation of the Declaration on the Strengthening
of International Security".
103rd plenary meeting
I 4 December I 979

34 / 102.

Settlement by peaceful means of disputes between States

The General Assembly,
Having examined the item entitled "Settlement by
peaceful means of disputes between States",
Recalling that, under the Charter of the United Nations, the Member States have expressed the determination of their peoples to practise tolerance and live together in peace with one another as good neighbours
and to unite their strength to maintain international
peace and security,
Recalling also that the Member States have pledged
under the Charter to settle their international disputes
by peaceful means in such a manner that international
peace and security and justice are not endangered,
Reaffirming the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, 105
Recognizing the important role of the United Nations
in promoting the peaceful settlement of international
disputes and preventing the outbreak of armed conflicts
among States and in bringing about by peaceful means,
in conformity with the principles of justice and international law, adjustment or settlement of international
disputes or situations which might lead to a breach of
the peace,
Bearing in mind the report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the
Strengthening of the Role of the Organization, 106 especially the consensus contained in it, 101 namely, that the
idea of preparing a declaration on peaceful settlement
of disputes to be adopted by the General Assembly
awakened special interest and is one on which general
agreement may be possible,
Recognizing the importance of the elaboration of a
declaration of the General Assembly on the peaceful
settlement of disputes between States,
104 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 46, document A/34/827, para. 9.
105 Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
106 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 33 (A/34/33).
107 Ibid., para. 13.

Taking into account the opinions and suggestions submitted at the thirty-fourth session of the General Assembly regarding the content of a declaration on the peaceful
settlement of disputes between States, as well as those
made on the subject by Member States in connexion
with the work of the Special Committee,
1. Calls upon all States to adhere strictly in their
international relations to the principle that States shall
settle their international disputes by peaceful means in
such a manner that international peace and security and
justice are not endangered;
2. Urges all States to co-operate in the elaboration
of a declaration of the General Assembly on the peaceful
settlement of disputes between States;
3. Invites Member States to transmit to the SecretaryGeneral their opinions, suggestions and proposals regarding the elaboration of a declaration on the peaceful
settlement of disputes between States and to bring up
to date their views on this subject submitted in pursuance
of General Assembly resolution 3499 (XXX) of 15 December 1975;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session a report containing the opinions, suggestions and proposals regarding
the declaration on the peaceful settlement of disputes
between States;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session an item entitled "Peaceful settlement of disputes between States".
103rd plenary meeting
14 December 1979

34/103.

Inadmissibility of the policy of hegemonism
in international relations

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the primary responsibility of the United
Nations to promote and strengthen international peace
and security on the basis of strict respect for the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, especially
the principle of sovereignty, sovereign equality and national independence of States,
Recalling the duty of States to refrain in their international relations from military, political, economic or
any other form of coercion aimed against the sovereignty,
political independence or territorial integrity of any
State,
Noting that hegemonism is a manifestation of the
policy of a State, or a group of States, to control, dominate and subjugate, politically, economically, ideologically or militarily, other States, peoples or regions of the
world,
Considering that imperialism, colonialism, neo-colonialism, racism including zionism and apartheid are all
forces which seek to perpetuate unequal relations and
privileges acquired by force and are, therefore, different
manifestations of the policy and practice of hegemonism,
. Concerned that hegemonism, global as well as regional, pursued in the context of the policy of division
of the world into blocs or by individual States, manifests itself in the use or threat of use of force, foreign
domination and intervention,
Concerned also that hegemonism seeks to limit the
freedom of States to determine their political systems
and pursue economic, social and cultural development
without intimidation, hindrance or pressure,
