A /75/PV.53

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

53rd plenary meeting

Thursday, 11 February 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 145 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
Letter dated 9 February 2021 from the
Secretary-General to the President of the
General Assembly (A/75/661/Add.2)
The President: Before proceeding to the items on
our agenda, I would like, in keeping with established
practice, to draw the attention of the General Assembly
to document A/75/661/Add.2, in which the SecretaryGeneral informs the President of the General Assembly
that, since the issuance of his communication contained
in document A/75/661/Add.1, South Sudan has made
the payment necessary to reduce its arrears below the
amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly takes note
of the information contained in document A/75/661/
Add.2?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 9 (continued)
Report of the Economic and Social Council
Draft resolution (A/75/L.57)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guinea to introduce draft resolution
A/75/L.57.

Mr. Diane (Guinea): I am pleased to introduce
draft resolution A/75/L.57, entitled “Extension of the
preparatory period preceding the graduation of Angola
from the least developed country category”.
The extraordinary challenges and shocks
throughout the global system brought about by the
coronavirus disease pandemic have exacerbated
the development challenges facing least developed
countries (LDCs) and reversed many years of hardearned development progress, leading to potential longlasting damage. The focus of the Group of 77 and China
has been to draw the attention of the international
community to the most vulnerable and furthest behind
in our efforts to implement the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals.
The LDC category has assumed its highest level
of relevance since its creation in 1971. Following the
graduation of Vanuatu in December 2020, 11 additional
LDCs are on track to graduation. While we have come
closer to achieving the objectives of the previous two
meetings of the United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries and the Istanbul Programme of
Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade
2011-2020, we are nowhere near the overarching goal of
seeing half of the LDCs graduate within the decade.
The level of ambition must not change, but, rather,
it is the perception of graduation that would benefit
from a shift. The graduation of LDCs is not an end in
and of itself, but an important milestone in a country’s
journey towards sustainable development, resilience

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-03858 (E)

*2103858*

A/75/PV.53

11/02/2021

and self-reliance. We must recognize that countries
must be enabled to graduate on a sure footing with
strong national ownership and confidence to make
graduation smooth and irreversible.
We thank all partners for their support and
cooperation with regard to the draft resolution
extending Angola’s preparatory period by an additional
three years before its effective graduation from the
LDC category.
The President: I now call on the representative of
Costa Rica on a point of order
Mr. Carazo (Costa Rica): Costa Rica wishes to
become a sponsor of draft resolution A/75/L.57.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/75/L.57.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.57?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 75/259).

A/75/L.57

was

adopted

The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of position on the resolution just adopted,
may I remind delegations that explanations are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Leiby (United States of America): The United
States is pleased to join the consensus on resolution
75/259. We reiterate the importance of our relationship
with Angola and understand the devastating and
ongoing impact that the coronavirus disease pandemic
and the country’s multi-year recession has had on
its economy. We look forward to working with the
international community on ways to strengthen a
sustainable economic recovery for Angola and other
least developed countries during these difficult times.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.

2/2

Mr. Gonzato (European Union): I have the honour
to deliver the statement on behalf of the European
Union and its States members.
We thank the facilitator, Mrs. Sibella Stern, of
Australia for her very effective and constructive role in
conducting the negotiations on resolution 75/259.
The European Union and its States members are
pleased to join the consensus today on the resolution
on the extension of the preparatory period preceding
the graduation of Angola from the least developed
country (LDC) category. Our support is based on the
reasons presented by Angola, that is, the effects of a
protracted six-year economic recession and the impact
of the global coronavirus disease crisis, which has
had particularly detrimental consequences for LDCs.
We are aware of the particular challenges that Angola
faces in the context of its graduation from LDC status,
notably the diversification of its economy and the
reduction of inequalities. We acknowledge and fully
support Angola’s intention to review and update its
national development strategy and look forward to a
successful graduation in 2024. We also trust that the
United Nations system will actively support Angola’s
work on its national smooth transition strategy, and
we welcome the language included in the resolution in
that regard.
The objective of a successful and sustainable
development process is shared by the international
community, which sees graduation as an achievement
on the road towards fulfilling the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. The European Union
will continue to support Angola on its journey to
graduation and beyond from a sustainable development
and trade perspective and by maintaining a close
political dialogue.
The President: We have heard the last speaker for
this item.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 9.
The meeting rose at 10.20 a.m.

21-03858
