United Nations

S/PV.6737

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6737th meeting
Wednesday, 21 March 2012, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Sir Mark Lyall Grant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Berger
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Menan
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-27140 (E)

*1227140*

S/PV.6737

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006)
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Ambassador Néstor Osorio, Permanent
Representative of Colombia, in his capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006).
I now give the floor to Ambassador Osorio.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia): I have the honour to
present the 90-day report of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), in accordance with
paragraph 18 (h) of the same resolution. The report
covers the period from 21 December 2011 to 20 March
2012.
During the reporting period, the Committee held
one informal consultation, on 29 February 2012. The
Committee also continued to perform its duties through
informal contacts and exchanges and the no-objection
procedure envisioned by paragraph 15 of the guidelines
for the conduct of its work.
During the informal consultations of 29 February,
the Coordinator of the Panel of Experts briefed the
Committee on the Panel’s activities since December
2011. The Panel conducted visits and held a series of
consultations, listed in the annex, and submitted three
reports regarding reported incidents, as well as a fourth
quarterly
assessment
of
Member
States’
implementation
reports.
Committee
members
exchanged views on a number of issues, including on
the three reports submitted by the Panel, the
publication of the Panel’s 2011 final report, the need
for an effective and diligent response of the Committee
to sanctions violations, and the open briefing of the
Chair to be held soon, with the participation of the
Panel.
Some Member States expressed concern
regarding the illicit transfers of arms between Iran and

2

Syria, documented by the reports notified to the
Committee. A Member State drew the attention of the
Committee to a public statement of the SecretaryGeneral of Hizbullah dated 7 February, in which he
acknowledged that his movement had received material
support in all possible and available forms from Iran
since 1982, while recognizing that in the past his
movement had remained silent when asked about
financial and military support.
With respect to the implementation assistance
notices previously drafted by the Panel at the request
of the Committee, some Committee members
expressed hope that the notices could be soon finalized.
A Member State raised the issue of the Panel’s travel
arrangements. Members also heard a briefing from the
delegation of France on the similarities between
ballistic and space technologies.
During the reporting period, the Committee
continued its consideration of the draft annual report
for 2011.
During the reporting period, the Committee
received a communication about a reported violation of
paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007), which imposes
a ban on the export and procurement of all arms and
related materiel from the Islamic Republic of Iran. In a
note verbale dated 9 January 2012, a Member State
provided information on the results of inspections
carried out on material confiscated from a truck on
15 February 2011 at a border gate with Syria.
In a letter dated 28 February 2012, four Member
States submitted a report regarding a violation of
paragraph 9 of resolution 1929 (2010) on the launch of
the Navid satellite into space using Iran’s Safir space
launch vehicle as announced by Iran on 3 February
2012.
In a letter dated 22 February, a Member State
provided information on interdictions of three
consignments. The Committee also received a letter
dated 3 January from a Member State, providing
information on the inspection of the Panel of Experts in
that State on 18 and 19 November 2011 regarding a
previously reported incident.
On 27 December 2011, the Committee received a
note verbale from a Member State containing a
notification with reference to paragraph 5 of resolution
1737 (2006) concerning the transfer to Iran of items

12-27140

S/PV.6737

“intended for nuclear power plants with a light-water
reactor”.
The Committee also received a note verbale dated
1 March 2012 from a Member State transmitting a
notification in accordance with paragraph 15 of
resolution 1737 (2006) and paragraph 4 of resolution
1747 (2007).
Furthermore, the Committee received from a
Member State a note verbale dated 22 February 2012,
indicating that its citizens and residents, as well as
entities based in that Member State, should address
their de-listing requests to the Committee directly
through the focal points.
The Committee also received a letter dated
6 March in which a Member State proposed, in
accordance with paragraph 26 of resolution 1929
(2010), the designation of two Iranian individuals and
an Iranian entity identified following a violation
previously reported to the Committee.
On 6 March 2012, responding to a query from the
International Federation of Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies, the Committee sent a letter
providing clarifications regarding the sanctions regime
imposed on Iran under resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747
(2007), 1803 (2008) and 1929 (2010) and humanitarian
activities.
On 30 January 2012, the Committee responded to
the note verbale dated 9 January 2012, which reported
a violation of paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007), as
I referred to earlier.
The Committee continued its consideration of a
reported inspection and seizure, on 28 August 2010, of
a container onboard the vessel MS Finland, with a view
to sending letters to six Member States.
In relation to the issue of national
implementation, I would like to note that on 30 January
2012, the Panel of Experts transmitted to the
Committee, in accordance with paragraph 1 (b) (i) of
the Committee’s work programme, a quarterly
assessment of the implementation reports submitted by
Member States pursuant of paragraph 31 of resolution
1929 (2010), for the period from 1 November 2011 to
31 January 2012.
On the same issue, I am happy to note that during
the reporting period the Committee received
communications from Turkmenistan and Armenia

12-27140

transmitting their respective reports on the
implementation of resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747
(2007), 1803 (2008) and 1929 (2010).
That concludes my report on the work of the
Committee.
The President: I thank Ambassador Osorio for
his briefing this morning.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I
would like to thank Ambassador Osorio for his report.
Iran’s illicit nuclear programme presents a grave
threat to international peace and security. Today we are
confronted with an unsustainable and dangerous status
quo. Without swift and serious progress to resolve the
international community’s doubts about Iran’s nuclear
programme, there will be further instability in an
already tense region.
Since our last meeting (see S/PV.6607), the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) has released yet another report that
once again affirms that Iran is not complying with its
international nuclear obligations and is not cooperating
fully with the IAEA. The Director General reports that
Iran is continuing to make progress on its nuclear
programme. Iran has begun to enrich uranium to the
near 20 per cent level at the previously covert Fordo
fuel-enrichment plant, which is buried in a hardened
bunker underground near Qom. Iran has tripled its
capacity to produce such uranium, which is much
closer to being weapons-grade.
In spite of good-faith outreach by the IAEA, Iran
has chosen to stonewall it, rather than to offer any real
cooperation. Iran twice denied IAEA requests to visit a
nuclear facility at Parchin, where the Director General
reported that Iran may have conducted high-explosive
tests related to the development of a nuclear weapon.
We all know what full cooperation with the IAEA
looks like. This is not even minimal cooperation.
The Director General’s latest report illustrates
Iran’s continued disregard for the Council’s clear
demands, most notably that it suspend all enrichmentrelated and reprocessing activities and heavy-water
related activities. The Security Council must therefore
take the necessary steps to hold Iran accountable.

3

S/PV.6737

The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006) and its Panel of Experts are critically
important to this effort. Both the Committee and the
Panel must fully and robustly carry out their mandates,
including
by
implementing
the
Panel’s
recommendations and responding to reported sanctions
violations. Better implementation of existing sanctions
can help to slow down Iran’s nuclear progress,
affording the world more time to resolve our concerns.
We therefore welcome the 1737 Committee’s
meeting last month to discuss sanctions violations and
to receive a briefing on certain Iranian ballistic missilerelated activities that are being conducted in violation
of resolution 1929 (2010).
We are pleased to see that there has been some
progress on the Committee’s response to reported
sanctions violations over the past 90 days, although
more needs to be done. We are alarmed that a majority
of the violations reported to the Committee involved
illicit transfers of arms and related material from Iran
to Syria, where the Al-Assad regime is using them to
violently repress the Syrian people. We urge the
Committee to impose targeted sanctions on individuals
and entities found to be involved in sanctions
violations.
We appreciate the Panel’s ongoing efforts and
look forward to its upcoming final report and
recommendations. My Government remains seriously
concerned that the Panel’s 2011 final report has not yet
been released to the full membership of the United
Nations. Ten months have passed since the report was
submitted. There is simply no excuse for members to
continue to delay and obstruct its release. We strongly
urge that this issue be resolved before our next
meeting.
The United States remains determined to prevent
Iran from acquiring a nuclear weapon, and we remain
committed to doing so through a comprehensive
diplomatic approach that includes substantive
engagement and unprecedented pressure. As part of
that strategy, on 6 March the European Union High
Representative, on behalf of the P5+1, offered to
resume talks with Iran as part of a sustained process
that leads to real progress in resolving our longstanding
concerns with Iran’s nuclear programme. Political
directors of the P5+1 held a preparatory meeting in
Brussels yesterday, and efforts are under way to
schedule the next round soon.

4

It is our firm view that resolving this issue will
require Iran to come to the table quickly and seriously
to discuss, in a forthright way, how to establish that the
intentions of its nuclear programme are, as it claims,
peaceful. There are verifiable steps that Iran can take to
be in compliance with its obligations. Such steps would
provide the world assurance that Iran is not pursuing a
nuclear weapon. The question is whether, in the
upcoming negotiations, Iran shows itself to be moving
clearly and credibly in that direction.
We and our partners remain ready to engage with
Iran on the basis of the framework proposed by the
P5+1. We will continue to work closely with our
partners in the international community, including on
the Council and the 1737 Committee, on this critical
issue.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Ambassador Osorio for his quarterly
briefing and for his effective chairmanship of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006).
The Security Council has once again taken up a
very worrying report from the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). The
report underscores that Iran is continuing to refuse to
honour its international commitments and to meet the
demands of the Security Council and of the IAEA
Board of Governors. The Agency also points out once
again that it is not possible for it to confirm that all
nuclear material in Iran is intended for peaceful
purposes.
Iran is continuing its uranium enrichment
activities, at 3.5 and 20 per cent, as well as its heavywater-related project, in violation of its obligations
under resolutions adopted by the Council and in the
absence of credible civilian purpose. Iran has begun to
produce uranium enriched to 20 per cent at its
underground facility at Fordo, which, let us remember,
had been concealed for many years. That is an
alarming development to which we, along with our
German, British and American partners, drew the
Council’s attention in January.
Iran’s increased capacity to produce enriched
uranium beyond 3.5 per cent clearly brings it very
close to military levels. The IAEA also expresses great
concern about the possible military dimension of Iran’s
nuclear programme. In its report of 8 November 2011,
it details Iran’s activities specifically tied to nuclear

12-27140

S/PV.6737

arms. We regret that, despite two visits by the Agency,
Iran has refused to give it access to all necessary
documents, people and sites. That refusal is contrary to
the demands formulated by the IAEA Board of
Governors in November. We especially regret that
IAEA inspectors were not authorized to visit the
military site in Parchin. We are also concerned by
reports from the Agency that several kilos of natural
uranium metal may have been diverted.
Beyond nuclear issues, other Iranian actions in
violation of Council resolutions compound our
concern. Iran is improving its ballistic capacities,
including under cover of its space programme. France,
along with the United Kingdom, the United States and
Germany, notified the Committee of a satellite
launched on a Safir rocket on 3 February — yet
another Iranian violation of paragraph 9 of resolution
1929 (2010).
We are also deeply concerned about the weapons
that Iran continues to distribute in violation of Council
resolutions, threatening the security of its neighbours
and of an already unstable region. I am particularly
concerned about Syria. New arms transfers between
Iran and Syria have been reported to the Committee
since our last meeting (see S/PV.6697), compounding
the numerous confirmed cases already reported to the
Committee by several Member States. The high
number of those instances confirms a deliberate and
ongoing policy of illicit transfer of arms and related
material between Iran and Syria. In Lebanon, too,
Hizbullah continues to claim Iran’s material support, in
violation of resolutions 1747 (2007) and 1701 (2006).
In the face of this challenge, the international
community has demonstrated its unity and
determination. Measures taken by the Security Council
are not ends in themselves; they are meant to convince
Iran to negotiate. And they have an effect. We must
therefore continue to implement them rigorously. That
will require first of all a firm response to reported
violations. The Committee must in particular identify
individuals and entities accused of violations, in
accordance with its mandate. We must also improve the
implementation of sanctions wherever they are
necessary. We call yet again for the final report of the
Panel of Experts to be published, in accordance with
sanctions committees practice.
What we call for — and what the Council has
demanded numerous times — is that Iran convince us

12-27140

of the peaceful nature of its nuclear programme. Our
goal remains a negotiated solution. We are ready for
dialogue, in keeping with the dual approach that we
have always advocated, but Iran must demonstrate its
willingness for serious negotiations. Ms. Ashton, on
behalf of the six parties, has proposed to Iran to restart
talks about nuclear issues. She has noted their
willingness to embark on a policy of re-establishing
trust, leading to a comprehensive solution, whereby
Iran would fully implement its obligations under
resolutions of the Security Council and of the IAEA
Board of Governors. For the six parties, it is essential
that discussions be focused on the concerns raised by
Iran’s nuclear programme. We therefore call on Iran to
seriously engage in that process. We call on it to seize
this opportunity to emerge from the international
isolation caused by its military nuclear programme.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I would like to
join my colleagues in thanking Ambassador Néstor
Osorio for presenting the 90-day report of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006). We commend his stewardship of the Committee
and the professionalism with which the Committee has
been implementing its mandate.
The Panel of Experts is mandated to assist the
Committee in the implementation of the relevant
resolutions, and has to work under the direction of the
Committee. We appreciate the work, including
outreach activities, that the Panel has been doing, and
we encourage it to continue its work in strict
compliance with the relevant resolutions in an
independent, objective, transparent and impartial
manner. The Panel should also brief the Committee
regularly on all its activities.
During the reporting period, the Panel submitted
several reports, including a quarterly update on the
implementation reports of the Member States
submitted during the period from 1 November 2011 to
31 January 2012. We thank the Panel for those reports,
which we are carefully studying. In January this year,
three members of the Panel visited India. They had a
useful exchange of views with the authorities
concerned in New Delhi.
India has consistently supported the right of all
nations to peaceful uses of nuclear energy, in
accordance with relevant international treaties to which
they are parties. Iran should fully cooperate with the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to restore

5

S/PV.6737

confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of its
nuclear programme. In that connection, we welcome
the recent exchanges between Iran and the IAEA. We
hope that the outstanding technical issues concerning
the Iranian nuclear programme will be resolved
peacefully through Iran’s cooperation with the IAEA.
We also welcome the decision to resume talks between
the P5+1 group and Iran. Those talks should serve as
an important confidence-building measure and help
avoid an escalation of the situation.
India supports the full implementation of relevant
resolutions of the Security Council concerning the
Iranian nuclear issue. While implementing those
resolutions, it is necessary that all efforts be made to
ensure that legitimate trade and economic activities do
not suffer.
In conclusion, we support the Chair’s intention to
hold an open briefing, along with the Coordinator of
the Panel of Experts, in April 2012 for interested
Member States on implementation procedures. That
briefing will also serve as a useful opportunity for the
members of the Committee and the Panel to get the
views of the wider United Nations membership.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank the Permanent Representative of
Colombia for his briefing on the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) over the past 90 days. I commend his efforts in
advancing the work of the Committee. I hope that the
Committee will continue to carry out its mandate in a
prudent, pragmatic and balanced way. China has
always attached importance to and will continue to
actively participate in the work of the Committee.
The situation in the Middle East is now
undergoing profound changes. Safeguarding regional
peace and stability and avoiding greater turbulence in
the region is in the common interests of all parties. It is
also in line with the shared aspirations of the
international community. Against that backdrop, it is of
more pragmatic importance to be firmly committed to
dialogue and negotiation in order to promptly resolve
the Iranian nuclear issue.
Thanks to the joint efforts of all parties, the P5+1
group and Iran have expressed their willingness to
engage in sincere dialogue. The process of resolving
the Iranian nuclear issue through dialogue has shown
positive momentum. China hopes that parties will
narrow differences and take constructive measures so

6

as to launch sustainable dialogue at an early date and
actively explore a comprehensive, long-term and
appropriate settlement to the Iranian nuclear issue.
As a party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, Iran enjoys the right to the
peaceful use of nuclear power. It should also honour its
international obligations. China hopes that Iran and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) will
further strengthen dialogue and cooperation on the
current basis and resolve the pending issues as soon as
possible. China also looks forward to a constructive
role being played by the IAEA in that regard.
China always believes that relevant resolutions of
the Security Council should be implemented in a
conscientious, comprehensive and accurate manner.
However, sanctions are by no means an end in
themselves. The Iranian nuclear issue can be
appropriately addressed only through dialogue and
cooperation. All members of the Committee and the
Panel of Experts, under the leadership of the
Committee, should further advance their work based on
the foregoing understanding and in strict accordance
with the mandate of the resolution.
Mr. Berger (Germany): I thank Ambassador
Osorio for his briefing and for his work as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006).
The E3+3 and Iran have expressed their
willingness to engage in talks. We acknowledge that
Iran has finally responded to the European Union High
Representative’s letter of 21 October 2011. We call on
Iran to engage seriously in meaningful discussions on
concrete steps aimed at restoring confidence in the
exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear
programme. The early resumption of nuclear talks
offers an important opportunity. It is now up to Iran to
seize the moment, return to the negotiating table in a
constructive spirit and be ready to cooperate.
Last week, Minister for Foreign Affairs
Westerwelle reiterated our concern that the Iranian
nuclear programme challenged the stability of the
Middle
East
region
and
the
international
non-proliferation regime. In the debate on the situation
in the Middle East (S/PV.6734), Minister Westerwelle
made clear that a nuclear-armed Iran was not
acceptable. We are concerned that, despite the efforts
made so far, access to Parchin was not granted to the
most recent missions of the International Atomic

12-27140

S/PV.6737

Energy Agency (IAEA). We also regret that Iran
recently increased its uranium enrichment activities at
the Fordo and Natanz facilities, as reported by the
IAEA. It remains essential that Iran intensify its
cooperation with the Agency in order to resolve all
outstanding substantive issues, in particular those
having possible military dimensions.
We repeat our call on Iran to finally comply in
full and without delay with all its international
obligations under the relevant resolutions of the
Council and the IAEA Board of Governors. We urge
Iran to apply the modified Code 3.1 and implement the
Additional Protocol.
It is unfortunate that Iran continues to be in
violation of its international obligations. As we were
told during today’s briefing, more cases of sanctions
violations have been reported. We reiterate our concern
over the weapons exports from Iran to other countries,
especially to Syria, and to Hizbullah. Likewise, we
notified, together with France, the United Kingdom
and the United States, yet another violation of
paragraph 9 of resolution 1929 (2010) — the launch of
the Navid satellite into space in early February, using
Iran’s Safir space launch vehicle.
These incidents underline the importance of
properly implementing the existing sanctions regime.
The 1737 Committee and its Panel of Experts have a
vital role to play in that regard. We believe that,
pending a final solution to the Iranian nuclear issue,
the international community should make the best use
of the tools at its disposal. We welcome the
forthcoming briefing by the Committee’s Chair in early
April to inform the broader United Nations
membership about how to implement the Iran
resolutions.
On 7 May 2011, the Panel of Experts presented
its final report. We reiterate our call for that useful
report to finally be released. The report of the Panel of
Experts is an important tool for all Member States,
which are themselves requested to report on the
implementation of the sanctions measures. That makes
it all the more urgent to release the report of the Panel
of Experts. We will continue to support the
independence of the Panel. We hold that its travel plans
must remain unimpeded. The Panel must be in a
position to investigate incidents wherever and
whenever deemed necessary.

12-27140

Additional designations under the Council’s
sanctions regime are an important element in our
toolkit. Germany welcomes the Committee’s ability to
designate sanctions violators, as stipulated in
paragraph 26 of resolution 1929 (2010). We support the
listing of sanctions violators to demonstrate to all
individuals who disrespect the Council’s resolutions
that they will be confronted by harsh measures for their
bad conduct.
Finally, let me reiterate our determination to find
a diplomatic solution to the Iranian nuclear issue. We
remain prepared to restart dialogue with Iran aimed at
restoring international confidence in the exclusively
peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear programme.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I thank Ambassador
Néstor Osorio for his work as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) and for
his comprehensive briefing on the activities of that
Committee.
It is essential that the Committee continue to
solicit national implementation reports from Member
States and, with the support of the Panel of Experts
working constructively with them, to increase the
number of such reports. Azerbaijan welcomes the
fourth quarterly assessment of Member States’
implementation reports. We note the work done so far
by the Panel of Experts in drafting the implementation
assistance notices, and hope that that work can be
finalized in a timely manner.
The Republic of Azerbaijan attaches the utmost
importance to preventing the use of its territory as a
transit route for the illicit trafficking of items and
materials related to the proliferation of nuclear
weapons and weapons technology. In our view,
preventing the spread of nuclear weapons is the most
important security challenge that the international
community is currently confronting. But in pursuing
that goal, we cannot deny the right of any country to
develop its nuclear industry for exclusively peaceful
purposes, under strict international control.
Finally, I would also like to note that the
requirements of resolution 1737 (2006) and
international norms of non-proliferation, including
combating illicit trafficking, cannot be applied to the
almost 20 per cent of the internationally recognized
territory of Azerbaijan that is currently occupied by
neighbouring Armenia, as a consequence of which

7

S/PV.6737

Azerbaijan does not control 132 kilometres of its
southern border.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): I, too, wish to thank
Ambassador Osorio for his briefing to the Council
today on the 90-day report of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006).
South Africa continues to support the resolution
of the issues involved with Iran’s nuclear programme
through peaceful means and dialogue between the
parties concerned, including between the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the Islamic
Republic of Iran. South Africa does not believe that
sanctions are an end in themselves and therefore
wishes to emphasize that they should be aimed at
encouraging progress towards a peaceful resolution of
the concerns about Iran’s nuclear activities.
In that regard, South Africa notes from the latest
report of the Director General of the IAEA that the
Agency continues to be able to verify the
non-diversion of nuclear material declared by Iran, but
also that it remains unable to provide credible
assurances about the absence of undeclared nuclear
material and activities in Iran.
The IAEA remains the sole competent technical
authority to verify the nature of the nuclear programme
of the Islamic Republic of Iran. We are therefore
pleased to note the recent negotiations between Iran
and the Agency, and look forward to their resumption
culminating in a structured approach to address all
outstanding issues consistent with the Agency’s
verification practices.
South Africa once again encourages all parties
concerned to avoid any actions that could derail
progress towards finding a sustainable solution to the
Iranian nuclear issue. To that end, we trust that the
Security Council will work in good faith to encourage
constructive dialogue between the parties concerned.
We call upon Iran to comply with the relevant
decisions of the IAEA and with its obligation and other
relevant Security Council resolutions.
We wish to reiterate that South Africa believes
that we should not tire in seeking, in a cooperative
manner, a long-term solution that restores international
confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s
nuclear programme, while respecting Iran’s right to the
peaceful use of nuclear energy, consistent with the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.

8

Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We thank Ambassador
Néstor Osorio for his briefing to the Council this
morning. Allow me to take this first opportunity as a
new Council member to offer our perspective on the
various Security Council resolutions relating to Iran
and on the work of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006) and its Panel of Experts.
Pakistan fully supports the internationally agreed
non-proliferation goals. Pakistan is an active partner in
the several global platforms and processes that are
aimed at advancing disarmament and non-proliferation.
It is important for all States to implement in good faith
Security Council resolutions, including those relating
to the Iranian nuclear issue. On our part, we have
complied fully with the provisions of resolution 1737
(2006), 1747 (2007), 1803 (2008) and 1929 (2010), and
have filed the requisite reports with the 1737
Committee.
Over the past several years, the 1737 Committee
has undertaken several activities, including, inter alia,
the adoption of guidelines for the conduct of its work,
the preparation of implementation assistance notices
and several reports and briefings to the Member States.
Similarly, the Panel of Experts has carried out a
number of tasks to assist the Committee in carrying out
its mandate. The scope of activities undertaken by the
Committee and its Panel is vast and requires careful
examination, especially by new members of the
Security Council. We are reviewing the documentation
that has been made available to the new members
recently, and will contribute to the proceedings of the
Committee in the months ahead.
The briefings by the Committee to the Council
serve useful outreach and awareness purposes for the
larger United Nations membership. They are designed
to sensitize the larger membership about the mandate
of the Committee and the activities carried out by it
and its Panel of Experts. We take this opportunity to
underscore the need for the Council to evolve an
institutionalized mechanism to ease the transition of
new Council members into the work not only of this
body, but also of all its subsidiary bodies. We propose
that structured briefings be offered and documentation
made available in a timely manner to the new members
in order to enable them to participate meaningfully in
the proceedings and decision-making processes of the
Council and its committees. We trust that the Council
and its committees shall pursue activities in a balanced,
inclusive and consensus-based manner. We assure you,

12-27140

S/PV.6737

Mr. President, and Ambassador Osorio
delegation’s full support in those endeavours.

of

our

a peaceful, amicable and fair resolution of the Iranian
nuclear issue.

We have noted the views expressed by other
Council members on the need for the publication of the
Panel’s final report. We are in the process of examining
that and other reports, and shall express our views
subsequently. At this stage, we would like to note that
the Panel has an important job in carrying out its work
consistent with its mandate and under the direction of
the Committee. As a matter of general principle, the
Panel’s reports should conform to the parameters set by
the Council’s resolutions and facilitate an effective and
balanced implementation of the sanctions regime. The
composition of the Panel also needs to reflect a broader
and more equitable geographic representation than is
currently the case. We hope that those considerations
will be taken into account when future reports are
prepared by them and the experts are appointed.

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation): We thank the
Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006), Permanent Representative of
Colombia Néstor Osorio, for his briefing on the
Committee’s work.

Sanctions regimes created by the Security
Council are, at best, a tool or a means to achieve a
larger objective. There are different perspectives on the
rationale, scope and efficacy of those regimes. Today’s
briefing is, however, not the forum to debate on what
the sanctions can or cannot achieve. As far as Pakistan
is concerned, we believe that sanctions should not
become an end in themselves. They should instead be
aligned with the broader objectives of facilitating
dialogue, negotiations and the resolution of outstanding
issues. We have taken note of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) report on the implementation
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) safeguards in Iran. While noting the
programme of work between Iran and the Agency, we
trust that they will remain constructively engaged with
a view to resolving all outstanding issues.
Pakistan welcomes the recent announcement of
the resumption of talks between Iran and the P5+1
group. That is a positive sign and a step in the right
direction. In our view, dialogue and cooperation are the
best means to resolve all outstanding matters relating
to the Iranian nuclear issue. Pakistan, as a
neighbouring country, does not wish any escalation of
tension in an already volatile region. Iran is a party to
the NPT and a member of the IAEA. Accordingly, it
has rights and obligations alike. We believe that Iran
should fulfil its legal obligations while Iran’s rights
should also be respected. We hope that the Committee
and Panel’s work moves in the direction of facilitating

12-27140

In the reporting period, the Committee pursued
its active work addressing the tasks facing it. In view
of the heightened sensitivity of the problem of
sanctions, it is particularly important for the
Committee to act in a balanced, objective manner and
not breach the terms of its mandate. That needs to
continue in the future, and also applies to the
Committee’s Panel of Experts, working under its
leadership and giving this body practical assistance. It
is important for the activities of the experts to be built
on an impartial and independent basis, using only
credible sources and reliable information.
Russia fully complies with all Security Council
sanctions against Iran. In that context, we believe that
the effectiveness of the sanctions regime and the
overall integrality and unity of the international
community’s actions on outstanding issues related to
the Iranian nuclear programme are undermined by
introducing further unilateral restrictions. In a number
of cases, they have an extraterritorial effect. That is
categorically unacceptable from an international legal
point of view. The members of the international
community must scrupulously fulfil the relevant
Security Council resolutions and not exceed their
remit.
We do not deny the gravity of the problem of
restoring trust in the exclusively peaceful nature of the
Iranian nuclear programme. We share the concerns in
that regard. At the same time, we oppose attempts to
artificially inflame the atmosphere around that subject.
After two rounds, the talks between the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and Iran should
continue. We expect a speedy resumption of dialogue
between the six international mediators with Iran, at
which the Iranian nuclear programme will be one of
the key topics of discussion.
For our part, we are doing our utmost to achieve a
comprehensive, long-term settlement to the situation
concerning the Iranian nuclear programme, using
exclusively political diplomatic means through
dialogue between the P5+1 group and Iran in a spirit of

9

S/PV.6737

mutual respect and on the basis of phased mutual
principles. It is important that the resolution adopted
by the IAEA Board of Governors in November and the
8 March statement by the Chinese representative to the
Board of Governors on behalf of the P5+1 both refer to
those principles and confirm the resolve of the
international community to find a comprehensive
political diplomatic settlement.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Like our
colleagues, I thank Ambassador Néstor Osorio for his
leadership of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006), for the work accomplished
under his direction, and for the informative report he
just presented on the activities carried out in the past
three months. Some of the issues raised in that report
are indeed particularly worrying, and we encourage the
Committee to pursue its investigations on all those
matters. Increasing tensions in an already unstable
region reinforce our concerns.
Let me reiterate once again the importance that
we attach to the publication of the Panel of Experts
final report, which was submitted in May 2011. That
report should already have been made available to all
United Nations Member States as a measure not only
of transparency, but also of accountability for the tasks
undertaken by the Committee last year. Moreover, we
need to raise awareness among Member States of the
importance of fully and adequately implementing
resolution 1929 (2010), and information sharing is
crucial in that regard.
The report of the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), dated
24 February (S/2012/114, annex), established again the
continued absence of progress in Iran’s cooperation
with the Agency and confirmed that its enrichment
activities and heavy water-related projects were not
suspended. A number of outstanding cases that demand
urgent clarification were not answered, and access to
nuclear sites, in particular the Parchin site, continue to
be denied.
The possible existence in Iran of past or current
undisclosed nuclear activities involving a military
dimension, including the development of ballistic
missile capabilities, significantly increases our general
concern and suspicion over the true nature of the
Iranian nuclear programme. At this point in time, it is
essential for Iran to urgently restore international
confidence concerning the exclusively peaceful nature

10

of its nuclear programme, in accordance with its
obligations under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons and its Safeguards Agreement, as
well as the relevant provisions of Security Council
resolutions.
As we have stated before, the IAEA is the only
international body of ascertaining the true nature of the
Iranian nuclear programme. It is imperative that Iran
respond positively and through concrete actions to the
requests of the Agency and engage seriously in the
resumption of negotiations for a comprehensive and
long-term settlement of the nuclear issue.
Portugal continues to stand by its long-standing
commitment to support and work for a diplomatic
solution and is encouraged by the prospect in the near
future of substantive talks to be held in the framework
of the E3+3. We sincerely hope that Iran will now enter
into meaningful discussions without preconditions and
cooperate with the IAEA to clarify all outstanding
issues, in particular those that give rise to the
international community’s deep concerns about
possible military dimensions to its nuclear programme.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Néstor Osorio for
his briefing this morning and his work as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006).
(spoke in French)
I also wish to extend my thanks to the Panel of
Experts established pursuant to resolution 1929 (2010)
for the level its expertise made available to the
Committee. We encourage the Panel to continue its
monitoring action of the Committee and its
participation in the various conferences and meetings
pursuant to the Committee’s mandate, in particular its
dialogue with Member States, especially through visits
organized to countries at their request.
The Committee continues to consider the cases of
which it has been notified, and we hope that it will
enjoy all the necessary support of Member States, just
as we remain confident that it can continue to count on
the professionalism and impartiality of the Panel of
Experts. We also hope that the Committee will
continue its consideration of the Panel of Experts’ final
report of 2011 in a constructive spirit that will enable it
to reach a consensus on the publication of that report as
soon as possible.

12-27140

S/PV.6737

In the same spirit, my delegation supports the
intention of the Chair to organize a briefing for all
States Members of the United Nations in the very near
future in order to provide greater transparency to the
work of the Council and its subsidiary bodies.
The latest report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) (S/2012/114, annex) shows
that outstanding issues of the Iranian nuclear
programme have still not been resolved. It is crucial
that the dialogue between Iran and the P5+1 group
resume as soon as possible. We remain convinced that
dialogue and the diplomatic channel are the only way
to find a solution to the issue. The success of such a
dialogue requires a clear and sustained commitment in
good faith and the avoidance of any action that could
complicate the situation.
We also believe that resolving the issue means
compliance with Security Council resolutions and the
requests of the International Atomic Energy Agency in
the context of Iran meeting its international
obligations. We remain convinced of the impartiality
and integrity of the IAEA as the sole competent body
in that area and that, as a result, it should enjoy all
necessary cooperation, including the required
information and access.
Here, we reiterate that the non-proliferation
regime should not be weakened and that all States
should
scrupulously
respect
their
safeguards
obligations. The goal of nuclear disarmament, which
my country values, continues to be put to the test if
freely undertaken non-proliferation commitments are
not respected. At the same time, we wish to underscore
that that regime is based on a fundamental balance
between the rights and obligations of States that no
State may avoid.
In conclusion, allow me to express the hope that
the intended dialogue will take place and that Iran and
the P5+1 swiftly return to the negotiating table.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We wish to thank Ambassador Néstor Osorio for his
informative briefing and the leadership that he has
shown in guiding the activities of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). We are
particularly grateful for the assistance provided by his
team, the Chair of the Committee and the Panel of
Experts to the new Council members to better
understand the functioning of the Committee.

12-27140

Since the adoption of resolution 1737 (2006),
Guatemala has adopted practical measures to ensure
the full implementation of the resolution in our
country. We do not possess or intend to possess
weapons of mass destruction of any kind. As a party to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) and a signatory to all main
international instruments and agreements on the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
Guatemala reaffirms the importance of a balanced
implementation of the three fundamental pillars of the
NPT: non-proliferation, disarmament and the peaceful
use of nuclear energy. Of course, we believe that that
last pillar includes the right of all States parties to the
NPT to develop, research, produce and use nuclear
energy as long as it has established that it is for
peaceful purposes. Allow me to underscore some
points of the report.
First, our primary focus in the Committee should
be the effective implementation of resolution 1737
(2006), adopted by the Council, which includes the
consideration of all its reports.
Second, it is of concern to note that the Islamic
Republic of Iran has ignored the provisions of
resolution 1737 (2006) and subsequent resolutions.
That is completely unacceptable and jeopardizes the
effectiveness of joint decisions of the Council.
Third, applying sanctions is a process that
requires the ongoing and resolute efforts of the
international community. Much has been done to
implement resolutions 1737 (2006) and 1929 (2010).
However, it is not enough and we must continue our
action.
We commend the outreach activities carried out
by the Panel of Experts through visits, inspections and
participation in seminars. Such activities have
facilitated understanding not only of the work of the
Committee, but also of the role of States in
implementing the relevant resolutions. We believe that
those activities should be continued. Further
strengthening of outreach activities in developing
countries is necessary to consolidate the improvements.
Fourth, Guatemala is grateful for the work of the
Panel of Experts established pursuant to resolution
1929 (2010) as summarized in the mid-term review
report published in 2011. It is important that the
Committee continue actively to provide its guidance
and leadership. The mandate of the Panel of Experts

11

S/PV.6737

has been clearly defined in paragraph 29 of the
resolution, and remains the sole reference for the
Committee to continue to follow up the various
activities of the group.
Fifth, viewed from a broader political
perspective, the issue of the Iranian nuclear situation is
not encouraging. As yet there has been no progress in
negotiations;
on
the
contrary,
the
current
confrontational tendency is a source of great concern.
The lack of confidence combined with the recent
alarming events both within and outside the Islamic
Republic of Iran risk generating a dangerous situation,
which we must strenuously avoid. To ensure that the
situation does not deteriorate even further, we must
seek worthy and credible alternatives aimed at
establishing an environment conducive to dialogue and
genuine commitment. New endeavours are necessary to
strengthen the foundation of a negotiated solution.
Sixth, Iran’s implementation of the provisions of
the relevant Council resolutions and its cooperation
with the International Atomic Energy Agency must also
be considered a step in the right direction. The
suspension of all activities linked to enrichment and
processing is a legally binding requirement under
resolution 1737 (2006), and crucial to establishing
confidence.
Seventh, we note that during the reporting period
the Committee received notifications from Member
States through reports of alleged violations. We
commend the Committee, which, with the support of
the Group of Experts, has responded to those reports
while at the same time intensifying its public opinion
outreach activities aimed at avoiding future sanctions
violations.
Lastly, my country supports the work of the
Committee and its Panel of Experts and remains ready
to participate creatively and constructively in
considering outstanding issues, as agreed at the
Committee’s recent meeting on 29 February. We shall
continue to follow the matter very closely.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would
first like to associate myself with previous speakers in
thanking Mr. Osorio for his excellent work at the head
of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). In the past three
months, the Committee, supported by its Panel of
Experts, has participated further in the implementation
of Security Council resolutions related to the Iranian

12

nuclear programme, in particular by promoting a better
understanding of the sanctions regime, pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) and others, and in reminding
States of their obligations stemming from those
resolutions. We welcome that work and encourage the
Committee to continue along those lines.
The quarterly report presented to the Council by
the Committee again highlights alarming violations of
the resolutions associated with the Iranian nuclear
programme, despite the many appeals from the
international community for those commitments to be
respected. Togo has always advocated the principle of
general and complete disarmament in all its aspects.
We express our grave concern about those serious
violations and urge States to fully honour all
commitments undertaken.
While Iran cannot be denied the right to use
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, that right should
not extend to permission to acquire nuclear weapons.
As Iran is a State party to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, in our opinion
it should respect its commitments and work to reassure
the international community of its willingness to
cooperate and, above all, to engage in direct
negotiations with the P5+1.
To date, the attitude of the Iranian authorities, as
represented by their public statements, has had little
effect in allaying suspicions as to the real nature of the
Iranian nuclear programme. Moreover, the latest report
of the International Atomic Energy Agency, of
24 February, notes serious concerns with respect to the
Iranian nuclear programme. That information suggests
that Iran has undertaken activities towards the
development of a nuclear explosive device. Such a
situation, lest we forget, jeopardizes regional and
international peace and security.
Military activities linked to the so-called civil
programme should not include nuclear-related
activities. We believe that the only guarantee of
reassuring the international community today as to the
true intentions of Iran is for that country to allow
access to all sites, equipment and documents associated
with its nuclear programme.
In paragraph 29 of resolution 1929 (2010), the
Panel
of
Experts
is
requested
to
make
recommendations on actions that the Council, the
Committee or Member States could consider taking to
improve the implementation of the measures under

12-27140

S/PV.6737

consideration. It goes without saying that the
implementation of the sanctions regime requires good
knowledge of best practices in the field. In that respect,
it is troubling that the final report of the Panel of
Experts has yet to be communicated to the Council due
to objections raised by certain Member States, at a time
when it is meant to convey information and best
practices aimed at helping States in their efforts to
implement resolutions on the Iranian nuclear
programme.
The international community, and the Security
Council in particular, must prevent nuclear energy from
being diverted from peaceful uses towards the
manufacture of nuclear weapons or other nuclear
devices. In that context, it is important to redouble our
efforts to ensure more efficient and effective measures,
such as sanctions, and to remain vigilant in confronting
violations of Security Council resolutions.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United
Kingdom.
I join others in thanking Ambassador Osorio for
today’s briefing to the Council and for his report on the
work of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) and its Panel of
Experts. As his report makes clear, the Committee
continues to do important work. During the reporting
period it has in particular received a violation report
following the launch by Iran of a Safir rocket, a clear
contravention of the Council’s decision that Iran should
not undertake activity related to ballistic missile
technology. It has heard a useful briefing from the
delegation of France explaining why space-launch and
ballistic-missile technologies are essentially identical.
It has received notifications from several States that
show that Iran continues both to proliferate weapons
and import nuclear-related material, in violation of
Security Council resolutions. Of those violation
reports, we are seriously concerned by evidence of
systematic Iranian activity to provide weapons illegally
to the Syrian Government — weapons that, as we
speak, are being used to violently suppress the people
of Syria.
The United Kingdom looks forward to the open
meeting of the Committee being planned by
Ambassador Osorio. This is an important opportunity
to discuss the Committee’s work with the wider United
Nations membership.

12-27140

We thank the 1737 Panel of Experts for their
ongoing support for the Committee. We welcome their
efforts to raise awareness of those steps that Member
States need to take to implement sanctions and to
promote knowledge-sharing and collaboration between
States.
We continue to be frustrated by the blockage of
the publication of the Panel of Experts’ independent
report. We urge the Committee to act on the
recommendations in the Panel’s report by designating
individuals and entities that have violated sanctions
and by publishing implementation assistance notices.
Iran’s nuclear programme continues to develop,
in contravention of the Council’s resolutions and of
Iran’s obligations under the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. The latest
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) report
provides further detailed evidence of this. In particular,
the report found that Iran continues to increase both
production of higher-grade 20 per cent enriched
uranium and enrichment to 3.5 per cent.
Iran has failed to give a convincing explanation
about how a quantity of its uranium has gone missing.
Two IAEA missions to Tehran within less than a month
have failed to convince Iran to engage constructively
with the Agency. The Iranian Government has again
refused the IAEA access to key sites, relevant
documents and individuals associated with its nuclear
programme. And let us not forget that in its last report,
the IAEA said unequivocally that Iran had carried out
activities relevant to the development of a nuclear
explosive device, that some of its nuclear activities
were specific to nuclear weapons and that some of
these may still be ongoing.
Iran has time and time again had the opportunity
to convince the IAEA otherwise by providing
unhindered access to its nuclear facilities and behaving
in a transparent manner, but it has failed to do so. No
one following these issues could be in any doubt that
Iran’s clear objective is to develop the technology
required for a nuclear weapon.
Despite this, we remain committed to engaging
Iran on the international community’s genuine
concerns regarding its nuclear programme. We
continue to seek a peaceful, negotiated solution and are
applying pressure on Iran to bring one about. The twintrack approach is working. Iran is feeling the pressure
of sanctions and its growing international isolation. We

13

S/PV.6737

are ready to talk, but Iran must negotiate seriously and
without preconditions. It must match our good faith.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to Ambassador Osorio to respond
to comments.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
shall be brief. I should first like to thank Council
members for their responses to and comments on the
report that was presented, which overall reflects the
work of the members of the Committee, whom I thank
for their contributions and guidance.
I should like also to highlight the work of the
Panel of Experts, carried out under difficult conditions
and with complete commitment and dedication. It
deserves commendation, as does the Secretariat, which
has provided guidance and assistance in a very seriousminded and professional manner.

14

I welcome the fact that the initiative of members
to convene a briefing open to Member States has
received the support that has been evident here. I
suggest that such a meeting be convened during the
first two weeks of April, if possible. We are working
with the Secretariat to determine the availability of
rooms, and we trust that we will be able to settle on a
date, which will then be duly made known to Council
members.
The President: I thank Ambassador Osorio for
the clarifications he has provided.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present state of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.

12-27140
