A/61/PV.106

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-first session

106th plenary meeting
Thursday, 2 August 2007, at 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al-Khalifa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Bahrain)

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 110 (continued)
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Draft resolution (A/61/L.65)
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly held a debate on this item at its 77th
plenary meeting, on 13 December 2006.
The General Assembly will now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/61/L.65. In connection with
the draft resolution, I give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Ms. Kelley (Director, General Assembly and
Economic and Social Council Affairs Division,
Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management): In connection with draft resolution
A/61/L.65, on revitalizing the role and authority of the
General Assembly and strengthening its performance, I
wish to place on record the following statement of
financial implications on behalf of the SecretaryGeneral, in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
Under the terms of operative paragraph 2 of the
draft resolution, the General Assembly decides
“to establish, at its sixty-second session, an ad
hoc working group on the revitalization of the
General Assembly, open to all Member States, to
evaluate and assess the status of implementation
of relevant resolutions, to identify ways to further

enhance the role, authority, effectiveness and
efficiency of the General Assembly, inter alia, by
building on previous resolutions, and to submit a
report thereon to the General Assembly”.
Pursuant to the aforementioned operative
paragraph of the draft resolution, it is understood that
the exact dates for meetings of the working group
would be determined in consultation between the
substantive secretariat and Conference Services,
subject to the availability of conference facilities and
services allocated for the General Assembly and its
working groups. It is further understood that the
working group cannot meet at the same time as the
General Assembly is meeting and that no two working
groups of the General Assembly can meet
simultaneously.
Should the General Assembly adopt draft
resolution A/61/L.65, the establishment of the
aforementioned working group would constitute an
addition to the draft calendar of conferences and
meetings of the United Nations. However, as the
required conference servicing resources of the working
group would be allocated from those already
earmarked for meetings of the General Assembly, no
additional conference servicing resources would be
required.
The President: The Assembly will now take
action on draft resolution A/61/L.65, entitled
“Revitalizing the role and authority of the General
Assembly and strengthening its performance”. May I

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

07-44792 (E)

*0744792*

A/61/PV.106

take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/61/L.65?
Draft resolution A/61/L.65
(resolution 61/292).

was

adopted

The President: The General Assembly has just
adopted resolution 61/292, on revitalizing the role and
authority of the Assembly and strengthening its
performance. I commend all Member States for their
support and cooperation throughout this process. It
gives me also great pleasure to congratulate the two
facilitators, Ambassador Badji, the Permanent
Representative of Senegal, and Ambassador Bodini, the
Permanent Representative of San Marino, for their
tireless efforts and dedication in leading the
consultations on this important agenda item. I wish to
express my most sincere appreciation to the facilitators
for conducting wide-ranging consultations, which
provided members with an opportunity to convey their
concerns and expectations on how best to revitalize the
General Assembly.
The resolution just adopted stresses the
importance of implementing General Assembly
resolutions on revitalization. It is our common
responsibility. I am convinced that the report that will
be submitted by the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 1 of the resolution will assist Member States
in this task. In this context, it should provide the ad hoc
working group called for in paragraph 2 with the basis
for its future deliberations. I welcome this new step to
strengthen the performance of the General Assembly,
an objective to which I am personally committed. On
the basis of my discussions with the President-elect,
Mr. Srgjan Kerim, I trust that this matter will be given
the full attention it deserves during the sixty-second
session.
Mr. Bodini (San Marino): First of all, I want to
thank you, Madam President, on behalf of Ambassador
Badji of Senegal and myself, for the very kinds words
that you just used about us and for having given us, on
9 March, such a major responsibility.
Paul Badji and I tried to fulfil the mission you
gave to us to the best of our capacity. In that regard, I
wish also to thank your staff for their great work and
the Secretary-General for helping us in our work and in
our planning. But most of all, I would like to thank our
colleagues, who were kind enough to spend so much
time with us in sometimes gruelling meetings. Paul and
I are also thankful to have learned so much about our

2

colleagues’ willingness to change the way we do
business in the General Assembly.
We have provided members with a paper that
summarizes some of the ideas that our colleagues
expressed to us. I hope that most of the ideas — and
most of them are very good ideas — will not get lost
and will be the basis for the process of revitalization at
the sixty-second session.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 110?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items: reopening of the consideration
of sub-item (a) of agenda item 106
The President: The General Assembly will turn
to a note by the Secretary-General contained in
document A/61/101/Add.1, under sub-item (a) of
agenda item 106, concerning the appointment of a
member of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions. Members will recall that the
General Assembly concluded its consideration of subitem (a) of agenda item 106 at its 54th meeting, held on
16 November 2006.
In order to enable the General Assembly to
consider the note of the Secretary-General, it will be
necessary to reopen consideration of sub-item (a) of
agenda item 106. May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to reopen consideration of sub-item
(a) of agenda item 106?
It was so decided.
The President: Representatives will also recall
that at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 13 September 2006,
the General Assembly allocated this sub-item to the
Fifth Committee. In order for the Assembly to proceed
expeditiously on this sub-item, may I take it that the
Assembly agrees to consider this sub-item directly in
plenary meeting?
It was so decided.
The President: May I further take it that the
Assembly agrees to proceed immediately to the
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 106?
It was so decided.

07-44792

A/61/PV.106

07-44792

3

A/61/PV.106

Agenda item 106 (a) (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(a) Appointment of members of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions
Note by the Secretary-General (A/61/101/Add.1)
The President: In his note, the Secretary-General
informs the General Assembly that he has received
notification of the resignation of Mr. Jun Yamazaki of
Japan from the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions. The Assembly will therefore
be required to appoint, at its current session, a person
to fill the unexpired portion of the term of office of Mr.
Yamazaki, that is, until 31 December 2007.

The Secretary-General also informs the General
Assembly that the Government of Japan has nominated
Ms. Misako Kaji to fill the vacancy arising from the
resignation of Mr. Yamazaki. The note further states
that the Secretariat was informed by the Chairman of
the Group of Asian States that the candidature of
Ms. Kaji has been endorsed by the Group.
May I take it therefore that it is the wish of the
Assembly to appoint Ms. Misako Kaji as a member of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions for a term of office beginning on
2 August 2007 and ending on 31 December 2007?
It was so decided.
The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded its consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda
item 106 and of agenda item 106 as a whole.
The meeting rose at 3.25 p.m.

4

07-44792
