A /75/PV.35

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

35th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 2 December 2020, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 37 (continued)
The situation in the Middle East
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/75/195
and A/75/297)
Draft resolution (A/75/L.29)
Ms. Squeff (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina takes the floor to address General Assembly
agenda items 37 and 88, “The situation in the Middle
East” and “Question of Palestine”, respectively.
Argentina continues to believe that the only way to
solve the conflict between Palestinians and Israelis
is through negotiations between both parties to seek
agreement on the final-status issues identified in the
Oslo Accords: Jerusalem, refugees, settlements, borders
and security measures.
Argentina supports a peaceful, definitive and
comprehensive solution to the Palestinian question,
based on the two-State solution and the 1967 borders,
to be determined by the parties through negotiations, in
conformity with the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and of the Security Council. Argentina
reaffirms its support for the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people to self-determination and to
establish an independent and viable State recognized
by all nations, as well as the right of the State of Israel
to live in peace alongside its neighbours within secure
and internationally recognized borders.

Argentina also reiterates its concern regarding the
persistent and continued expansion of illegal Israeli
settlements in the occupied Palestinian territories
and urges that their expansion cease. As the General
Assembly has repeatedly made clear, settlements
contravene international law, create obstacles to peace,
undermine the prospects for a solution based on two
States living in peace and security and thereby promote
the continuation of an unsustainable status quo. The
gravity of the situation was recognized by the Security
Council in resolution 2334 (2016), the terms of which
we fully reaffirm.
At the same time, Argentina condemns the
indiscriminate shelling from Gaza of civilians in Israel,
as well as all acts of violence perpetrated by Hamas
and other armed groups. It is essential that Palestinian
leaders sincerely address Israeli security concerns. In
that regard, we recognize the right of Israel to act in
its legitimate defence, while stressing the necessity for
Israeli actions to respect their obligations pursuant to
international humanitarian law, particularly taking into
account the principles of distinction and proportionality.
Regarding the financial difficulties facing the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, Argentina wishes to reiterate
its full support for the Agency’s work, which helps
prevent even further deterioration in the humanitarian
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories.
We likewise reaffirm the need for the international
community to develop appropriate responses to ensure
that the Agency has the necessary funds to ensure that
its services can be provided without interruption.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-33907 (E)

*2033907*

A/75/PV.35

02/12/2021

With regard to the situation in East Jerusalem,
Argentina reaffirms the special status of Jerusalem
in keeping with relevant United Nations resolutions,
including Security Council resolution 478 (1980), and
in that regard rejects any unilateral attempt to modify
that status, especially with regard to the Old City, which
has special significance for the three great monotheistic
religions. My country believes that the Holy City
should be a meeting place and a place of peace and that
free access to holy sites should be guaranteed to Jews,
Muslims and Christians.

Agenda item 38 (continued)

Any attempt to negate or diminish the historical
connection and deep significance of those places for
any of the three monotheistic religions is completely
unacceptable and undermines efforts to find a solution
to the conflict by reinforcing prejudices and distrust
among the parties. Argentina believes that Jerusalem is
among the issues whose final status must be determined
by the parties through bilateral negotiations.

Mr. Erdan (Israel): I asked to take the floor on
the draft resolutions presented under agenda items
37 and 38, the draft resolutions of the Palestinian
package. Not only do those draft resolutions fail to
promote peace; every single one of them is destructive
to peace. The draft resolutions reinforce a false
narrative of the conflict and further entrench the
Palestinians in their uncompromising positions. They
convince the Palestinians there is no need for them to
negotiate because the United Nations will fight for their
outrageous demands to be met — demands that include
resettling millions of Palestinians in Israel and forcing
us to give up sovereignty over our holiest sites. Such
steps would cause the destruction of Israel as a Jewish
State, and we will never agree to them.

With regard to the Syrian Golan, Argentina
maintains a principled position with respect to the
illegality of the acquisition of territory by force and
respect for the territorial integrity of States. We firmly
believe in the principle of the peaceful settlement
of disputes, and therefore deem it important that a
negotiated solution be sought to the conflict between
Syria and Israel with a view to ending the occupation
of the Golan Heights as soon as possible, in line with
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973)
and the principle of land for peace.
Finally, Argentina once again urges Palestinians
and Israelis to resume peace talks in good faith, with
flexibility and in line with international law and the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council, with a view to reaching agreement
on pending questions regarding the final status of
Palestine in all its aspects.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item.
I would like to inform members that action on draft
resolution A/75/L.29 will be taken after we take action
on draft resolutions A/75/L.32, A/75/L.33, A/75/L.34
and A/75/L.35, submitted under agenda item 38.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 37.
2/29

Question of Palestine
Draft resolutions (A/75/L.32, A/75/L.33,
A/75/L.34 and A/75/L.35)
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolutions A/75/L.32, A/75/L.33, A/75/L.34
and A/75/L.35.
Delegations wishing to make a statement in
explanation of vote before the voting on any of the draft
resolutions are invited to do so now in one intervention.

Those draft resolutions not only embolden
Palestinian rejectionism; they increase Israeli mistrust
towards the United Nations, making the General
Assembly irrelevant in facilitating peace. Why should
Israelis trust the United Nations when the majority of
Member States vote to renew the mandates of bodies
whose sole purpose is to promote anti-Israel bias?
The existence of those United Nations committees
is a further stain on this institution’s reputation. It is
time the General Assembly realized that and stopped
voting automatically to renew their mandates. Funding
propaganda against a Member State is not only
outrageous and shameful; it is a flagrant misuse of
valuable United Nations resources, which should be
used to save lives, not to perpetuate a conflict.
The peace between Israel and the United Arab
Emirates, Bahrain and the Sudan proves that peace
in the Middle East can be achieved only with direct
negotiations between the parties. They also prove
that United Nations intervention is not necessary. In
fact, the decades of failed United Nations attempts
at ending the Israeli-Palestinian conflict suggest that
20-33907

02/12/2021

such intervention may even be counterproductive.
For years, the Assembly has voted in favour of the
same draft resolutions. It recycles old talking points
and tries the same approach, and the result remains
unchanged. Perhaps it is time to try something new. I
suggest that the Assembly start by voting against these
draft resolutions.
Ms. Messenger (United States of America): The
United States continues to take active steps to rebuild
trust with our partners in the region by identifying
their shared interests and moving them away from
the conflicts of the past. Between the United States
Vision for Peace and the Abraham Accords, we have
made tangible gains in promoting peace, security and
prosperity in the Middle East. The Vision for Peace
is forward-looking and makes clear the United States
commitment to promoting a peaceful, secure and
prosperous future for the Israeli and Palestinian peoples.
Despite those positive steps forward, we are
disappointed, although not surprised, that the General
Assembly has again taken up a disproportionate
number of unbalanced draft resolutions that are
unfairly critical of Israel, demonstrating a clear and
persistent institutional bias directed at one Member
State. The United States continues to oppose the annual
submission of more than a dozen draft resolutions
biased against Israel. That one-sided approach only
undermines trust between the parties and fails to create
the kind of positive international environment critical
to achieving peace.
These draft resolutions recycle the tired habitual
rhetoric that does nothing to advance the cause of
peace. They also damage United Nations credibility,
casting into doubt its impartiality. It is deeply troubling
that the United Nations, an institution founded upon the
idea that all nations should be treated equally, should be
so often used by Member States to treat one State — in
particular Israel — unequally.
As the United States has repeatedly made clear,
that dynamic is unacceptable. We see draft resolutions
that are quick to condemn all manner of Israeli actions
but say nothing, or almost nothing, about Palestinian
actions or terrorist attacks by Hamas and similarly
aligned groups. Therefore, the United States once again
votes against these one-sided draft resolutions and
encourages other nations to do so as well.
The United States remains firmly and consistently
committed to achieving a comprehensive and lasting

A/75/PV.35

peace agreement between Israelis and the Palestinians.
Unfortunately, draft resolutions like those introduced
here today only just distract from making real progress
on the goal we all share.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolutions A/75/L.32, A/75/L.33, A/75/L.34 and
A/75/L.35.
We turn first to draft resolution A/75/L.32, entitled
“Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to the delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become co-sponsors
of draft resolution A/75/L.32: Algeria, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Brunei Darussalam, Comoros, Cuba, Djibouti, Egypt,
Indonesia, Iraq, Kuwait, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mauritania, Morocco,
Namibia, Nicaragua, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia,
South Africa, Tunisia, the United Arab Emirates, the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen
and the State of Palestine.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan,
Algeria,
Angola,
Argentina,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burundi, Cabo
Verde, Cambodia, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gambia, Grenada, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria,

20-339073/29

A/75/PV.35

02/12/2021

Oman, Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa,
South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Austria, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada,
Colombia,
Czechia,
Germany,
Guatemala,
Honduras, Hungary, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Papua
New Guinea, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Belarus, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Cameroon, Croatia,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi,
Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Togo, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uruguay

Nicaragua, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South Africa,
Tunisia, the United Arab Emirates, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen and the State
of Palestine.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana,
Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Chile, China,
Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Gambia, Grenada, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe

of

Against:
Australia, Austria, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada,
Colombia, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Israel,
Lithuania, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Nauru, Netherlands, Papua New Guinea,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Switzerland, United States of
America

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
draft resolution A/75/L.33: Algeria, Angola, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Brunei
Darussalam, Cuba, Djibouti, Egypt, Indonesia, Iraq,
Kuwait, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Malaysia, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia,

Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Belarus,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Cabo Verde,
Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Eritrea, Finland,
France, Georgia, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, New Zealand,
North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Sao

Draft resolution A/75/L.32 was adopted by 91 votes
to 17, with 54 abstentions (resolution 75/20).
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/75/L.33, entitled
“Division for Palestinian Rights of the Secretariat”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

4/29

floor

to

the

representative

20-33907

02/12/2021

A/75/PV.35

Tome and Principe, Serbia, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, South Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Togo,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Uruguay
Draft resolution A/75/L.33 was adopted by 82 votes
to 25, with 53 abstentions (resolution 75/21).
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/75/L.34, entitled
“Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I would like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/75/L.34 and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of draft resolution A/75/L.34: Algeria, Angola,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Brunei Darussalam,
Comoros, Cuba, the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Djibouti, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Indonesia, Iraq,
Jordan, Kuwait, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Malaysia, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia,
Nicaragua, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South Africa,
Tunisia, the United Arab Emirates, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen and the State
of Palestine.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chile,
China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein,

Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, San
Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, United
States of America
Abstaining:
Brazil,
Cameroon,
Guatemala,
Honduras,
Madagascar, Malawi, Palau, Rwanda, South Sudan
Draft resolution A/75/L.34 was adopted by 145
votes to 7, with 9 abstentions (resolution 75/22).
The President: We turn next to draft resolution
A/75/L.35, entitled “Special information programme on
the question of Palestine of the Department of Global
Communications of the Secretariat”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I would like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/74/L.35 and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of draft resolution A/74/L.35: Algeria, Angola,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Brunei Darussalam, Comoros, Cuba, Djibouti, Egypt,
Indonesia, Iraq, Kuwait, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic Lebanon, Malaysia, Mauritania, Morocco,
Namibia, Nicaragua, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia,
South Africa, Tunisia, the United Arab Emirates, the

20-339075/29

A/75/PV.35

Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Yemen and the State
of Palestine.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burundi, Cambodia, Chile,
China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, San Marino, Sao
Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Hungary, Israel, Marshall
Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru,
United States of America
6/29

02/12/2021

Abstaining:
Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Guatemala, Honduras,
Madagascar, Mexico, Rwanda, Samoa, South
Sudan, Togo, Uruguay
Draft resolution A/75/L.35 was adopted by 142
votes to 8, with 11 abstentions (resolution 75/23).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
for explanations of vote on the resolutions just adopted,
may I remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Mrs. Bogyay (Hungary): Regarding the Middle
East peace process, Hungary supports the two-State
solution, which has to be achieved through direct
negotiations between the two sides. We hope that the
parties will agree to engage in renewed dialogue in
good faith.
We align ourselves with the explanation of vote
to be delivered by the representative of Germany on
behalf of the European Union and its member States
and wish to make the following explanation of vote in
our national capacity.
Hungary has traditionally pursued a balanced, fair
and constructive approach in its relations with Israel and
Palestine, as well as regarding the Middle East peace
process. In 2020, Hungary was the first European nation
to welcome the historic achievement of normalization
between Israel and a number of Arab countries, a
development that does not impose any constraints on
Palestine; on the contrary, the normalization benefits
all, and we are happy to see that the Palestinian leaders
have started to recognize that to be true.
We would like to see the same approach reflected
in our multilateral efforts. We are willing to lend our
support to any draft resolution that is balanced and fair
to both parties and, most important, beneficial to all of
us. But we are also ready to express reservations when
we see that would firmly help to achieve a constructive
and balanced approach. Our efforts should be
concentrated on fostering cooperation and partnership
in the Middle East and North African region instead
of alienating key partners and each other by adopting
often one-sided and unbalanced draft resolutions,
which is detrimental to the peace process and our work
here at the United Nations.
20-33907

02/12/2021

For that reason, Hungary cannot support the
draft resolutions on the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, the
Division for Palestinian Rights of the Secretariat and
the Special information programme on the question of
Palestine of the Department of Global Communications
of the Secretariat.
Mr. El Eid (Germany): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.
The EU wishes to thank the Palestinian delegation
for the successful outcome of our negotiations on a
number of resolutions on which action is taken by the
General Assembly. The EU welcomes the Palestinian
Mission’s decision to biennualize a number of resolutions
under the agenda item “Question of Palestine”.
At this point in time, we would like to put on record
that with regard to all resolutions that are adopted during
the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly, the
EU and its member States consider that whenever the
Palestinian Government is mentioned, this refers to the
Palestinian Authority.
Furthermore, the use of the term “Palestine” in any
of those resolutions cannot be construed as a recognition
of the State of Palestine and is without prejudice to the
individual positions of Member States on this issue and
hence on the question of the validity of an accession to
the conventions and treaties mentioned therein.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 38.
Agenda item 37 (continued)
The situation in the Middle East
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/75/L.29.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/75/L.29, entitled “The Syrian Golan”. A
recorded vote has been requested.
The draft resolution has closed for e-sponsorship.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.

A/75/PV.35

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution and in
addition to the delegations listed in draft resolution
A/75/L.29, the following countries have also become
co-sponsors of the draft: Angola, Bangladesh, Brunei
Darussalam, Indonesia, Malaysia, Oman, Palestine
and Senegal.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Cabo
Verde, Cambodia, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia,
Grenada, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia,
Morocco,
Mozambique,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Nicaragua, Oman, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Russian Federation,
Saint Lucia, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa,
South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, United
Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Brazil, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malta,
Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Nauru, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway,

20-339077/29

A/75/PV.35

Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Rwanda,
Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Togo, Tuvalu, Ukraine, Uruguay
Draft resolution A/75/L.29 was adopted by 88 votes
to 9, with 62 abstentions (resolution 75/24).
[Subsequently, the delegation of the Republic
of Moldova informed the Secretariat that it had
intended to abstain; the delegation of Tajikistan
had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote after the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Mazzeo (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina wishes to deliver the following explanation
of vote on resolution 75/24, on the Syrian Golan, which
the General Assembly has just adopted.
Argentina voted in favour of the resolution because
it believes that its essential character is linked to the
illegality of the acquisition of territory by force. Article
2, paragraph 4, of the Charter of the United Nations
prohibits the use or threat of use of force against the
territorial integrity of a State.
Likewise, I wish to make clear Argentina’s position
on operative paragraph 6 of the resolution. Our vote does
not prejudge the content of this paragraph, particularly
the reference to the line of 4 June 1967. Argentina
believes it is important to move ahead in the quest for
a solution to the Syrian-Israeli conflict in the Middle
East, with a view to putting an end to the occupation of
the Golan Heights.

02/12/2021

of the Palestinian people and holding the occupying
regime accountable for its crimes against Palestinians,
in particular women and children.
The question of Palestine is the longest-running
crisis of our time with no feasible conclusion in sight.
After more than seven decades, the Israeli regime
continues to violate the fundamental human rights and
dignity of the Palestinian people and of other Arabs
living under its occupation. As a result, Palestinians
are not only deprived of their land and property while
being forcibly evicted but are also subject to violence,
terror and intimidation.
In the Gaza Strip, nearly 2 million Palestinians
continue to live under a suffocating blockade, making
Gaza the world’s largest inhabitable open-air prison.
That situation amounts to a collective punishment
against the entire population of Gaza, including women
and children, thus constituting a war crime under
international law.
The Islamic Republic of Iran is of the view that peace
in the Middle East cannot be achieved solely through the
promotion of a discriminatory and selective policy of
support for the Israeli regime as well as simultaneously
condemning the legitimate struggle of the Palestinian
people against occupation. Putting an end to more than
seven decades of conflict and instability in the Middle
East is possible only by resolving the Palestinian issue
through the termination of the occupation, the return
of Palestinian refugees to their homeland, ensuring
the inalienable right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination and establishing a sovereign and viable
State of Palestine with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.

The Government of Argentina therefore reaffirms
once again the importance of a resumption of
negotiations so as to seek a definitive solution to the
situation in the Syrian Golan, in line with Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the
principle of land for peace.

In the context of the current debate, several top
Iranian scientists have been targeted and assassinated
in numerous violent terrorist attacks. The cowardly
assassination of the martyr Fakhrizadeh, with serious
indications pointing to Israeli responsibility, is
another desperate attempt to jeopardize international
and regional peace. In fact, the commission of such a
reckless and criminal act is a clear manifestation of State
terrorism, which needs to be strongly and immediately
condemned by the international community.

Mr. Sahraei (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation welcomes the adoption by majority of all
resolutions under agenda items 37 and 38. By adopting
those resolutions, Member States have once again
expressed their strong support for the cause of Palestine,
in particular the realization of the inalienable rights

Emphasizing that no number of terrorist attacks
can hinder Iran’s progress in the achievement of
the successes in the field of science and technology
needed for its socioeconomic development, the Islamic
Republic of Iran reserves its right to take all necessary
measures to defend its people and secure its interests.

8/29

20-33907

02/12/2021

A/75/PV.35

The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting.

solution to the Palestine refugee question, on the basis
of General Assembly resolution 194 (III).

I now give the floor to the observer of the Observer
State of Palestine.

These are the pillars of a just and lasting PalestinianIsraeli peace and of genuine security and stability
for both peoples and the region, pillars on which the
international consensus as reflected in the vote today
remains strong.

Ms. Abdelhady-Nasser (Palestine): I wish to take
this opportunity to express the State of Palestine’s
sincere gratitude to all the Member States that voted
in support of the important resolutions — 75/20, 75/21,
75/22, 75/23 and 75/24 — that have just been adopted by
the General Assembly under agenda item 38, “Question
of Palestine”, once again by a resounding majority.
We convey additional appreciation to those
countries that co-sponsored those resolutions for their
strong endorsement and support and express in that
regard our special appreciation to Senegal, Chair of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People, for leading the Committee
and its co-sponsorship of those resolutions; to Namibia,
Vice-Chair of the Committee, for introducing the
resolutions to the Assembly (see A/75/PV.34); and to
Afghanistan, Vice-Chair and Acting Rapporteur of
the Committee, for presenting the annual report of the
Committee (A/75/35) today (ibid.), reflecting on the
ongoing plight of the Palestinian people, the continued
quest for a just solution and the Committee’s ongoing
efforts in that regard, in line with its General Assembly
mandate since it was established in 1975, 45 years ago.
We renew our gratitude also to all members and
observers of the Committee and to the Division
for Palestinian Rights and the Special information
programme on the question of Palestine of the
Department of Global Communications of the
Secretariat for all of their efforts, advocacy and
outreach in support of the realization of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people and the achievement
of a just, lasting and peaceful solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict and the question of Palestine as a
whole, in accordance with international law and the
relevant United Nations resolutions.
Central to all of the resolutions just adopted, both
the programmatic and political, is that goal of a just,
lasting, comprehensive and peaceful solution that
will put an end to the Israeli occupation, fulfil the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including
to self-determination and freedom, in an independent
and sovereign State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, based on the pre-1967 borders, and a just

We must reject the offensive remarks by the Israeli
representative against the integrity of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People and against the States that have sponsored and
voted in favour of those resolutions. This is not the socalled question of Palestine, as he flippantly stated; it is
in fact the longest- standing item on the United Nations
agenda. Once again he went on to insult the General
Assembly by claiming that everyone in this Hall is
“detached from reality”.
On the contrary, what was discussed today in this
debate is the reality, and what was discussed today are
not so-called Palestinian talking points. These are the
international talking points; this is the international
consensus, the consensus that Israel, the occupying
Power, continues to reject, obstruct, deny, belittle and
attempt futilely to destroy.
The debate in this Hall, with the participation of
countries from every region of the globe, is a clear
expression of international law and its respect by the
international community. The exception is Israel,
which refuses to abide by international law, flagrantly
trampling the Charter, international humanitarian and
human rights law, and United Nations resolutions,
clearly having gotten too accustomed to violating the
law with zero consequences.
We reiterate what was stated in our intervention
earlier today (see A/75/PV.34): it is high time for
accountability for such systematic breaches of
international law and violations of the human rights of
the Palestinian people. Only accountability can change
this miserable situation and give hope for a future of
justice and peace.
Peace cannot be built on the basis of illegality and
oppression. Peace is built on the foundation of justice
that is international law and upon compromise, and no
one has made a greater compromise for peace than the
Palestinian people and their leadership. The hypocritical
and degrading claim by the Israeli representative that
this institution’s approach has “failed” perhaps should

20-339079/29

A/75/PV.35

highlight even more the need for concrete action by
States to implement the resolutions adopted by the
General Assembly and, of course, the Security Council
to give meaning and substance to the commitments
made, to give life to the international consensus and to
ensure accountability for such illegal and contemptuous
behaviour. We all know that it is that behaviour that is
what is causing so much grief and suffering in occupied
Palestine, what has undermined every single peace
initiative and negotiations over two decades and what
is preventing the establishment of peace and security
between the Israeli and Palestinian peoples and in the
Middle East region as a whole.
We urge the mobilization of the necessary political
will to change course from decades of inaction towards
real action for a peaceful end to this conflict.
In closing, I wish to reiterate our deep gratitude for
the principled support given to the resolutions on the
question of Palestine and for the support and solidarity
to the Palestinian people expressed in the debate and
in the many messages of solidarity received in the past
days from all corners of the globe in commemoration of
the International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian
people. These resolutions reflect the collective will
of the international community to uphold the law as
it pertains to the question of Palestine and ultimately
contribute to a just, lasting and peaceful solution. For
this, the General Assembly should be proud.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 37.
Agenda item 15 (continued)
Culture of peace
Report of the Secretary-General (A/75/233)
Draft resolutions (A/75/L.28 and A/75/L.36/Rev.1)
The President: The Assembly will now hear
the remaining speakers on this agenda item before
proceeding to take action on draft resolutions A/75/L.28
and A/75/L.36/Rev.1.
Ms. Lahmiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to thank the Secretary-General for his
report entitled “Promotion of a culture of peace and
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace” (A/75/233), submitted
pursuant to resolutions 74/21 and 74/23, which provides
10/29

02/12/2021

an overview of the measures taken by Member States
and the United Nations system to promote a culture of
peace and interreligious and intercultural dialogue.
I reiterate my country’s support for the efforts of
the United Nations to ensure that a culture of peace and
interreligious and intercultural dialogue is the focus of
the United Nations as a whole. I would like here to pay
warm tribute to the Secretary-General for his selfless
dedication, at the head of our Organization, to a culture
of peace.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
has brought home to the international community the
pivotal importance of building a peaceful, stable and
prosperous world. The pandemic has shown to what
extent a culture of peace is crucial in order to bridge
the gaps among and within societies. In that context, we
warmly welcome the role of, and the actions taken by,
the Secretary-General to keep the United Nations at the
core of all international efforts to combat the pandemic.
The call made by the Secretary-General for a
global ceasefire and all his other appeals, initiatives
and strategies in various sectors have helped Member
States in their national policies aimed at addressing
this unprecedented health crisis and its significant
economic, social and political ramifications.
A culture of peace is based on the promotion of
a political understanding and a constructive dialogue
among States on the basis of mutual respect and
strictly in line with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, as well as the norms
of international law, in particular the principles of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States. It
enshrines the three pillars that guide the work of the
United Nations, namely, development, peace and
security, and human rights.
The Kingdom of Morocco, which is an active
and responsible player in the community of nations,
remains convinced that strengthening multilateralism
is the best tool for arriving at global solutions to the
major challenges of the twenty-first century, in order
to bring about a more peaceful and tolerant world for
current and future generations.
The Kingdom of Morocco is proud to have a long
tradition of promoting intercultural, interreligious and
intercivilizational dialogue, as it is a hub where different
cultures and civilizations meet and mix. Respect for
cultural and religious diversity is an integral part of our
20-33907

02/12/2021

everyday life and the collective memory of Moroccan
society. Morocco continue to work tirelessly in order to
strengthen the values of peace, harmony and knowledge
of and respect for cultural and religious diversity at the
national, regional and international levels. In this we
are guided by His Majesty Mohammed VI, may God
preserve him.
Morocco is replete with Jewish holy and pilgrimage
sites, in both large cities and remote areas. Jews and
Muslims share the same holy sites and traditions, with
no distinction based on faith or religious belonging.
Similarly, the historic visit by His Holiness Pope
Francis on 30 and 31 March 2019, at the invitation of
His Majesty King Mohammed VI, Commander of the
Faithful, which was the second papal visit following the
visit by Pope John Paul II in 1985, is clear testimony
to my country’s pivotal role in promoting dialogue,
understanding and cooperation among various cultures
and faiths.
Morocco attaches fundamental importance to
education and deems it a key factor in development,
promoting a culture of peace and combating intolerance,
hatred and extremism. I would like to welcome here
the work done by UNESCO to promote the kind of
education that promotes a culture of peace throughout
the world. The educational system in Morocco promotes
respect, openness, diversity and human rights from the
very early years. Textbooks and school curricula are
continually reviewed to include the values of peaceful
coexistence, harmony and tolerance. I would refer
here to the recent decision taken by Morocco to teach
Moroccan students Jewish history and culture in the
Arabic language starting in primary school, beginning
with the current school year.
Morocco has undertaken various initiatives, such
as religious reform, updating religious education and
the promotion of cooperation with brotherly countries,
particularly African ones, in order to promote the just,
noble and respectful values of the Islamic religion
and combat radicalism and extremism of all stripes.
Morocco created the Mohammed VI Foundation for
African Ulemas and the Mohammed VI Institute for
the Training of Imams, Morchidines and Morchidates,
upon instruction from His Majesty King Mohammed
VI, Commander of the Faithful. We therefore provide a
multidimensional education to hundreds of preachers,
both male and female, from many African, Arab and
European countries.

A/75/PV.35

The Kingdom of Morocco attaches great
importance to combating all kinds of discrimination,
xenophobia, hate and rejection of the other, including
Islamophobia, anti-Semitism and Christianophobia.
Morocco is proud and honoured to have played a large
part in the adoption and implementation of the plans
of action, documents and resolutions that represent the
cornerstone of the efforts of initiatives of the United
Nations to promote a culture of peace and to combat
exclusion and discrimination of all kinds.
I refer in particular to the United Nations Plan
of Action to Safeguard Religious Sites, the United
Nations Strategy and Plan of Action on Hate Speech,
the Marrakesh Declaration on the Rights of Religious
Minorities in Predominantly Muslim Majority
Communities, the Rabat Plan of Action on the
prohibition of advocacy of national, racial or religious
hatred, and the Fez Plan of Action for Religious Leaders
and Actors to Prevent Incitement to Violence that Could
Lead to Atrocity Crimes.
Furthermore, we were the driving force behind the
adoption by consensus by the Assembly on 25 July 2019
of resolution 73/328, entitled “Promoting interreligious
and intercultural dialogue and tolerance in countering
hate speech”. The resolution was co-sponsored by 90
States Members of the United Nations.
Religious leaders also have an important role to
play in order to help address the challenges posed by the
COVID-19 pandemic. Here the Kingdom of Morocco,
in support of the call made by the Secretary-General
in that respect, organized in May 2021 a high-level
video-teleconference entitled “The Role of Religious
Leaders in Addressing the Multiple Challenges of
COVID-19”. The meeting underscored the vital role
that religious readers can play in order to overcome the
pandemic and combat discrimination, stigmatization
and misinformation of all kinds.
Furthermore, the Kingdom of Morocco, a founding
member of the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations,
participates actively in global dialogues conferences
and is working towards cultural and religious
understanding and enrichment, and it spares no effort
in promoting a dialogue on peace that would allow for
genuine synergies within the international community.
I would like to take this opportunity to welcome the
contributions and efforts made by the Alliance of
Civilizations under the leadership of His Excellency
Mr. Miguel Ángel Moratinos to promote intercultural

20-3390711/29

A/75/PV.35

dialogue and strengthen understanding and respect
among civilizations, cultures, religions and beliefs.
In that regard, I would like to specify that because
of the pandemic, the Global Forum of the Alliance,
which had been planned for 2020 in Morocco, has been
postponed. My country will be honoured to host it as
soon as the global health situation allows.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan to introduce draft resolution
A/75/L.36/Rev.1.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Before I introduce the draft
resolution contained in document A/75/L.36/Rev.1,
allow me to say a few words in my national capacity.
Attaining a culture of peace that is both sustainable
and universally acceptable is one of the fundamental
struggles confronted by communities, societies,
cultures, nations and civilizations. Throughout human
history, defenders of peace have been trying to balance
the conflicting instincts of humankind, oscillating
between the selfish trait, which focuses only on vested
interests, and the selfless trait, which pushes us to
consider the good and well-being of others.
Our collective resolve to promote a culture of peace
is all the more important today as we fight a global
pandemic. As this deadly virus rages across the globe,
it is feeding on insecurities, anxieties and fault lines
within and among societies and poses a grave threat to
peace. It is also unravelling the decades of work done
to promote a culture of peace. More worryingly still,
the tensions triggered by that regarding the sensitivities
of entire communities in condoning offensive and
provocative actions have emboldened those who seek to
take advantage of such expressions of disunity.
While discrimination and acts of violence continue
to take place against individuals of all religions,
a particularly alarming trend is the resurgence of
anti-Muslim hatred and Islamophobia, glimpses of
which we have seen in many countries during the recent
months. Such vilification and negative stereotyping
of the adherence of one of the largest religions in
the world only perpetuates dangerous self-fulfilling
prophecies, such as that of a clash of civilizations, and
must therefore be addressed on an urgent basis by the
international community.
In view of those concerns, the Prime Minister of
Pakistan, Mr. Imran Khan, has repeatedly urged the
global community and the United Nations to promote
12/29

02/12/2021

tolerance and respect for all religions and beliefs and to
combat Islamophobia. We hope that the United Nations
and the Secretary-General will respond to that call.
On behalf of Pakistan, the Philippines and the
other sponsors, I have the privilege to introduce draft
resolution A/75/L.36/Rev.1, entitled “Promotion of
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace”, The draft resolution under
consideration is an attempt to bridge the differences
among religions, societies, cultures and civilizations
by promoting a culture of peace, dialogue and mutual
respect. It is also for that very reason that the General
Assembly includes an item on the culture of peace on
its agenda every year.
Due to the unprecedented challenges posed by the
coronavirus disease pandemic, the sponsors decided
to limit the discussions to a few emerging and urgent
issues rather than the entire draft resolution. To that
end, we retained the agreed language in the resolutions
from previous years. At the same time, we thought that
we would be doing an injustice to our mandate as the
main co-sponsors of this draft resolution if we failed
to reflect the current trends, such as the challenges
posed by the pandemic, the rise in religious intolerance,
xenophobia and hate speech, and an acknowledgement
of the respect and significance of religious symbols.
We were encouraged to note that our approach
was supported by the membership. We held an open,
inclusive and transparent negotiation and worked
closely with all Member States to reach a draft text that
enjoys the widest possible support. We have reverted
to the agreed language, where possible, and throughout
the consultations we agreed to reword and dilute our
initial proposals to alleviate the concerns of Member
States. In our view, the current draft text accommodates
the concerns of the widest possible membership, while
keeping intact the original objectives and purposes set
forth by the facilitators and agreed by Member States
at the start of the negotiations. We once again thank all
Member States for constructively engaging with us in
that process.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank all
the sponsors of the draft resolution and to urge others
to become sponsors before its adoption. We hope that
also this year the General Assembly will reaffirm the
importance of interreligious and intercultural dialogue
for the achievement of peace and stability and the
20-33907

02/12/2021

promotion of a culture of peace by adopting the draft
resolution by consensus.
Mr. Sharma (India): A culture of peace is the
cornerstone of the foundation of a global order of
peace and tolerance. Under the auspices of the United
Nations, the promotion of a culture of peace has grown
into a global discourse.
As Mahatma Gandhi said:
“I do not want my house to be walled in on all sides
and my windows to be stuffed. I want the culture
of all lands to be blown about my house as freely
as possible. But I refuse to be blown off my feet
by any.”
India has tried to foster that culture, inter
alia, through tolerance, understanding, respect for
differences, respect for other religions and cultures,
respect for human rights and gender equality under
the overarching umbrella of pluralistic ethos and
democratic principles.
India is not only the birthplace of Hinduism,
Buddhism, Jainism and Sikhism, but also the land
where the teachings of Islam, Judaism, Christianity and
Zoroastrianism have taken strong root and where the
Sufi tradition of Islam has flourished. Today every one
of the world’s major religions has a home in India. The
great Indian philosopher Swami Vivekananda said:

A/75/PV.35

up to the Declaration and Programme of Action on a
Culture of Peace (A/75/L.28), which India is happy to
co-sponsor.
However, we find disconcerting trends in the world
of today. At the outset, let me state that we fully agree
that anti-Semitism, Islamophobia and anti-Christian
acts need to be condemned, and India firmly condemns
such acts. However, United Nations resolutions on such
important issues speak only of those three Abrahamic
religions together. This organ fails to also acknowledge
the rise in hatred and violence against Buddhism,
Hinduism and Sikhism. The shattering of the iconic
Bamiyan Buddha by fundamentalists, the terrorist
bombing of the Sikh gurudwara in Afghanistan, where
25 Sikh worshippers were killed, the destruction of
Hindu and Buddhist temples and the minority cleansing
of these religions by countries call for condemning
such acts against these religions also. But the current
Member States refuse to speak of these religions in the
same breath as the first three Abrahamic religions.

“We believe not only in universal toleration, but we
accept all religions as true.”

Why is that selectivity? Overall, Hinduism has
more than 1.2 billion followers, Buddhism has more
535 million and Sikhism has around 30 million. It is
time that attacks against those religions were also added
to the earlier list of the three Abrahamic religions when
such resolutions are adopted. A culture of peace cannot
apply only to Abrahamic religions. And as long as such
selectivity exists, the world can never truly foster a
culture of peace.

For millenniums, India has provided shelter to
waves of those persecuted in foreign lands and allowed
them to thrive in India. And our tradition of intercultural
dialogue goes right to the time when ancient Indian
thinkers had a flourishing dialogue with the ancient
Greeks. India is not just a culture, but a civilization
in itself.

The United Nations is not a body that should take
sides when it comes to religion. If we are selective, we
will end up only proving Samuel Huntington’s clash of
civilizations. What we are trying to build is an alliance
of civilizations, not set up a clash. I call on the United
Nations Alliance of Civilizations to act likewise and
speak for all, not just a select few.

That historical tradition of intercultural dialogue
in India has drawn upon our quest for knowledge and
a willingness to question, as well as a desire to learn.
Thus, for instance, the Buddha urged his followers not
to accept his beliefs without questioning them. The
Indian Constitution, which declares our nation to be a
secular democratic republic, also underlines both the
freedom of religion and faith, as well as the duty of the
State to inculcate a scientific temper among the people.

Pakistan has already violated the earlier resolution
on a culture of peace adopted last year by this very
Assembly (resolution 74/23). Last month, Pakistan
arbitrarily transferred the management of the Sikh
holy shrine Kartarpur Sahib Gurudwara from the
Sikh community body to the administrative control
of a non-Sikh body. That act goes against the Sikh
religion and its preservation and protection. Members
will recall that the holy Kartarpur Sahib Gurudwara
finds mention in that earlier resolution. That resolution
stands violated by Pakistan.

We appreciate the efforts of Bangladesh in
presenting a draft resolution today on the follow-

20-3390713/29

A/75/PV.35

If Pakistan changes its current culture of hatred
against religions in India and stops its support of crossborder terrorism against our people, we can attempt
a genuine culture of peace in South Asia and beyond.
Until then, we will only be a mute witness to Pakistan
driving away their minorities by threat, coercion,
conversion and killing. Even people of the same
religion are not spared due to the encouragement given
to sectarian killing.
In today’s world, intolerance, hatred, violence and
terrorism have almost become the norm. There can be
no doubt that terrorism, which is a manifestation of
intolerance and violence, is the antithesis of all religions
and cultures. We are troubled by the increase in
resources, financial and otherwise, that are being made
available to violent and terrorist groups that misuse
religion to justify and propagate their agendas. We need
to be clear that abetting or condoning terrorism is like
feeding a monster that will turn around to consume us.
Let us fight such negative forces together rather
than separately. Let us build a culture of peace together
rather than fail separately.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): As the Declaration on
a Culture of Peace proclaims, a culture of peace is a
set of values, attitudes, traditions, modes of behaviour
and ways of life based on, inter alia, full respect for
the principles of the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and political independence of States, a commitment
to the peaceful settlement of disputes, the promotion
of all human rights and fundamental freedoms and
compliance with international obligations under the
Charter of the United Nations and international law.
The very fact that the General Assembly has adopted
a growing number of resolutions under the agenda item
“Culture of peace” with the overwhelming support
of Member States attests to the primacy and urgency
given by the international community to the topic.
The annual resolutions entitled “Follow-up to the
Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture
of Peace” and “Promotion of interreligious and
intercultural dialogue, understanding and cooperation
for peace” continue to serve as universal standardsetting and guidance in that area of activities and
cooperation. Taking this opportunity, I would like to
thank the delegation of Bangladesh and the delegations
of Pakistan and the Philippines, respectively, for
submitting the relevant draft resolutions this year
(A/75/L.28 and A/75/L.36/Rev.1) and for their strong
14/29

02/12/2021

commitment to the promotion of interreligious and
intercultural dialogue. We are grateful to the SecretaryGeneral for his report (A/75/233) on the promotion of
a culture of peace and interreligious and intercultural
dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace,
submitted pursuant to resolutions 74/21 and 74/23.
We would also like to emphasize the leading role
of UNESCO and the critically important work of the
United Nations Alliance of Civilizations in advancing
the cause of a culture of peace.
Intercultural and interreligious dialogue has
diverse forms and continues to play an important role in
advancing sustainable development, promoting cultural
diversity and tackling the root causes of violence and
conflict. Indeed, the culture of peace is interlinked
with the objectives of sustainable development. The
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development recognizes
that all cultures and civilizations can contribute to, and
are crucial enablers of, sustainable development.
A culture of peace is equally important in the context
of addressing conflicts and post-conflict situations,
especially those exacerbated by long-standing policies
aimed at sowing dissension and inculcating enmity
and hatred on religious and racial grounds, creating
mono-ethnic societies and promoting hateful ideas of
ethnic incompatibility.
It is critical that the United Nations continue
confronting hate speech and mobilizing the world
against hatred of all kinds, including through the
implementation of the commitments contained in
the United Nations Strategy and Plan of Action on
Hate Speech.
The deliberate attacks on cultural property during
conflicts and the destruction and desecration of cultural
heritage and religious sites as a method of warfare and
a means of colonization have become an integral part
of a policy and strategy aimed at eliminating diversity
and concealing or destroying cultural, historical and
scientific evidence. More resolute and targeted measures
are required to end impunity for such offences, which
may amount to war crimes and crimes against humanity.
The United Nations Plan of Action to Safeguard
Religious Sites offers an action-oriented framework
and a multidimensional and multi-stakeholder approach
to preventing, preparing for and responding to attacks
against religious sites.
20-33907

02/12/2021

Azerbaijan attaches great importance to the
promotion of a culture of peace, while paying particular
attention to encouraging intercultural and interreligious
dialogue at the national and international levels.
Among the initiatives put forward and successfully
implemented by Azerbaijan, the Baku process has
proved itself to be one of the leading international
platforms for fostering dialogue and cultural diversity.
The Secretary-General emphasized the important role
of the Baku process in advocating for dialogue among
cultures in his report on the current agenda item to
the General Assembly at its seventy-second session
(A/72/488). An integral part of the Baku process is the
World Forum on Intercultural Dialogue, which since
2011 has been organized biennially by Azerbaijan, in
partnership with UNESCO, the United Nations Alliance
of Civilizations, the World Tourism Organization,
the Council of Europe and the Islamic Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization.
We welcome the growing international recognition
of the World Forum on Intercultural Dialogue, which, as
stated in the report of the Secretary-General I mentioned,
has established itself as a key global platform for
promoting intercultural dialogue. That high assessment
of the role of the World Forum was further promulgated
by the General Assembly in resolutions 72/136, 73/129
and 74/23. It is also emphasized in the United Nations
Plan of Action to Safeguard Religious Sites.
The United Nations continued support for successful
initiatives on the culture of peace and multiculturalism
is essential in the context of building relationships,
overcoming stereotypes and misconceptions and
implementing development frameworks and policies.
Intercultural and interreligious dialogue at the national
and international levels has been, and must remain, one
of the important avenues within the broader objectives
of sustaining peace, peacebuilding, reconciliation,
reconstruction and reintegration. As the SecretaryGeneral noted in his report,
“diversity is a richness, not a threat” [and] “investing
in a culture of peace as the essential foundation for
global cooperation ... means an end to injustice and
discrimination” (A/75/233, paras. 3 and 7).
Azerbaijan is ready to continue its efforts towards
promoting mutual understanding and respect for
diversity and looks forward to enhanced cooperation
with all stakeholders in achieving those noble goals.

A/75/PV.35

Ms. Juárez Argueta (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): I want to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
for convening this discussion on a culture of peace — a
topic that we believe to be of great importance to both
my country and the international community as a
whole. We also express our gratitude for the report of
the Secretary-General on the promotion of a culture
of peace and interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace (A/75/233),
which contains valuable reflections on existing
challenges and good practices at the international level.
As set out in the report, “in times of crisis, the
shared human condition and values must be a source
of unity, not division” (A/75/233, para. 45). Guatemala
has given particular importance to the culture of peace
since its initial conceptualization, reaffirming through
its own experience that peace is humankind’s most
precious asset, which not only is achieved but should
be maintained and strengthened at all levels. The
crisis brought about by the coronavirus disease has
highlighted the interdependence among nations and the
need to step up cooperation to tackle common scourges,
such as poverty, hunger and inequality.
In that regard, Guatemala actively supports the
fact that the United Nations should work on conflict
prevention and investing in sustainable development.
To that end, we believe that it is necessary to step up
efforts to improve the peacebuilding architecture and
the concept of sustainable peace. We reiterate the
need to break down silos to achieve a coherent and
integrated approach in the work of the Organization,
which recognizes that peace and security, development
and human rights are interrelated and mutually
reinforcing. It is also necessary to ensure peaceful
coexistence among societies through interreligious and
intercultural dialogue.
We must curb hate speech, discrimination and
intolerance and address the misinformation crisis by
ensuring the responsible use of technology. The 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development is our blueprint
for creating just and peaceful societies by addressing
the root causes of conflict and violence of all kinds.
That means that we must adopt a robust approach to
inclusion, with a particular emphasis on integrating
all sectors of society in combating discrimination,
stigmatization and racism, as well as on protecting the
most vulnerable groups, including indigenous peoples,
people with disabilities and migrants.

20-3390715/29

A/75/PV.35

As a relevant contribution, we would like to
highlight that Guatemala, together with the Kingdom
of Morocco, jointly put forward during this session
of the Second Committee the draft resolution entitled
“Global Code of Ethics for Tourism” (A/C.2/75/L.20/
Rev.1), which recognizes that the Global Code of Ethics
for Tourism and the Framework Convention on Tourism
Ethics represent a commitment to ethical and sustainable
tourism and a contribution to peace, development,
prosperity and human rights as indivisible values.
Finally, we express our gratitude to those
delegations that have put forward the draft resolutions
to be adopted under this agenda item (A/75/L.28 and
A/75/L.36/Rev.1), including Bangladesh, Pakistan,
the Philippines, Morocco, Saudi Arabia and Egypt.
We underscore the importance of their adoption by
consensus, in particular the implementation and
execution of their content. We recall that the pursuit of
peace is an ongoing process based on the choices and
decisions made every day. Today we therefore urgently
need to play our part in history by empowering the
whole of society so that together we can ensure a better
future for this and future generations.
Ms. Sorto Rosales (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish):
El Salvador welcomes the convening of this debate,
which is being held in a context that highlights the
importance of further exploring the notion that seeking
peace should be a constant process given the new
challenges that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic poses to the ongoing efforts to build peaceful,
just and inclusive societies.
El Salvador commends the measures adopted
by Member States and the United Nations system
to promote a culture of peace and interreligious and
intercultural dialogue. Those measures are set out in
the report of the Secretary-General on the promotion of
a culture of peace and interreligious and intercultural
dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace
(A/75/233), which allows us to take stock of the progress
made and challenges facing us in ensuring that we
meet the commitments made since the adoption of the
Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of
Peace (resolution 53/243).
In that regard, we reaffirm the importance of that
instrument, whose adoption more than two decades ago
meant the recognition of the universal mandate of the
international community to promote a culture of peace
and which remains valid in the light of the current
16/29

02/12/2021

challenges. We therefore also reaffirm the importance
of redoubling our efforts to implement the Programme
of Action, which is an inseparable part of upholding
human rights and respect for diversity.
In the same vein, we firmly believe that the support
enjoyed by the resolution entitled “Follow-up to the
Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture
of Peace” over the years reflects the commitment of
Member States to a culture of peace and non-violence,
which benefits humankind and in particular
future generations.
El Salvador welcomes the actions supported by
the United Nations to promote a culture of peace and
interreligious and intercultural dialogue. We particularly
underscore the importance of increased coordination
among the different pillars of the Organization and
of ensuring comprehensive responses at the country
level. Similarly, we recognize the importance that
peacebuilding be increasingly grounded in an integrated
approach and linked to the work being done with regard
to a culture of peace.
In that regard, against the backdrop of the seventyfifth anniversary of the United Nations, we underscore
the importance of renewing our collective efforts
to promote a culture of peace and tolerance. In that
respect, allow me to highlight some of my country’s
efforts to strengthen both peace and tolerance.
In El Salvador, we are convinced of the important
role of young people in all initiatives aimed at
establishing the foundations of peace and ensuring its
sustainability in future. For that reason, the promotion
of a culture of peace at the national level is focused
above all on strengthening the role of young people in
El Salvador in society, in particular by encouraging
them to discard the idea of violence as an inherent part
of their everyday lives.
In that way, we are working to provide a better
reality for today’s generations and future ones, mainly
through a comprehensive focus on preventing violence
and promoting a culture of peace through actions that
allow us to minimize risk factors at the local level by
promoting civil participation and cooperation. That
is being done in order to integrate that approach into
areas such as peacebuilding, education, the arts and
sport, while benefiting from the positive contributions
by young people in many fields.
20-33907

02/12/2021

Despite the encouraging progress made in the
implementation of the culture of peace agenda, we must
stress the fact that there are significant challenges. As
has been highlighted, in addition to its devastating
impacts on health, the crisis caused by the COVID-19
pandemic has also exposed and exacerbated existing
inequalities and vulnerabilities, with serious social,
economic and political consequences, as well as
significant challenges for peace and security and the
risk of provoking or exacerbating violence.
In that context, for El Salvador, investing in
promoting a culture of peace means working to
eliminate inequalities, which run counter to respect
for human dignity, while creating opportunities for
all. In the context of this decade of action, my country
therefore calls for reinforcing the central role of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals in
our response to the causes of the crisis and of existing
vulnerabilities in order to sustain the gains made in the
area of peace in recent years.
I would like to conclude by reiterating our readiness
to fully participate in all regional and international
efforts to revitalize the promotion of a culture of peace
for current and future generations.
Mr. Elgharib (Egypt): Allow me, at the outset,
to extend our thanks to the Secretary-General for his
report (A/75/233) entitled “Promotion of a culture
of peace and interreligious dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace”, submitted pursuant to
resolutions 74/21 and 74/23. We commend the efforts
of the various United Nations entities to create and
promote a culture of peace and engage in interreligious
and intercultural dialogue.
As delineated in the report, the magnitude of global
transformations has given rise to new opportunities as
well as threats. While global trends in certain areas
such as media, trade and technology have brought the
international community closer together, there is no
doubt that the events unravelling in many parts of the
world are a clear manifestation of the unprecedented
challenges we face. The gravity and complexity of
those challenges require the combined efforts of the
international community.
Despite the commendable progress achieved in
the realm of promoting and protecting human rights
and fundamental freedoms, it has nonetheless become
increasingly apparent that there is a resurgence of

A/75/PV.35

xenophobia, intolerance and discrimination across
many parts of the globe. The unprecedented crisis of the
coronavirus disease pandemic has simply highlighted
and deepened those phenomena, which go against
fundamental rights and freedoms and human dignity.
They also pose a challenge to international peace
and security, development and social stability. It is
imperative to recognize that democracy and the rule of
law are incompatible with any form of discrimination or
intolerance. The proliferation of radical and extremist
movements in many societies therefore represents
an alarming trend, as such movements build their
political and social platforms on incitement, hatred and
social exclusion.
In that regard, the promotion of a culture of peace
and interreligious and intercultural dialogue across
and within societies is essential to discredit violent
and intolerant ideologies. The rise in intolerance,
discrimination, violence and negative stereotyping
against persons based on their religion or belief and the
increased incidence of religious hatred are also matters
of concern. A clear manifestation of that lies in the
insistence of some to defame religions under the guise of
the freedom of expression, which undermines the values
of tolerance, coexistence and mutual respect. Equally
alarming are attempts by some to conflate combating
terrorism with unjustified discrimination against
individuals or groups on ethnic or religious grounds.
Our societies remain plagued by violence, extremism
and terrorism. It is important to note that any attempt to
eradicate such phenomena must strive to address their
root causes, including foreign occupation, so that such
challenges can be diagnosed effectively and the means
of overcoming them determined. A comprehensive
approach that is not limited to military and security
aspects should be adopted. It should include economic
and social development and encompass cultural aspects
so as to rectify religious discourse, improve the quality
of education and disseminate a culture of tolerance,
acceptance of the other and peaceful coexistence.
Intellectuals, cultural leaders, the media and
educators also have a great responsibility to confront
ideas that provoke hatred, promote ignorance, reject
diversity and exclude others, and instead spread the
values of moderation and tolerance. In that regard,
the media should play its role by raising awareness,
combating extremist and destructive ideas and
disseminating noble values. It is important to note
that efforts should also be made to prevent the misuse

20-3390717/29

A/75/PV.35

of modern technologies, mainly social media and the
Internet, to spread incitement and hatred and to recruit
others under the guise of false religious claims. We must
ensure that such technologies are used as intended — to
disseminate culture and knowledge and enhance positive
interactions among peoples and civilizations.
In conclusion, I reiterate Egypt’s strong support
for efforts throughout the United Nations system to
promote a culture of peace as well as interreligious
and intercultural dialogue. Only through the concerted
efforts of the international community and continued
dialogue can peace prevail, and only thus can our
efforts to eliminate intolerance, prejudice, negative
stereotyping and discrimination succeed and endure.
Mr. Elhomosany (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
It is my pleasure to express my thanks and appreciation
to you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting on the
culture of peace at a time when the world needs peace
more than ever before.
I would also like to thank the delegations of
Bangladesh, Pakistan and the Philippines for their
efforts in introducing draft resolutions A/75/L.28 and
A/75/L.36/Rev.1 — the two draft resolutions that we
supported under agenda item 15.
God Almighty said:
“O mankind! We have created you male and
female, and appointed you races and tribes, that you
may know one another. Surely the noblest among
you in the sight of Allah is the most godfearing of
you. Allah is All-knowing, All-aware. (The Holy
Qur’an XLIX:13)
That noble verse from the Qur’an stresses the doctrine
of tolerance in Islam, which calls for promoting a
culture of peace and plurality among nations, building
bridges across cultures and societies, accepting others
and believing that diversity and difference are intrinsic
features that make distinction of humans and societies.
Agenda item 15, entitled “Culture of peace”,
encompasses all of the principles that underpin the
Charter of the United Nations, namely, to maintain
international security, urge countries to seek
cooperation and find a way that leads to understanding,
dialogue and non-violence.
That is why the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has sought
to promote pluralism, diplomacy and mutual respect in
its international relations, along with non-interference
18/29

02/12/2021

in the internal affairs of other States. That is in
keeping with the Charter of the United Nations and the
Organization’s three pillars — sustainable development,
peace and security and human rights.
In 2012, my country established in Vienna the
King Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz International Centre for
Interreligious and Intercultural Dialogue. The Centre
constitutes a historic beginning in establishing a
meaningful and responsible humane dialogue that seeks
to promote the commonalities among the followers of
different religions.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia also created the
Global Centre for Combating Extremist Ideology in order
to monitor, analyse and pre-empt extremist ideologies
by combating and preventing them, in cooperation
with Governments and relevant organizations. Its
aim is to rank as the first international centre on
countering extremist thoughts and fostering the culture
of moderation.
My country also contributed to the creation of
the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre, which
seeks to build the capacity of Member States to counter
terrorism and extremism.
Today it is imperative for the international
community to promote global peace through inclusive
and integrated policies and preventive measures with
a view to spreading a culture of peace. Those include
instilling the values of peace and tolerance in future
generations through educational curricula and the
media. That would contribute to preventing and settling
and disputes, strengthening economic well-being,
preserving the gains made, achieving and supporting
inclusive economic growth and empowering women
and youth.
In
conclusion,
the
Kingdom
of
Saudi
Arabia — alongside its brothers in Morocco, Egypt,
Pakistan and a number of other countries — will soon
introduce a draft resolution under this item, calling for
the promotion of a culture of peace and the protection
of religious sites. My delegation hopes that, once the
negotiations are over, Member States will co-sponsor
the text because of its lofty goals, which call for
respecting religions and religious symbols, protecting
religious sites from extremist and terrorist attacks
and preserving the identity of such sites, in particular
historic and heritage ones.
20-33907

02/12/2021

Ms. Charikhi (Algeria): I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for the presentation of his report
contained in document A/75/233, which provides an
overview of the promotion of the culture of peace and
interreligious and intercultural dialogue within the
United Nations system. I would also like to thank the
delegations of Bangladesh, Pakistan and the Philippines
for presenting the draft resolutions under this agenda
item (A/75/L.28 and A/75/L.36/Rev.1) and for their
tireless efforts towards the adoption of these two draft
resolutions today.
Algeria attaches great importance to the matter of a
culture of peace. Indeed, the concept of peace is deeply
rooted in the Organization’s pillars of sustainable
development, peace and security and human rights,
and is enshrined in the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, which me must
all uphold, including through respecting the right of
peoples to self-determination and the principles of
justice and international law.
The Declaration and Programme of Action on a
Culture of Peace, as provided in resolution 53/243, is
a milestone document in that regard. It constitutes a
shift in our perception of peace — from being only an
end in itself to becoming a process that requires the
contribution and cooperation of all in order to achieve
lasting peace.
We must therefore reaffirm our commitment to
the principles of international cooperation, solidarity,
understanding, tolerance and dialogue, which are
needed now more than ever, as we all strive to recover
and respond to the global pandemic and try to address
other pressing challenges affecting the lives of many
people around the world.
The coronavirus disease crisis serves to underscore
the urgent need to leverage a culture of peace as a means
of bridging divides across and within societies, as
well as ensuring peaceful coexistence as a foundation
for advancing the implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals.
As the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
recognizes, there can be no sustainable development
without peace and no peace without sustainable
development. As we embark upon the decade of action,
the interrelatedness between peace and development
should be duly considered. More action is needed
from all nations and stakeholders in order to realize
the culture of peace by addressing the root causes of

A/75/PV.35

conflicts, including through decolonization, education,
inclusion, social cohesion, combating violent
extremism, eradicating poverty and fostering good
governance and the rule of law.
Algeria has always been a devoted advocate for the
promotion of the culture of peace and tolerance among
nations. In that regard, Algeria introduced resolution
72/130 (see A/72/PV.68), adopted by consensus, to
proclaim 16 May as the International Day of Living
Together in Peace. The aim of that resolution is to
contribute more to promote living together in peace,
to promote tolerance, peaceful coexistence and
harmonious cohabitation and to increase understanding
and mutual respect, without distinction as to race,
nationality, sex, civilization, language or religion.
Our effort here, in the United Nations family,
is proof of Algeria’s deep belief in the promotion of
a culture of peace as a tool for regularly mobilizing
the efforts of the international community to ensure
sustainable development, and in the critical role played
by all actors, especially young people, who contribute
to the fundamental shifts that are urgently needed to
achieve lasting stability.
At a national level, the Government has invested in
efforts to implement policies of reconciliation, focusing
on education and communication, and working with
communities, civil society and other actors in order to
build an inclusive, tolerant and peaceful society.
In addition, in May 2020, Algeria adopted a new
law related to the prevention of, and the fight against,
discrimination and hate speech. That law establishes a
global legal framework to fight against that phenomenon,
which is foreign to our society and the principles of
Islam, in order to protect our society against those
scourges. The law provides for the establishment of
a national prevention strategy against discrimination
and hate speech and in promotion of moral public life
through spreading the culture of tolerance and dialogue
by involving civil society and the private sector in
its development and implementation. Its provisions
provide for the necessary measures to be taken to
prevent these phenomena through the development of
education and training programmes to raise awareness
and disseminate a culture of human rights.
Allow me to conclude by recalling that we are in
the process of implementing the 2030 Agenda and are
laying the foundation for sustainable peace through a
more holistic approach to peacebuilding. Algeria hopes

20-3390719/29

A/75/PV.35

that the culture of peace can move forward alongside
those complementary objectives and processes, with
the conviction to continue our efforts to achieve
lasting peace.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on agenda item 15.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolutions
A/75/L.28 and A/75/L.36/Rev.1.
Before the Assembly takes action on these draft
resolutions, one by one, members are reminded that
they will have an opportunity to explain their vote or
position on any or both of the two draft resolutions
either before or after action. Delegations wishing to
make a statement on either draft resolution are invited
to do so now.
Mr. Sharma (India): I am grateful for this
opportunity to explain India’s vote before the voting on
draft resolution A/75/L.36/Rev.1, entitled “Promotion of
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace.”
The text before us is being considered under the
agenda item “Culture of peace”. However, it suffers
from serious infirmities. I am referring in particular,
to paragraph 10, relating to the volatile matter
between India and Pakistan on the holy Kartarpur
Sahib Gurdwara.
Since the adoption of resolution 74/23 last year,
the situation has only deteriorated. The Government of
Pakistan, in a unilateral and arbitrary decision taken
in early November, transferred the management of the
Gurdwara to a non-Sikh body. We strongly protested
against that action taken by the Pakistani side, as it runs
counter to the spirit of the Kartarpur Sahib Gurdwara
and the religious sentiments of the Sikh community
at large.
We also received communications from the Sikh
community expressing grave concern about this
Pakistani decision, which targets the rights of the
minority Sikh community in Pakistan. Depriving the
Sikh community of its right to manage the affairs of
the holy Gurdwara goes against the basis of the culture
of peace. It is completely inappropriate to retain this
reference in the text before us when the Pakistani
Government has entirely subverted this issue. In fact,
by doing all of this, Pakistan stands in clear violation of
last year’s resolution.
20/29

02/12/2021

It is a matter of disappointment that the co-sponsors
did not agree to our demand to delete paragraph 10,
mainly because one of them wants it to be retained for
its own domestic consumption, as well as to mislead
the international community and divert attention from
their record of hostile treatment of its own minorities.
We call on them to immediately drop this paragraph
from the text and stop politicizing the matter. United
Nations resolutions cannot be weapons for settling
bilateral scores.
We call on the Government of Pakistan to stop
the hatred, harassment, conversion and killing of its
minorities before it proceeds to co-sponsor a draft
resolution on the culture of peace. If the draft resolution
cannot accommodate a matter of importance to India,
we have no option but to abstain in the voting if it is
put to the vote. We will disassociate ourselves from the
draft resolution, as the matter is referred to in paragraph
10 and strikes at the very root of the draft resolution,
which is relevant to fostering a culture of peace, both in
South Asia and the rest of the world. Pakistan’s actions
reflect anything but that.
Mr. Meirelles Reis Sotero de Menezes (Brazil):
This explanation of vote concerns the draft resolution
contained in document A/75/L.36/Rev.1, entitled
“Promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace”.
Brazil has been a supporter of the core messages
of the draft resolution since a resolution on this theme
was first presented, a decade and a half ago. For Brazil,
fostering dialogue among members of different cultures
and religions is an essential condition for lasting
peace, stability and development. But interreligious
and intercultural dialogue is more than sound public
policy — it is an integral part of our identity as a nation.
Interfaith and intercultural relations in Brazil are, by
and large, marked by open dialogue and respect. Our
society is a melting pot of different cultures and beliefs.
Our social fabric was woven over centuries with strands
from every continent.
We are a diverse country and proudly so. Those
values inspire our foreign policy, and any international
initiative that promotes interreligious and intercultural
dialogue can count on our wholehearted support.
That being said, we must also reiterate that freedom
of expression is an indispensable condition for such
dialogue. For any exchange to be truly democratic and
20-33907

02/12/2021

meaningful, it must be free from undue limitations
and preconditions.
The notion that, in order to foster dialogue and
protect religious freedom, we must curtail or amend
the right of religious freedom or freedom of expression
as laid out in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and in the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights is extremely troubling. Equally
unfounded is the conception of an inescapable causal
link between supposedly disrespectful conduct and acts
of violent extremism.
Brazil condemns all forms of violence related to
the expression of opinions and rejects any propositions
suggesting that victims are in any way responsible for
the violence they suffer. While the draft resolution
before us today does not include text in that vein,
similar proposals made in the negotiation process made
it needlessly divisive and protracted, extending it well
beyond its expected conclusion.
We are also disappointed that new and redundant
text on the rights and duties associated with the
exercise of freedom of expression has been included
in the twenty-third preambular paragraph of the draft
resolution, which weakens its overall balance.
In the coming years, the General Assembly
will be better served by examining the promotion
of interreligious and intercultural dialogue on a
proactive constructive basis solidly grounded in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other
foundational documents.
Mr. Sautter (Germany): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States to explain our position on the draft resolution
contained in document A/75/L.36/Rev.1.
The EU is a strong supporter of the freedom of
religion or belief and actively encourages and supports
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace. Those values are at the
core of the EU. The EU has major concerns about the
substance of the text before us today. We regret that,
in many ways, it duplicates and seeks to distort, in a
selective manner, the provisions of two draft resolutions
recently adopted by the Third Committee and soon to
be considered by the General Assembly.
The first draft resolution is on freedom of religion
or belief (A/75/478/Add.2, draft resolution XIV); the
second draft resolution is on combating intolerance,

A/75/PV.35

negative stereotyping, stigmatization, discrimination,
incitement to violence and violence against persons
based on religion or belief (A/75/478/Add.2, draft
resolution XIII), which has been shaped over the years
with the involvement of the main sponsor of draft
resolution A/75/L.36/Rev.1.
We see no need for draft resolution A/75/L.36/
Rev.1 to address the same issues. The draft resolution
also includes several new references not included in
previous years, despite the call to avoid new substantive
language during this session of the General Assembly
due to the coronavirus disease. The new language
includes a reference to a statement by the spokesperson
of the High Representative for the United Nations
Alliance of Civilizations, which we believe is misleading
with respect to the right of everyone to exercise their
freedom of expression, including with respect to
religion and — despite its name — contains negative
and exclusive language that does not correspond with
the title of the draft resolution.
The draft resolution also draws attention to
future and unfinished endeavours, thereby taking the
focus away from tangible achievements and adopted
documents and negatively impacting efforts to advance
interreligious and intercultural dialogue.
Throughout the negotiations, the proposals put
forward by the EU had the following objectives: to
safeguard important human rights, such as the freedom
of expression and the freedom of religion or belief
against attempts to curtail or redefine them; to stress
that the freedom of religion or belief, including the
right not to believe and to change one’s religion or
belief, belongs to the individual; to refute the notion
that religions or belief systems as such can be insulted
and to reject the idea that religious symbols as such
have sacred value.
We also have to express our concerns about how
the process was handled by the facilitators. There
were clear duplications with another draft resolution
on safeguarding religious sites that contains identical
provisions, without any explanation being offered. The
process, despite substantive additions, started very late
and the timetable for the negotiations was too rushed,
not leaving sufficient time for proper reflection. That
could have been handled in a more constructive and
respectful way. Overall, there was little willingness to
accommodate the concerns expressed by the EU and

20-3390721/29

A/75/PV.35

others, despite our sincere efforts to ensure a balanced
outcome respectful of human rights.
The EU supports all efforts to promote tolerance and
respect for cultural diversity and religious pluralism.
We believe that the promotion of interreligious and
intercultural dialogue, understanding and cooperation
for peace should be consensual in character and enjoy
the widest possible support. We deeply regret both the
process leading to action on the draft resolution and
the attempt to curtail fundamental freedoms, starting
with the freedom of expression and the right to criticize
religions or beliefs. With those clear reservations,
the EU and its member States, some of them former
co-sponsors of the draft resolution, will abstain in
the voting.
Ms. Kaczmarska (Poland): Poland takes the floor
to give its explanation of vote on the draft resolution
contained in document A/75/L.36/Rev.1.
Poland shares the concerns expressed by the
observer of the European Union (EU) about the
problematic substantive parts of the draft resolution.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered by the
observer of the EU in that regard.
We regret this year’s limited negotiations timeline
and the fact that our primary concerns were not
reflected in the text. We continue to underline that
freedom of religion or belief belongs to individuals as
rights holders, who may exercise that right either in
the community, including as religious minorities, with
others or individually.
We also oppose the emphasis on future and diverse
texts in the draft resolution, which takes the focus away
from tangible achievements and adopted documents,
thereby negatively impacting efforts to advance
interreligious and intercultural dialogue.
As a former sponsor of the draft resolution, we
regret that the positive evolution of this text, which
we have observed in previous years, has been put on
hold. We hope that negative trend will be reversed next
year. We also hope that the co-facilitators will look
positively on our suggestions next year, allowing us
to return to the group of co-sponsors, as we remain a
staunch supporter of the freedom of religion or belief
and interreligious dialogue.
We believe that, in the face of the dangers posed
by the pandemic today, it is even more important that
the global community show unity and redouble its
22/29

02/12/2021

collective efforts to secure religious rights. Therefore,
while unable to support the text of the draft resolution, it
is Poland’s sincere hope that we can reach compromise
with the facilitators on this important topic while
negotiating future texts and continue cooperation with
respect and goodwill.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/75/L.28, entitled “Follow-up to the
Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture
of Peace”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I would like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors
of draft resolution A/75/L.28: Afghanistan, Algeria,
Argentina, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, the Plurinational State of Bolivia ,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, the Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, the Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Finland, the
Gambia, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, India, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libya, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Sierra Leone, Spain, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, Suriname,
the Syrian Arab Republic Tajikistan, Thailand, TimorLeste, Tunisia, Tuvalu, the United Arab Emirates,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan and the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.28?
Draft resolution
(resolution 75/25).

A/75/L.28

was

adopted

20-33907

02/12/2021

A/75/PV.35

The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/75/L.36/Rev.1, entitled
“Promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I would like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution
and in addition to those delegations listed in the
document, the following countries have also become
sponsors of draft resolution A/75/L.36/Rev.1: Angola,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia,
Cameroon, China, Eritrea, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau,
Honduras, Indonesia, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Malaysia, Mongolia, Morocco, Myanmar, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Oman, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Qatar, the Russian Federation, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Sri Lanka, the
Sudan, Suriname, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela and Viet Nam.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria,
Angola,
Argentina,
Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam,
Cambodia,
Cameroon,
Chile,
China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Honduras, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Libya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Russian
Federation, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay,

Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Latvia, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malta, Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, North
Macedonia, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
Draft resolution A/75/L.36/Rev.1 was adopted by 90
votes to none, with 52 abstentions (resolution 75/26).
The President: Before I give the floor to
delegations in explanation of position or vote on the
resolutions just adopted, may I remind delegations that
explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Messenger (United States of America):
The United States delegation would like to offer an
explanation of position on resolution 75/25, entitled
“Follow-up to the Declaration and Programme of
Action on a Culture of Peace”, as well as an explanation
of vote on resolution 75/26, entitled “Promotion of
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace”, which were just adopted.
With regard to resolution 75/25, the United States
strongly believes in encouraging a culture of peace
through the promotion of justice, democracy, human
rights and fundamental freedoms, as well as by rejecting
violence and addressing the root causes of conflict.
We note that, as of 31 December 2018, the United
States withdrew from the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization and is no longer a
party to it. In joining the consensus on resolution 75/25,
we refer members to our statement of 18 November
on our position with respect to the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. That concludes our
explanation of position on resolution 75/25.

20-3390723/29

A/75/PV.35

Turning to our explanation of vote on resolution
75/26, the United States firmly supports efforts to
promote interreligious and intercultural dialogue
and cooperation. We thank the Philippines and
Pakistan for their initiative in presenting the text on
an important topic that is of key interest to all United
Nations delegations.
We would like to take this opportunity to explain
our decision to abstain and to clarify some important
points. We note that recent years have marked a
growing departure from previous approaches, including
the approach established in Human Rights Council
resolution 16/18 and the Istanbul Process, which are
widely supported and offer a comprehensive road map
to combating religious intolerance, while protecting
the freedom of expression and the freedom of religion
or belief. We have concerns about the potential for the
further erosion of such consensus approaches in this
and other resolutions that have been presented at the
General Assembly.
The United States strongly supports the freedom
of expression and the freedom of religion or belief.
We oppose any attempts to unduly limit the exercise
of those fundamental freedoms. In that context, we
continue to have strong reservations about paragraph
13 of resolution 75/26, in which the text suggests that
the protections for the freedom of expression and the
freedom of religion or belief are at odds with one
another. We strongly believe that protecting the freedom
of religion or belief and the freedom of expression
promotes a mutual respect and pluralism that are
essential to human dignity and a robust civil society.
We firmly believe that all people should be free to
choose and practice their faith based on the persuasion
of the mind and heart. Freedom of religion plays an
important societal role and is crucial to the creation of
tolerant and respectful societies. Those two freedoms
are mutually reinforcing, and both must be respected
in order to achieve mutual respect and meaningful
interreligious and intercultural dialogue.
Rather than seek restrictions to expression to deal
with intolerance or hate speech, the United States
advocates for robust protections for speech, as well as
the enforcement of appropriate legal regimes that deal
with discriminatory acts and hate crimes. We remind
Member States that — as recognized in the Istanbul
Process — the open, constructive and respectful debate
of ideas, as well as interfaith and intercultural dialogue
24/29

02/12/2021

at the local, national and international levels, can play a
positive role in combating religious hatred and violence.
The United States strongly believes in working together
to build a more secure and peaceful world through the
promotion of justice, democracy, human rights and
fundamental freedoms.
With respect to the invocation of moderation in
paragraph 12, we are concerned that the implementation
of moderation-focused programmes and policies could
be subject to abuse. In particular, we are concerned
that such programmes and policies could undermine
the enjoyment of freedoms of expression and thought,
conscience and religion or belief.
We also note that, as of 31 December 2018, the
United States withdrew from UNESCO and is no longer
a UNESCO member State. We refer members to our
statement of 18 November on our position with respect
to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Nevertheless, we reiterate our appreciation for the
efforts of the Philippines and Pakistan in presenting a
resolution on interreligious dialogue. The United States
remains committed to working with Member States to
promote tolerance and understanding.
Mr. Mazzeo (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina voted in favour of resolution 75/26, entitled
“Promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace”, because we
believe that dialogue among religions and cultures can
contribute significantly to achieving the objectives of
the Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture
of Peace.
Argentina has the greatest respect for religious
freedoms and has adopted an approach that goes above
and beyond mere tolerance and promotes understanding
and mutual respect among those with theistic beliefs,
non-theistic beliefs, such as those of some indigenous
people, and atheistic beliefs. Religious freedom refers to
a broad range of beliefs, encompassing institutionalized
religions, cults, beliefs, popular observances and
specific world views.
The freedom of religion or belief, the freedom
of opinion and expression, the right to peaceful
assembly and the right to freedom of association
are interdependent and mutually reinforcing. They
therefore play an important role in combating all forms
of intolerance and discrimination based on religion
or belief.
20-33907

02/12/2021

In that regard, in his report contained in document
A/HRC/40/58, the Special Rapporteur on freedom of
religion or belief indicated that international human
rights law compels States to adopt a moderate approach
when addressing the tensions between the freedom
of expression and the freedom of religion or belief.
That approach must be based on limitation criteria
that recognize the rights of all persons to the freedom
of expression and the freedom of religion or belief,
regardless of whether they are critical of opinions,
ideas, doctrines or beliefs or whether such expression
shocks, offends or disturbs others, provided that it does
not extend to promoting religious hatred or incitement
to discrimination, hostility or violence.
Therefore, we note with concern the fact
that resolution 75/26 places an unnecessary and
counterproductive emphasis on restrictions of the right
to freedom of expression, in particular in its twentythird preambular paragraph and paragraph 13.
Finally, while we thank the facilitators, Pakistan
and the Philippines, for their efforts to bring delegations
closer together in their positions, a more extensive and
predictable timetable for negotiations would have been
preferable and would have allowed proposals to be
considered in greater detail.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): Azerbaijan would like
to offer the following explanation of vote on resolution
75/26, entitled “Promotion of interreligious and
intercultural dialogue, understanding and cooperation
for peace”, which was just adopted.
Azerbaijan voted in favour of the resolution and
welcomes its adoption with the overwhelming support
of Member States. We regret that, for the first time
since 2004, the General Assembly was prevented
from adopting the resolution by consensus. We also
regret that we could not join other Member States in
co-sponsoring the resolution.
Our position on the event referred to in the thirtyfirst preambular paragraph was explained in detail in
the statement delivered by the delegation of Azerbaijan
at the plenary meeting of the General Assembly held on
15 April 2019 (see A/73/PV.75). However, Azerbaijan
fully supports and shares the main objectives of
resolution 75/26 and subscribes to its content, purpose
and philosophy. We are grateful to the delegations
of Pakistan and the Philippines for their efforts and
impeccable professionalism.

A/75/PV.35

Mr. Zlenko (Ukraine): Ukraine would like to make
the following explanation of vote on resolution 75/26
“Promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace”, which was
just adopted.
Ukraine acknowledges the importance of
interreligious and intercultural dialogue for the
purposes of peace and has always been a part of
international efforts to that end. In that regard, Ukraine
does not support the idea of the inclusion, in the text
of the resolution, of the reference to the intention of
the Inter-Parliamentary Union to hold, in 2022 in the
Russian Federation, the World Conference of Heads
of State, Parliamentarians and Representatives of the
World Religions on Intercultural and Interreligious
Dialogue for the Benefit of Peace and Mankind.
Regrettably, the Russian Federation attempts to
make all international events that it hosts serve the
goal of whitewashing its aggressive policies against
sovereign States and its repressive practices in
occupied areas, including in the religious and cultural
domains. The ongoing pressure exerted against
religious communities is a sad reality for people in the
temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine today.
The toolbox includes frequent police raids; the
demolition of, and eviction from, buildings dedicated
to religion; new registration requirements that have
affected legal status and property rights; and threats
against, and persecution of, those belonging to the
Orthodox Church of Ukraine, Protestant evangelical
communities, mosques and Muslim religious schools,
as well as Greek Catholics, Roman Catholics and
Jehovah’s Witnesses. Dozens of peaceful Muslims have
been convicted under trumped up charges of allegedly
belonging to Islamic organizations.
It is also worth noting that the challenging
circumstances of the coronavirus disease pandemic
make it of no real value to refer to the preparedness
for an event due to take place in almost two years.
Moreover, no credible information of preparatory
work already done that the General Assembly could
acknowledge has been provided.
Mr. Knyazyan (Armenia): I take the floor to
explain the vote of Armenia on resolution 75/26, entitled
“Promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace”, which was
just adopted.

20-3390725/29

A/75/PV.35

As a country situated at the historical crossroads of
different civilizations, Armenia has cultivated deeply
rooted traditions of coexistence with, and respect
towards, other cultures and religions. Armenia preserves
a rich cultural heritage, including a Hellenistic-era
temple, some of the oldest Christian churches and
monasteries in the world, a Jewish synagogue, an
eighteenth-century mosque in the very centre of our
capital, Yerevan, and the world’s largest Yazidi temple.
The protection of religious and ethnic groups from
identity-based hate crimes is a long-standing priority
for Armenia in international forums. Our objection to
the thirty-sixth preambular paragraph of the resolution,
which refers to an event entitled the “World Forum
on Intercultural Dialogue”, organized biennially
by Azerbaijan, is based on the fact that the country
hosting the event continuously advances the policy of
organizing various international forums to distract the
attention of the international community from the dire
human rights situation in that country, its promotion
of anti-Armenian hatred and its destruction of the
Armenian cultural and religious heritage.
It would be erroneous to think that intercultural
and interreligious dialogue is possible under conditions
of gross violations of human rights and fundamental
freedoms, in particular the freedoms of expression,
peaceful assembly and association, and the silencing of
dissenting voices. The event referred to in resolution
75/26 is continuously misused by its host country,
which seeks to turn it into an instrument of propaganda.
We believe that, while organizing international events
on intercultural dialogue and the promotion of peace,
due regard should also be given to the record of the
host country in terms of adherence to its obligations
under international human rights law, as well as
the protection of cultural heritage of historical and
religious significance.
Armenia therefore disassociates itself from the
thirty-sixth preambular paragraph of resolution 75/26,
which contains a reference to the above-mentioned event.
Ms. Jáquez Huacuja (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico thanks Pakistan and the Philippines for their
work as co-facilitators of resolution 75/26, entitled
“Promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace”, which
was just adopted, in particular for having convened
multiple rounds of negotiation and for their flexibility
26/29

02/12/2021

in taking into consideration the concerns expressed by
delegations and the language proposed.
Mexico voted in favour of resolution 75/26 as
a reflection of the constructive spirit and tolerance
with which we participated in the consultations on the
resolution. We therefore wish to express our surprise
at the abrupt way the consultations were suspended
and the premature way the resolution was presented.
The themes of the resolution, which are in themselves
delicate issues, are worthy of careful consideration and
reflection. Further consultations could have allowed us
to forge language that would have been adopted without
a vote by the General Assembly.
Mexico hopes to continue discussions on this
thematic topic in a transparent, constructive and
inclusive manner to ensure that the opinions of all are
taken into account and new agreements can be reached
for the benefit of multilateral solutions, which the
General Assembly must always seek.
Mexico reiterates its commitment to the peaceful
settlement of disputes, the international rule of law
and the promotion of dialogue and international
cooperation. That commitment is the basis for a safer
and more peaceful world.
Mr. Ham Sang-Wook (Republic of Korea): My
delegation voted in favour of resolution 75/26, entitled
“Promotion of inter-religious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace”.
We note with appreciation that the facilitators made
great efforts to accommodate the concerns of the widest
possible membership. However, we believe that there
was still room for improvement in that regard. Indeed,
it is regrettable that we could not reach consensus on a
resolution that to date has been adopted by consensus.
We voted in favour of resolution 75/26 based
on the understanding that tolerance and respect for
religion and belief should be upheld. Nevertheless, my
Government is of the view that the right to freedom
of opinion and expression is one of the fundamental
human rights and should not be compromised. My
delegation will continue to constructively engage with
the international community to ensure that the right to
freedom of opinion and expression is fully respected.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote on the resolutions just adopted.
20-33907

02/12/2021

The exercise of the right of reply has been requested.
May I remind members that statements in the exercise
of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes for the
first intervention and to five minutes for the second
intervention and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Amba (Pakistan): My delegation is obliged
to take the floor in response to the statement made
by the representative of India a short while ago. We
categorically reject India’s wilful propaganda against
the Katarpur corridor. The Prime Minister of Pakistan,
Imran Khan, took that landmark initiative last year in the
openly hostile environment created by the belligerence
and warmongering of our eastern neighbour solely to
promote interreligious and intercultural harmony in
our region.
We knew full well that it was beyond the capacity
of India’s current regime to comprehend gestures of
peace and interreligious harmony, but we still decided
to open the Katarpur corridor to the Gurdwara Darbar
Sahib, which was constructed as the world’s biggest
Sikh gurdwara; we welcomed members of the Sikh
community from all over the world; and we granted
them visa-free access to one of their holiest sites.
We are not surprised that India continues to
politicize that peaceful initiative by coming up with
baseless and fallacious propaganda. Insinuations about
transferring the affairs of the Katarpur-Gurdwara
Darbar Sahib corridor are aimed at creating religious
disharmony, casting mischievous aspersions against
the interests of the Sikh community and diverting
attention from India’s own reprehensible human rights
violations against minorities in India. They have
also been rejected by the Pakistan Sikh Gurdwara
Prabandhak Committee.
While Pakistan is opening doors to the Sikh
community and gaining their gratitude and appreciation
all over the world, Hindutva zealots are following a
well-planned strategy to eradicate their identity. I will
not go into the history, but one only has to follow what
is happening around Delhi these days to find out how
the Fascist Indian regime treats its minorities, including
Muslims and Sikhs.
As far as terrorism is concerned, it is rather rich
for a country that uses terrorism as an instrument of
State policy against all its neighbours to point fingers
at others. Only recently, Pakistan shared with the world
a detailed and extensive account of the terrorist and

A/75/PV.35

subversive activities that are planned, sponsored and
endorsed by the Indian regime to destabilize our region.
We have also caught red-handed Indian agents
who have confessed to committing those activities,
such as Commander Kulbhushan. Since Bharatiya
Janata Party-Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh zealots
cannot realize their dream of Akhund Bharat, they try
to enlist, train, fund and sponsor terrorists to do their
bidding and further their destabilizing agenda in all of
their neighbouring countries. Instead of crying foul all
the time, India would be well advised to take steps to
protect its minorities and their places of worship, rather
than feeding misleading and sham concerns about the
rights of minorities elsewhere.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): There is nothing
surprising in the inadequate, irrelevant and unethical
comments just made by the representative of Armenia.
His allegations once again eloquently confirm that
culture, peace and dialogue are alien to Armenia. The
representative of Armenia went so far as to lecture
others about principles and values that his Government
has consistently disregarded and opposed.
The purpose of Armenia’s allegations is evidently
to camouflage its own racist policy and hate crimes.
It is Armenia whose President invented the notion of
ethnic incompatibility. It is Armenia that has become
uniquely monoethnic and has methodically and
systematically pursued a policy of destroying any traces
of other cultures in the territories under its control. It is
Armenia that is responsible for numerous war crimes,
crimes against humanity and acts of genocide. It is in
Armenia that international terrorists and war criminals
are national heroes.
With regard to the comments on human rights and
democracy, the Armenian authorities should first look
closely at themselves rather than blame other countries.
Indeed, all successive Governments in Armenia,
including the current one, have come to power violently
and have resorted to the cruellest possible methods of
dealing with political opponents.
Following the latest change of Government in
Armenia, the new authorities at the outset started to
diligently accuse their predecessors of authoritarian
rule, systemic corruption, election rigging and the
suspension of democracy and human rights. However,
the natural question arises as to whether and on what
grounds the current Armenian authorities should be
regarded differently.

20-3390727/29

A/75/PV.35

The crackdown on the opposition, persecution of
political opponents, politically motivated killings, limited
freedom of the media and interference in the judiciary
are bitter realities in today’s Armenia — which at the
same time projects itself as a proponent of human rights
and democracy, albeit wrongly and unsuccessfully, and
continues to exploit the cynical and perpetual narrative
of victimized Armenians. The current Government
of Armenia continues without any hesitation to deny
its responsibility for the heinous crimes committed
against Azerbaijan and its citizens in the course of
the aggression.
Armenia’s denial of responsibility for wrongdoing
and the resulting human rights suffering — including
through apparent falsifications and distortions of the
past and present and the glorification of war crimes
and their perpetrators — represent a defiance of human
rights, a direct obstacle to genuine reconciliation and a
threat to regional security and stability.
We hope that, instead of sowing dissension and
challenging various global initiatives and international
events for racist purposes, Armenia will learn lessons,
accept and reconcile with the new realities and
finally realize that diversity, dialogue and mutual
understanding and respect are values, not threats.
Mr. Knyazyan (Armenia): We reject the narratives
just put forward by the representative of Azerbaijan,
which could serve as textbook examples of hate speech.
In our assessment of the record of Azerbaijan in
promoting intercultural dialogue, we proceed not from
the number of window-dressing events but from the
dire realities on the ground.
Although positioning itself as a model of tolerance
and multiculturalism, in reality Azerbaijan has
achieved the complete annihilation of every trace
of the civilizational presence of Armenia in the
territory currently under its jurisdiction, in particular
in Nakhchivan, the occupied parts of Nagorno
Karabakh and other areas. The barbaric destruction
in 1998 to 2005 of the ancient Jugha cemetery — with
more than 5,000 khachkars, or medieval Christian
cross-stones — is illustrative in that regard. It is a
documented fact that Azerbaijan rejected all requests
by international organizations, including the European
Parliament, to send a fact-finding commission to
Nakhchivan to investigate that crime.
The recent aggression unleashed against the people
of Artsakh, with the involvement of foreign terrorist
28/29

02/12/2021

fighters, was accompanied by atrocity crimes and the
barbaric destruction of ancient Armenian cultural
and religious heritage. The inhumane and degrading
treatment of prisoners of war and civilian hostages and
the widespread glorification of that behaviour on social
networks, with a clear sense of impunity, are deplorable.
Regardless of the number of international events
organized by Azerbaijan, it will never whitewash the
policy of anti-Armenian hatred, which goes against the
values of humankind.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its concentration of agenda
item 15.
Programme of work
The President: Before adjourning, in reference to
my letter dated 1 December 2020, I would like to draw
the attention of members to the date of recess of the
current session.
Members will recall that, at its second plenary
meeting, on 18 September 2020 (see A/75/PV.2), the
General Assembly decided that the seventy-fifth session
would recess on Monday, 14 December 2020. However,
in the light of the work that remains to be completed
for this part of the session, I would like to propose to
the Assembly that it postpone the date of recess until
Monday, 21 December.
If there is no objection, I shall take it that the
Assembly agrees to postpone the date of recess until
Monday, 21 December 2020.
It was so decided.
The President: I would also like to consult
members regarding an extension of the work of the
Fifth Committee.
Members will recall that, at its second plenary
meeting, on 18 September 2020 (see A/75/PV.2), the
General Assembly approved the recommendation
of the General Committee that the Fifth Committee
should complete its work by Friday, 11 December.
However, I have been informed by the Chair of the Fifth
Committee that it requests an extension of its work to
Monday, 21 December, with a view to facilitating the
comprehensive consideration of the important agenda
items before it.
20-33907

02/12/2021

If there is no objection, I shall take it that the
Assembly agrees to extend the work of the Fifth
Committee until Monday, 21 December 2020?
It was so decided.
The President: I would furthermore like to
make the following announcement concerning the

A/75/PV.35

programme of work of the plenary. The consideration
of agenda item 40, “The situation in the occupied
territories of Azerbaijan”, originally scheduled for
Monday, 14 December, has been postponed to a later
date to be announced.
The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.

20-3390729/29
