A/63/PV.53

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-third session

53

rd plenary meeting
Tuesday, 18 November 2008, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. D’Escoto Brockmann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nicaragua)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Wolfe
(Jamaica), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Agenda item 48
Follow-up to and implementation of the outcome
of the 2002 International Conference on Financing
for Development and the preparation of the 2008
Review Conference
Report of the Second Committee (A/63/413)
The Acting President: If there is no proposal
under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, may I take it
that the General Assembly decides not to discuss the
report of the Second Committee that is before the
Assembly today?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendations of the
Second Committee have been made clear in the
Committee and are reflected in the relevant official
records.
May I remind members that in accordance with
General Assembly decision 34/401, a delegation
should, as far as possible, explain its vote only once,
that is, either in the Committee or in the plenary
meeting, unless that delegation’s vote in plenary
meeting is different from its vote in the Committee.

Also, explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the report of the Second
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take a decision in the same
manner as was done in the Committee.
The Assembly has before it five draft decisions
recommended by the Second Committee in paragraph
29 of its report. The Assembly will now take action on
the five draft decisions one by one. After all the
decisions have been taken, representatives will again
have an opportunity to explain their vote or position.
We turn first to draft decision I, entitled
“Arrangements and organization of work of the Followup International Conference on Financing for
Development to Review the Implementation of the
Monterrey Consensus (Doha, 29 November-2 December
2008)”. The Second Committee adopted draft decision I.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft decision I was adopted (decision 63/509).
The Acting President: Draft decision II is entitled
“Provisional rules of procedure for the Follow-up
International Conference on Financing for Development
to Review the Implementation of the Monterrey
Consensus (Doha, 29 November-2 December 2008)”.
The Second Committee adopted draft decision II. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft decision II was adopted (decision 63/510).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

08-60760 (E)

*0860760*

A/63/PV.53

The Acting President: Draft decision III is
entitled “Provisional agenda for the Follow-up
International Conference on Financing for Development
to Review the Implementation of the Monterrey
Consensus (Doha, 29 November-2 December 2008)”.
The Second Committee adopted draft decision III. May
I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft decision III was adopted (decision 63/511).
The Acting President: Draft decision IV is
entitled
“Accreditation
of
intergovernmental
organizations
to
the
Follow-up
International
Conference on Financing for Development to Review
the Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus
(Doha, 29 November-2 December 2008)”. The Second
Committee adopted draft decision IV. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft decision IV was adopted (decision 63/512).
The Acting President: Draft decision V is
entitled
“Accreditation
of
non-governmental
organizations
to
the
Follow-up
International
Conference on Financing for Development to Review
the Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus
(Doha, 29 November-2 December 2008)”. The Second
Committee adopted draft decision V. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft decision V was adopted (decision 63/513).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
48.
Agenda item 114 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(l) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Inter-Parliamentary Union
Draft resolution (A/63/L.26)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly held its debate on agenda item 114 and
its sub-items (a) to (u) at its 36th and 37th plenary
meetings, on 3 November 2008.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Namibia to introduce draft resolution A/63/L.26.
Mr. Mbuende (Namibia): It is an honour for
Namibia, the country holding the presidency of the

2

Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU), to introduce to the
Assembly draft resolution A/63/L.26 entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Inter-Parliamentary Union”.
The draft resolution highlights the important role
world parliaments are playing in international affairs,
as well as in the work of the United Nations. Special
attention is given to the cooperation between the
United Nations and the IPU for the promotion and
protection of peace and security, conflict prevention,
gender and human rights, good governance and
promotion of democracy, and of social and economic
development.
In order to bridge the implementation gap of
various United Nations decisions and resolutions and
to ensure greater democratization of the United Nations
system, it is important to engage more closely with
national parliaments and parliamentarians all over the
world. Such engagement would provide a better
understanding of parliamentarians on the importance of
translating international commitments into national
legislation and policies.
Namibia would like to appeal to those Member
States that have not sponsored this important draft
resolution to do so. We hope this draft resolution will
be adopted by consensus.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/63/L.26. I wish to
advise the General Assembly that the following are
additional sponsors of the draft resolution: Albania,
Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Costa Rica, Croatia, El Salvador,
Ethiopia, Finland, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Guinea, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Japan, Kuwait,
Lithuania, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, the
Netherlands, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Panama, Poland,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, the Republic of
Moldova, the Russian Federation, Rwanda, San
Marino, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Sri
Lanka, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Turkey, Ukraine and Yemen.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/63/L.26. May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt A/63/L.26?
Draft resolution
(resolution 63/24).

A/63/L.26

was

adopted

08-60760

A/63/PV.53

The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): My delegation had
wished to raise a point in connection with draft
resolution A/63/L.26; unfortunately, Sir, you did not
see me ask for the floor in time.
In operative paragraph 4 of the draft resolution —
and this is a minor addition from the developing
countries’ point of view — we would have requested
the insertion of the phrase “capacity-building,
development”,
after
the
words
“democratic
governance”.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (1) of agenda item 114?

Agenda items 9 and 111
Report of the Security Council (A/63/2)
Question of equitable representation on
and increase in the membership of the
Security Council and related matters
The Acting President: I shall now read out the
following on behalf of the President of the General
Assembly:
“As members know, this summer the
historic renovation of the United Nations building
got under way under the Capital Master Plan.
Asbestos, poor lighting, faulty ventilation, leaky
roofs, inadequate security and dated decor
characterize the building.

Agenda item 102

“Just like the building, the institutions are
also in desperate need of an overhaul — that is
the real master plan. Today, we don hard hats and
gleaming new shovels — I am ready to break
ground. We are all ready to break ground. We are
ready to assume our responsibilities and make the
most out of our historic opportunity to
democratize the Security Council.

Notification by the Secretary-General under Article
12, Paragraph 2 of the Charter of the United Nations

“At the 2005 World Summit, our leaders
voiced support for, and I quote:

It was so decided.
The Acting President: Before proceeding to the
next agenda item, I would like to appeal to those
Member States intending to submit draft resolutions on
the remaining sub-items to do so as soon as possible.

Note by the Secretary-General (A/63/300)
The Acting President: As members are aware, in
accordance with the provisions of Article 12, paragraph
2, of the Charter of the United Nations, and with the
consent of the Security Council, the Secretary-General
is mandated to notify the General Assembly of matters
relative to the maintenance of international peace and
security that are being dealt with by the Security
Council and of matters with which the Council has
ceased to deal.
In this connection, the General Assembly has
before it a note by the Secretary-General issued as
document A/63/300.
May I take it that the Assembly takes note of that
document?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 102?
It was so decided.

08-60760

‘early reform of the Security
Council — an essential element of our overall
effort to reform the United Nations — in
order to make it more broadly representative,
efficient and transparent and thus to further
enhance its effectiveness and the legitimacy
and implementation of its decisions.’
(resolution 60/1, para. 153)
“Our leaders thus already spelled out what
the objective of Security Council reform is. What
they did not do, of course, was to define ‘early
reform’. However, it would seem safe to say that
they did not mean to see another World Summit
pass us by with the status quo intact. That is why
we must move swiftly to bring out the hammer
and nails and rebuild the horseshoe table. The
twenty-first century does not require a horseshoe
table, but a circle-shaped one, with room for extra
seats. We must come full circle, realizing our
founders’ vision of a Council with the legitimacy
to act on behalf of all Member States, in
accordance with Article 24 of the Charter.

3

A/63/PV.53

“Thanks to the moral courage and
diplomatic skills of many great men and women,
many of them here in the room, we are in an
excellent position to make change happen.
“In the final days of the sixty-second
session, members decided to take a decisive step
towards Security Council reform by launching
intergovernmental negotiations during the sixtythird session. Making the most out of that
achievement would be a centrepiece of any
subsequent General Assembly presidency.
However, it places a special responsibility on a
transformational presidency like mine — a
presidency built around the imperative of a more
democratic United Nations, where every country
counts. Members can count on me and also count
on Ambassador Tanin, whose appointment as
Vice-Chairman of the Open-Ended Working
Group and as Chairman of the upcoming
intergovernmental negotiations was universally
applauded. Members can count on us to work our
hearts out.
“Each and every one of us stands to gain.
Peace and security cannot be maintained by a
Security Council that is out of date and out of
touch. Let our reform effort therefore not run out
of time. A better Council cannot wait until
tomorrow, if we want to have a better tomorrow.
“So here we are today, poised for progress.
The platform for progress is decision 62/557.
This decision is the ground beneath our feet and,
as I have stressed both informally and formally, I
intend to implement it both in letter and in spirit.
That is why I guarantee the Open-Ended Working
Group the opportunity to contribute to the
upcoming intergovernmental negotiations in a
positive way and help pave the way towards
them. That effort is already well underway, with
meetings both last week and yesterday. To
maximize the chances of success, I will shortly
present a work plan for the Working Group.
Above all, the plan will be characterized by
ambition: ambition not to waste a single minute;
ambition to, if possible, finish early, before the
1 February deadline.
“Whatever happens in the Working Group,
the intergovernmental negotiations will start at
the very latest on 28 February 2009. However, it

4

is my firm belief that we must work as hard as
possible to be able to start as early as possible.
“For this entire enterprise to prosper, one
principle in particular should in my view be
respected: we should not reinvent the wheel. Over
the years, members, many of them personally,
have been quite successful at paving the way
towards the intergovernmental negotiations,
culminating in decision 62/557. Standing on the
shoulders of giants, we can deliver on its
promise. I look forward to hearing the remarks of
members, particularly on the plans to contribute
to that endeavour, as I am sure members will to
the best of their abilities.
“However, as long as the Council remains
unreformed, we need to make an extra effort to
hold it to account. Today, the General Assembly
has that opportunity and I have encouraged
Member States beforehand to use this debate
especially to take advantage of that opportunity.
Before us is the report of the Security Council. It
is a factual account of the Council’s work during
the period just past: 219 formal meetings, 58
resolutions and 50 presidential statements. The
report is full of such facts and figures on the
Council’s efforts to fulfil its mandate of
maintaining international peace and security.
“At the end of last year’s debate, President
Kerim made the following observation:
‘... some serious concerns were
expressed regarding the report itself, in
particular the lack of comprehensive
evaluation of the various deliberations of
the Council. … [M]any participants in the
debate stressed the importance that the
report should in future be more analytical
and substantive.’ (A/62/PV.51, p. 14)
“It is my sincere hope that we will not let
that hold us back in our debate today, either in
our dialogue with the Council or in our
evaluation of its work. If the report indeed lacks
evaluation and analysis, then the Assembly
should make its own. Nothing less is expected
from a General Assembly that wants to hold its
own within the United Nations — an Assembly
that truly engages the Council at the same time as
it engages in self-renewal.

08-60760

A/63/PV.53

“Next to Security Council reform, this
renaissance of the General Assembly constitutes
another crucial component of that real master
plan I mentioned at the outset of my statement:
overhaul not only of the United Nations physical
structure, but of its institutions as well; not of the
exterior, but of the interior. Internal change is far
more difficult to bring about than external
change. The difference is like that between an
open-heart operation and a facelift: the openheart operation involves opening the chest. In
other words, we face enormous resistance, but we
can also expect much greater rewards: a world
body with a new lease on life.”
I now give the floor to the President of the
Security Council, His Excellency Mr. Jorge Urbina, to
introduce the report of the Security Council.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of all members of the Security Council, I would
like to congratulate Father Miguel d’Escoto
Brockmann on his election as President of the sixtythird session of the General Assembly. It is our sincere
hope that, under his leadership and with his experience,
we will be able to increase and enhance the
cooperation between the Security Council and the
General Assembly.
In my capacity as President of the Security
Council for the month of November, it is my honour to
introduce the annual report of the Council to the
General Assembly, contained in document A/63/2.
Before turning to the report, I should like, on behalf of
the Council, to thank the delegation of Viet Nam for its
efforts in the preparation and completion of this report.
In particular, we recognize its initiative to convene an
informal meeting with the Council’s entire membership
to discuss the best way to prepare the report, with a
view to making it more analytical, balanced and
substantive.
Over the past few years, the complexity and
multidimensional character of the international
situation have created an ever-increasing demand for
United Nations activities in the areas of conflict
prevention, mediation and resolution, as well as
peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities. Against this
backdrop, the Security Council has faced increasingly
complex responsibilities in fulfilling its mandate of
maintaining international peace and security.

08-60760

In order to better reflect the fact that the role and
activity of the Council have been extended in difficult
circumstances, the quality of the annual report being
submitted today to the General Assembly should be
even more reliable in all aspects. We believe that the
gradual improvements can not only improve the
perception and contribution of States Members of the
United Nations in general and other relevant parties
interested in what the Council does, but that they can
also enhance its authority and efficiency as it carries
out its mandates.
I am particularly pleased to inform the Assembly
that the Council is paying particular attention to
requests from the membership regarding its working
methods. There is still room for making improvements
here, and we must do so in order to further the cause of
transparency, access to the Council and accountability.
However, on occasion it is sometimes easier to reach
agreements than to explain how such agreements were
actually reached. It would therefore be wise to consider
in depth how much more we can and should expect
from the report of the Security Council in terms of its
analytic capability.
The report covers the Council’s work during the
period from 1 August 2007 to 31 July 2008. During
this period, the Council adopted 58 resolutions and 50
presidential statements. It held 219 formal meetings, of
which 191 were public. In addition, there were 18
meetings with troop-contributing countries. The
Council also held 177 private consultations.
The introductory part of the report that we have
prepared provides insights into the way in which the
Council addressed a wide array of issues during the
course of another year of intensive work, reflecting
both the Council’s achievements and situations and
circumstances in which it was unable to take action. In
every case, we have endeavoured to reflect the general
views expressed by Council members.
With regard to developments in conflicts and
disputes in Africa, Asia, Europe, the Middle East and
the Balkans, the introduction elaborates on the regular
briefings by the Secretariat, interventions by countries
and parties concerned, the Council’s communications
with troop-contributing countries, and follow-up
deliberations and actions of the Council to respond to
situations under review.
A large part of the introduction is devoted to
general issues, ranging from terrorism, the non-

5

A/63/PV.53

proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, children and
armed conflict, and women and peace and security to
the work of subsidiary organs of the Council, such as
the sanctions Committees, the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions and
the Working Group of the Whole on United Nations
Peacekeeping
Operations.
Coordination
and
cooperation with the other principal organs of the
United Nations, as well as the evolving role of regional
and subregional organizations, have also been
highlighted as appropriate.
The body of the report is essentially a
compilation of the documents considered or issued by
the Council. These documents include a detailed
account of the meetings held by the Council, the
outcomes of those meetings when there were outcomes,
and the documentation that served as a basis for
meetings. It also details the list of issues that were
brought to the attention of the Council but that were
not discussed at meetings of the Council during the
period covered in the report.
I would like to point out that the format of the
report now before the General Assembly corresponds
to the provisions included in the note by the President
of the Security Council dated 19 July 2006
(S/2006/507), in order to ensure that the report prove
more useful.
In conclusion, on behalf of all Security Council
members, I thank the General Assembly for this
opportunity to inform its members of the activities of
the Council over the past year. I would also to thank,
on behalf of the Council, the Secretary-General and
Secretariat staff for their work, their invaluable support
for the development of the Council’s activities, and
their professionalism in the discharge of their
responsibilities enabling the Council to fulfil its
mandate.
I would now like to make some comments in my
capacity as the Permanent Representative of Costa
Rica.
In the recent chronicles of the Assembly’s history,
I think that there are no precedents for a delegation as
President-in-office
of
the
Council
speaking
subsequently to make a comment on the annual report
of the General Assembly in a national capacity.

6

We believe that, in so doing, we are doing
something new in the context of our search to improve
the working methods of the Council. We wish to
innovate in a way that can turn what has always been a
routine exercise into something more substantive. We
trust that, in this way, we can make a contribution to
the analysis of the work of the Council in the period
under review.
For Costa Rica, a permanent member of this
General Assembly, the introduction of the annual report
of the Security Council to the Assembly should not be
a mere exercise of rhetoric, nor should it become a
mere statement of facts. A true consideration of the
report requires an analytical and critical approach to
the work of the Council in the period under review, in
observation of its mandate and its organic relationship
to the Assembly in accordance with the provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations.
We believe that, despite the endeavours made and
the desire to include in the introduction to the report
both the achievements and the situations and
circumstances in which the Council was unable to act,
we agree with the assessment made by the Council
itself to the effect that the report and its quality should
improve even further. We wish to follow the good
practice implemented by Viet Nam to hold
consultations on the annual report with members in
general, and we refer in particular to the meeting held
to provide information on the preparation of the report
as its presidency came to an end. We urge the States
that will be entrusted with that task in the future to
continue the improvement introduced by the delegation
of Viet Nam.
We must acknowledge that the report just
submitted by the Council continues to be limited and,
in our judgement, descriptive in its approach. It does
not lift the veil of opacity shrouding Council action in
the majority of cases.
I should like to stress that it is important and
appropriate that the report assess the Security
Council’s compliance or non-compliance with its
Charter mandates. Specifically, I should like to
highlight the Council’s repeated non-compliance with a
mandate as essential as that set out in Article 26, as we
will have the opportunity to see during tomorrow’s
Council debate. Of all the Charter’s Articles, including
the 32 directly related to the Council, Article 26 has

08-60760

A/63/PV.53

had a special characteristic over the years: it has been a
dead letter.
Although the Security Council must address
situations representing threats to international peace
and security, it has remained silent by failing to
exercise its obligatory powers under Article 26 in the
area of arms control and reduction. This repeated
non-compliance over many years is related to a
mandate that goes to the very heart of the Organization
and represents, we believe, a shirking of duty. The
present annual report, like previous ones, makes no
reference whatsoever to the fact that the Council is
unwilling or unable to carry out a mandate that is
currently in force and is still not being fulfilled under
Article 26 of the Charter.
Whereas Article 26 is not being implemented by
the Council, Article 25 is not being complied with by
various States that refuse to accept the obligations
arising from Council decisions. It would appear that in
a number of cases, given the Council’s difficulties in
ensuring compliance with its resolutions, we are
witnessing the modification — and thus the
undermining — of Article 25, whereby all States
agreed to accept and implement Council decisions.
That is particularly worrisome, because it involves
obligations arising from resolutions adopted under
Chapter VII. Therefore, since compliance with Article
25 is directly related to the Council’s effectiveness, this
is an issue that should be analysed in depth in the
annual report.
Another Charter mandate, while of a more
procedural nature, is related to the submission of
special reports in accordance with Articles 15 and 24 —
articles that also appear to have fallen into disuse. In
this Organization, where reports on the most diverse
subjects proliferate, we have been unable to systematize
the submission of special reports on issues on the
Council’s agenda that thus merit such treatment. We
believe that, in cases such as those involving the
imposition of sanctions or other coercive measures or
the adoption of measures for general implementation
under Chapter VII — or even cases in which the
Council cannot achieve the necessary consensus or
where the threat of the veto exists — it is appropriate to
submit special reports. In our view, during the period
under review, cases such as Kosovo, Zimbabwe or the
Oil-for-Food Programme, inter alia, would have
merited the submission of special reports to the
Assembly.

08-60760

Costa Rica has been keen to seek correct
implementation of the provisions set out in Articles 31
and 32 regarding participation by members of the
General Assembly in Security Council debates when
their interests are being affected or when they are
parties to a dispute being considered by the Council. In
that connection, we have insisted on speaking after the
States that are participating pursuant to Articles 31 and
32, rather than before, as is the custom. We do not see
the logic in taking a position and then listening to all
the information and the positions that those most
directly affected consider it necessary to share with the
Council.
Although the report of the Council fails to assess
the implementation of Articles 31 and 32, we
congratulate the delegation of Belgium on having
compiled information that has enabled us to see
apparent improvement in that area. According to those
data, during the second half of 2006, Council members
spoke before invited States in 48.3 per cent of the
meetings held. That percentage increased to 73 in 2007
and then fell to 26.5 in the first half of 2008. We hope
that, with the assistance of all Council members, this
volatile figure can be maintained at the latter lower
number or further reduced.
In that connection, we also consider it appropriate
to assess the implementation of rule 48 of the Security
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, which
provides that “unless it decides otherwise, the Security
Council shall meet in public”. Once again, we are
basing our position on information compiled by the
Belgian delegation, which indicates that, while the
Council met in private consultations 44 per cent of the
time during the second half of 2006, that percentage
increased slightly to 45.5 in 2007 and then fell to 41.4
in the first half of 2008. Although we recognize that
not all Council deliberations can be held in public, we
believe that private consultations should be the
exception, not the rule.
Costa Rica sought to broaden the implementation
of rule 48 on the basis of the principle of publicizing
our Council presidency’s programme of work. We
express our appreciation for the support received
through the implementation of that measure by various
elected members, in particular Panama and South
Africa. We hope that, through the implementation of
this principle on publicity, those subsequently in the
presidency of the Council will seek to consolidate the
precedent.

7

A/63/PV.53

I wish to refer briefly to the matter of Iraq. We
would like to explain our position to the Assembly with
regard to the oil-for-food programme, given that the
majority of the Assembly is opposed to it and that it has
not been clearly reflected in the report. Costa Rica is
not opposed to closing the programme, but we think
that the established rules should be followed in
processing the pending letters of credit for payment,
that is, documentation should be presented attesting that
the services or products were really received by Iraq.
We are not willing to repeat the mistakes of the
past made by the Committee established pursuant to
Security Council resolution 661 (1990). Costa Rica has
interrupted the no-objection procedure, through which
an attempt was made to end the programme without the
relevant documentation being required. We find such a
blind conclusion of the programme inadmissible,
particularly if we take into account the failures
mentioned in the Volcker report with regard to the
changes in prices and services. It is also inadmissible
in the light of the fact that many of the companies that
still have payments pending were expressly questioned
in that report.
Given these doubts, Costa Rica has decided to
maintain the hold. In August, we distributed a note
asking the Council to coordinate with the SecretaryGeneral in order to ensure that the conclusion of the
oil-for-food programme would be carried out with all
due prudence in order to avoid new criticism being
levelled against the United Nations. That has been the
sole motive guiding our actions. Shortly afterwards, we
sent a second note to the Secretary-General requesting
information on the companies and people with
outstanding invoices to compare these lists with the
annexes of the Volcker report. We are still waiting for a
reply to that request.
Lastly, as an elected member of the Security
Council, we would like to shoulder the commitment to
bring to the Council’s attention those improvements
and suggestions that the Assembly recommends on the
basis of its consideration of the annual report of the
Council. I wish to express my thanks for the support
that we have received and to reiterate our willingness
to provide the Assembly with information we have on
the Council’s business.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
His Excellency Mr. Bagudu Hirse, Minister of State for
Foreign Affairs of Nigeria.

8

Mr. Hirse (Nigeria): On behalf of the delegation
of Nigeria, I have the honour to express our gratitude
to Mr. Miguel d’Escoto Brockmann for scheduling this
General Assembly debate on the question of equitable
representation on and increase in the membership of
the Security Council and related matters, pursuant to
the decision of our leaders in September 2005.
It has always been the view of Nigeria that the
reform of the United Nations would not be complete
without a fundamental reform of and increase in the
size and the composition of the Security Council to
reflect the current global realities, thereby enabling the
Council to gain in stature and credibility and ensuring
that its decisions attract the wider support of the
international community.
Africa’s position on Security Council reform has
been well articulated in the decisions taken by African
heads of State and Government at the fifth and sixth
ordinary sessions of the Assembly of the African
Union, held respectively in Sirte, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, in July 2005 and in Khartoum in January
2006. We strongly feel that it would be a great
disservice to the United Nations if Member States
continued to prevaricate on this vital matter.
While Nigeria respects the viewpoints of those
Member States that insist on the need for consensus
before a decision is taken on the framework and
modalities of the reform, we equally recognize that, in
the greater national interests of our respective peoples,
the search for consensus should not inhibit the taking
of important and crucial decisions. It is essential,
therefore, that in the interest of our Organization and
its future we exert every effort to ensure a speedy and
successful conclusion of the reform process.
This may well entail some element of flexibility,
but flexibility informed by a shared view that Council
reform in all its aspects is long overdue. If we proceed
along this path, Nigeria is confident that we will, in the
immediate future, achieve that goal and thereby not
only rekindle the hopes and confidence of mankind in
the United Nations, but also prove wrong the
Organization’s few vocal critics, who wrongly argue
that Member States individually and collectively
cannot rise to the challenges of true multilateralism.
Let us therefore send forth from this hallowed Hall a
clear message of our common resolve not to let slip yet
another opportunity to address this matter once and for
all.

08-60760

A/63/PV.53

There are also those who believe that States
Members of this Organization should be content with
merely tinkering with the working methods of the
Security Council and that this would better serve the
interests of the broader membership. Although the full
implications of such a position for overall United
Nations reform have been the subject of discussions in
informal consultations in the past, Nigeria considers it
necessary to restate that this approach would hardly
address the fundamental issue of inequity that the
Council, as currently constituted, represents.
Nigeria strongly believes that, in the pursuit of
the objective of reforming the Security Council,
Africa’s legitimate aspirations should be addressed, as
Africa is the only region without representation in the
permanent membership category of the Security
Council, even though 60 per cent of the issues
addressed by the Council relate to the continent. We
therefore identify with those Member States whose
initiatives boldly and substantially take into account
Africa’s primary interests and concerns on Security
Council reform. Nigeria also believes that the
permanent membership of the Council should reflect
cultural and geographical diversity.
Lastly, Nigeria is encouraged by the unanimous
adoption of decision 62/557, in which the General
Assembly
mandated
that
intergovernmental
negotiations should commence in the informal plenary
of the Assembly not later than 28 February 2009. Our
understanding of this decision is that the Open-ended
Working Group should come to an end in order to
allow intergovernmental negotiations to commence. We
are of the view that the decision to be reached at the
end of the negotiations should be democratic in nature,
respecting consensus as an ideal but, if necessary,
involve a majority decision. This is in keeping with
both the rules of procedure of the General Assembly
and democratic principles. The Assembly cannot delay
this matter any further.
Mr. Hackett (Barbados): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the 14 States members of the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM) that are also
members of the United Nations on agenda item 9,
“Report of the Security Council”, and item 111,
“Question of equitable representation on and increase
in the membership of the Security Council and related
matters”.

08-60760

At the outset, I would like to thank Ambassador
Jorge Urbina, Permanent Representative of Costa Rica
and current President of the Security Council, for his
detailed presentation of the report of the Council
(A/63/2). CARICOM commends the members of the
Council for the work that they have undertaken during
the reporting period.
The work of the Council over the past year
covered virtually all regions of the world, although the
principal focus continued to be on Africa. CARICOM
would like to thank the members of the Council for
their efforts in seeking to bring peace and stability to
the various conflict situations around the world. We
welcome the attention that the Council has paid to the
situation in Haiti and the support provided to the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). The extension of MINUSTAH’s
mandate will provide further opportunity for the
international community to continue to support the
Haitian political leadership and the Haitian people in
rebuilding the country and progressing towards
sustainable development.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
President of the General Assembly at its sixty-second
session, His Excellency Srgjan Kerim, for the
preparation of the report of the Open-ended Working
Group on Security Council reform that we have before
us today. CARICOM continues to believe that Security
Council reform needs to be one of the priority issues
that should be addressed by the current session of the
General Assembly.
The 2005 World Summit Outcome Document
reflected the resolve of world leaders to reform several
areas of the United Nations architecture, including the
Security Council. Member States said then that there
must be a constant process of review, reform and
renewal of the Organization so that it can remain
relevant to the continuously changing international
climate. This led to the creation of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Human Rights Council, the
revitalization of the Economic and Social Council and
a number of management initiatives in the
administration area. It is of great disappointment to
CARICOM, however, that reform of the Security
Council, the main organ of the United Nations that is
primarily responsible for achieving global peace and
security, continues to elude us; for world leaders also
said at that 2005 Summit that early reform of the
Security Council is “an essential element of our overall

9

A/63/PV.53

effort to reform the United Nations in order to make it
more broadly representative, efficient and transparent”
(resolution 60/1, para. 153).
Despite a nearly four-fold increase in the
membership of the United Nations, the size and
composition of the Security Council have remained
almost unchanged since its creation, albeit for a change
in size in the membership of the non-permanent
members in 1965. Thus, 60 years after the founding of
the United Nations, the composition of the Security
Council no longer reflects current political realities.
We commend the efforts of the President of the
General Assembly at its sixty-second session, and the
members of his task force, for the work undertaken
over the past year on the issue of Security Council
reform. Those efforts were focused on identifying
concrete elements of negotiables that could form the
basis for intergovernmental negotiations. The task
force undertook extensive consultations, with a view to
identifying these elements, and reflected them in their
report. We believe that the consultations to date have
provided useful references and relevant ideas that can
be the basis for intergovernmental negotiations; and
with the mandate from the 2005 United Nations
Summit, and more recently General Assembly decision
62/557 of 15 September 2008, we believe that
intergovernmental negotiations should begin without
much further delay.
Indeed, the issues of modalities and framework
for the intergovernmental process have already been
settled, in our view, as outlined in decision 62/557. The
framework for the intergovernmental negotiations is
the informal plenary of the United Nations General
Assembly, with all of the attendant rules and
procedures of the Assembly, and the modalities are all
the positions and proposals advanced by Member
States. CARICOM countries stand ready to participate
fully in these negotiations, with a view to achieving a
successful outcome by the end of this session.
In this regard, CARICOM member States
reiterate their belief that a reformed Security Council
should have an increase in membership in both the
permanent and non-permanent categories. We further
believe that additional permanent members should
come from both the developed and developing worlds,
and that arrangements for the increase in the number of
non-permanent members should allow for greater
representation from small and island States. The use of

10

the veto should be limited to actions taken under
Chapter VII of the Charter, with a move towards its
eventual abolition. We also believe that a review
mechanism after a reasonable period of time will be
essential.
Comprehensive reform of the Security Council is
fundamentally grounded in the reform of the working
methods of the Council. Thus, CARICOM sees the
need for greater transparency and openness in the
working methods of the Council. More specifically, we
suggest that there be more frequent open debates of the
Security Council to allow for greater inclusiveness and
participation of non-member States, for such open
debates provide, we believe, national and regional
perspectives that can assist the Council in addressing
effectively the crises and issues with which it is seized.
We also believe that more comprehensive Council
briefings to non-members should be held in order to
keep all delegations fully informed of the activities of
the Council.
We are heartened that there is greater acceptance
of the view that the Security Council should be
accountable to the General Assembly. In this regard,
we again request that the reports of the Council to the
General Assembly, such as the one presented today,
should be more substantive and analytical, thus
providing a basis for a more interactive and meaningful
debate by the Assembly on the work of the Council.
Achieving success in these intergovernmental
negotiations will require strong commitment on the
part of all Member States. CARICOM believes that
consultations carried out over the past 15 years,
particularly including the last two, provide the critical
elements that can serve as the basis for these
intergovernmental negotiations. Thus, it should be
possible to start intergovernmental negotiations quite
soon. Together we should seek to create a reformed
organ with an expanded membership that better reflects
contemporary world realities, an organ that possesses a
set of working methods which are formalized, clear
and transparent and which provide for greater
accessibility to its work by non-members. This we
believe will make the Council more broadly
representative, thereby increasing its legitimacy, and
will make it a more effective body which is responsive
to the views and needs of all Member States and has an
enhanced capacity to act when faced with threats to
peace and security.

08-60760

A/63/PV.53

Mr. Soborun (Mauritius): Once again, I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the African Group and to
commend the President of the General Assembly for
convening today’s meeting to discuss the report of the
Security Council, under agenda item 9, and to consider
the question of equitable representation on and increase
in the membership of the Security Council and other
related matters, under agenda item 111. Allow me also
at the very outset to thank His Excellency Mr. Jorge
Urbina, Permanent Representative of Costa Rica and
President of the Security Council for the month of
November, for the presentation of the report of the
Security Council (A/63/2). Furthermore, the African
Group associates itself with the statement to be made by
the representative of Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
The African Group appreciates the efforts of the
Security Council in peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
the maintenance of peace and security in conflict
situations, particularly in Africa. However, once again
it is noted that the report of the Council is more a
statement of events in chronological order than an
analytical report which could provide an opportunity
for Member States to assess the strengths and failures
of the Council in conflict situations. Moreover, the
Group certainly shares the growing concern about the
gradual encroachment by the Security Council on the
powers and the mandate of the General Assembly. In
this context, it is necessary that resolutions 51/193,
58/126 and 59/313, which aim at facilitating the
Security Council’s accountability to the General
Assembly, are implemented without any further delay.
Furthermore, the Council’s rules of procedure, which
still remain provisional after six decades, urgently need
to be formalized. In addition, closer coordination
among the Presidents of the General Assembly, the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council
can only augur well for the Organization.
The global crises we are facing at present, such as
the energy crisis, food crisis, financial crisis and
climate change, make it all the more necessary to effect
the expeditious and meaningful reform of the Security
Council in a comprehensive manner which takes into
account representativity and the geopolitical realities
of the twenty-first century. The African position,
spelled out in the Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte
Declaration on the comprehensive reform of the
Security Council, has been stated several times in this

08-60760

body. It is not our intention this morning to repeat it
again.
Suffice it, however, to recall that the African
common position, as spelled out in the Ezulwini
Consensus, calls for no less than two permanent seats,
with all the prerogatives and privileges of permanent
membership, including the right of veto, and also five
non-permanent seats for Africa. Even though Africa is
opposed in principle to the veto, it is of the view that,
so long as the veto exists and as a matter of common
justice, it should be made available to all new
permanent members of the Security Council.
This African position is intended to assert
unequivocally the legitimate claim of Africa and to
ensure that Africa is fully represented in all decisionmaking organs of the United Nations, and in the
Security Council in particular.
The African Group welcomes the decision of the
President of the General Assembly to commence in the
informal plenary of the General Assembly the
intergovernmental negotiations, in accordance with
Assembly decision 62/577. We extend our fullest
support to His Excellency Father Miguel d’Escoto
Brockmann in this endeavour and also to His
Excellency Mr. Zahir Tanin, Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan, as Chair of the intergovernmental
negotiations on behalf of the President of the General
Assembly. I would like to once again bring to the
attention of the General Assembly that, in paragraph 3
of the decision of the African Union contained in
document Assembly/AU/Dec.184 (X), the 53 African
heads of State and Government directed
“the African Permanent Representatives to the
United Nations to participate in the forthcoming
intergovernmental negotiations on the basis of the
Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte Declaration and
to report to the Assembly accordingly, should
they require further guidance”.
That decision is almost a year old now. The next
African Union summit is scheduled for January 2009.
We hope that at that time the African Permanent
Representatives will have something worthy to report
on the reform of the Security Council, in particular on
the commencement of the intergovernmental
negotiations, to their heads of State and Government.
The African Group looks forward to starting at
meaningful
and
constructive intergovernmental

11

A/63/PV.53

negotiations in compliance with the unanimous
General Assembly decision 62/577, as soon as
possible, but in no case later than 28 February 2009.
Mrs. Núñez Mordoche (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): I have the honour to address the General
Assembly on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement
(NAM). First of all, we thank His Excellency
Ambassador Jorge Urbina, Permanent Representative
of Costa Rica and President of the Security Council for
the month of November, for the presentation of the
report of the Security Council (A/63/2).
The Non-Aligned Movement takes note of the
efforts undertaken to improve the quality of this year’s
annual report and to submit it on time to the General
Assembly. At the same time, the Movement reiterates
that much more should be done with regard to the
content of the report. We call on the Security Council
to submit to the General Assembly comprehensive and
analytical annual reports which evaluate the work of
the Council, including cases on which the Council has
failed to take decisions, as well as the views expressed
by its members during the consideration of the agenda
items before it.
We welcome as a positive step the holding of an
informal meeting with United Nations Member States
by the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, which held the
presidency of the Security Council in July this year, as
part of the process of preparing the annual report. We
call for more regular interactions in the future between
the country holding the July presidency of the Council
and the wider membership of the United Nations, in
order to help enhance the quality of the reports. We
also call on the Security Council to submit special
reports for the consideration of the General Assembly,
pursuant to Article 15, paragraph 1, and Article 24,
paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations. The
Presidents of the Security Council should ensure that
their monthly assessments are comprehensive and
analytical and that they are issued in timely fashion.
The General Assembly could propose parameters for
drawing up such assessments.
The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its
concern over the increasing and continuing
encroachment by the Security Council on issues that
clearly fall within the functions and powers of other
principal organs of the United Nations and their
subsidiary bodies. The Council must fully observe all
Charter provisions as well as all General Assembly

12

resolutions that clarify its relationship with the
Assembly and the other principal organs. Close
cooperation and coordination among all principal
organs is indispensable in order to enable the United
Nations to remain relevant and capable of meeting the
existing, new and emerging threats and challenges.
We call on the Presidents of the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
Security Council to meet regularly to discuss and
coordinate among themselves issues related to the
agendas and programmes of work of the respective
principal organs that they represent. NAM also calls on
the Security Council to take fully into account the
recommendations of the General Assembly on matters
relating to international peace and security, consistent
with Article 11, paragraph 2, of the Charter.
The Movement remains concerned at the lack of
progress in the General Assembly discussions on the
reform of the Security Council. The discussions have
shown that while there has been a convergence of
views on a number of issues, major differences still
exist on many others.
The Movement looks forward to the full
implementation of decision 62/557, adopted by the
General Assembly on 15 September 2008. The
Movement expresses its full support for the Assembly
President in this process, as well as for His Excellency
Mr. Zahir Tanin, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, in his work as Vice-Chair of the Openended Working Group and as chair of the
intergovernmental negotiations on behalf of the
President of the General Assembly.
NAM reiterates the fact that the reform of the
Security Council should not be confined to the
question of equitable representation on and an increase
in the membership of the Security Council. It should
also address substantive issues relating to the Council’s
agenda, working methods and decision-making
processes.
In recent years, the Security Council has been too
quick to threaten or authorize enforcement action in
some cases while being silent and inactive in others.
Furthermore, the Council has increasingly resorted to
Chapter VII of the Charter as an umbrella for
addressing issues that do not necessarily pose an
immediate threat to international peace and security.
Instead of excessive and hasty use of Chapter VII,
efforts should be made to fully utilize the provisions of

08-60760

A/63/PV.53

Chapters VI and VIII for the peaceful settlement of
disputes. Chapter VII should be invoked, as intended,
as a measure of last resort. Unfortunately, in some
cases provisions of Articles 41 and 42 have been too
quickly resorted to when the other options have not
been fully exhausted.
Sanctions imposed by the Security Council
remain an issue of serious concern to the non-aligned
countries. In accordance with the United Nations
Charter, the option of imposing sanctions should be
considered only after all means for peaceful settlement
of disputes under Chapter VI of the Charter have been
exhausted and the short-term and long-term effects of
such sanctions have been analysed in detail. The
objectives of sanctions should be clearly defined and
the period of their imposition should be specified.
Sanctions should be based on tenable legal grounds and
should be lifted as soon as the objectives are achieved.
The Non-Aligned Movement considers that some
improvements have been made in the Council’s
working methods. But they are clearly not enough and
leave much room for improvement. The Council’s open
debate on its working methods, held on 27 August
2008, was a step in the right direction, almost 15 years
after the last such debate on the issue. We sincerely
hope that it will be the first step towards the regular
and comprehensive consideration of that important
issue within the Council, taking fully into account the
views of countries not members of the Council.
Transparency, openness and consistency are key
elements that the Security Council should observe in
all of its activities, approaches and procedures.
Regrettably, the Council has neglected those important
factors on numerous occasions. The Council must
comply with the provisions of Article 31 of the Charter,
which allow any State not a Council member to
participate in discussions on matters affecting it. Rule
48 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure
should be duly observed. Closed meetings and informal
consultations should be kept to a minimum and held on
an exceptional basis, as they were meant to be.
It is the position of NAM that the objectives of
Security Council reform, which should be addressed in
a comprehensive, transparent and balanced manner,
include the following. The Council’s agenda should
reflect the needs and interests of both developing and
developed countries equally, in an objective, rational,
non-selective
and
non-arbitrary
manner. The

08-60760

enlargement of the Council must lead to a more
democratic, more representative, more responsible and
more effective Council. The Council’s rules of
procedure, which have remained provisional for more
than 60 years, should be made official in order to
improve its transparency and accountability. The
decision-making process of the Council should be
democratized, including by limiting and curtailing the
use of the veto with a view to its eventual elimination.
The countries of the Non-Aligned Movement
requests the Security Council to take the following
immediate actions to improve its working methods. It
should increase the number of public meetings, in
accordance with Articles 31 and 32 of the Charter, and
ensure that those meetings provide real opportunities to
take into account the views and contributions of the
entire membership of the United Nations, particularly
of countries not members of the Council whose affairs
the Council is discussing. The State concerned should
be more closely involved in the Council’s discussions
of matters affecting it, in accordance with Article 31 of
the Charter. The Council should ensure that the views
of Member States, obtained through open, thematic
debates, are reflected in relevant resolutions and
presidential statements that the Council adopts after
such debates, instead of the current practice of
adopting resolutions and presidential statements
without reference to such discussions.
The Council should allow briefings by the special
envoys or representatives of the Secretary-General and
of the United Nations Secretariat to be held in public
meetings, except in exceptional circumstances. It
should further strengthen its relationship with the
Secretariat and troop-contributing countries, including
through a sustained, regular and timely interaction. The
Council should establish its subsidiary organs in
accordance with the letter and spirit of the Charter and
should ensure that those organs function in a manner
that provides adequate and timely information on their
activities to the general United Nations membership. In
that context, it should guarantee that countries not
members of the Council have access to subsidiary
organs, including the right to participate in their
discussions, as appropriate.
I would like to conclude by extending our best
wishes for the success of the incoming members of the
Security Council: Austria, Japan, Mexico, Turkey and
Uganda. The willingness of the countries of the
Non-Aligned Movement to engage constructively in

13

A/63/PV.53

consultations and negotiations towards democratizing
the Security Council as an effective organ in
maintaining international peace and security can
always be counted on.
Mr. Delacroix (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Costa Rica, as President of the
Security Council, for his comprehensive introduction
of the Council’s annual report to the General Assembly
(A/63/2). My delegation would also like to thank the
delegation of Viet Nam for its excellent work in
preparing the report. We would like to emphasize the
quality of the report, which we believe meets
legitimate and well-known expectations.
Equally, I would like to set out France’s position
with regard to Security Council reform. The President
of our General Assembly has made it one of the
priorities of his mandate. The support of my delegation
can be counted on to ensure that together we achieve
bold reform of the Security Council, the central
institution for United Nations actions in the area of
peace and security.
First, naturally, France remains committed to
continued improvement of the Security Council’s
working methods through enhanced transparency of the
Council’s work and better interaction with non-member
States, without, of course, questioning its autonomy.
France is also fully committed to reforming the
composition of the Security Council and its
commitment on that point remains unswerving. As the
President of the French Republic said before the
General Assembly on 23 September:
“The world of the twenty-first century
cannot be governed with the institutions of the
twentieth century ... Let today’s major Powers
and the Powers of tomorrow unite to shoulder
together the responsibilities their influence gives
them in world affairs.
“To all those who are hesitant, I wish to say
that enlarging the Security Council and the G-8 is
not just a matter of fairness, it is also a question
of effectiveness. We can no longer wait to turn
the G-8 into the G14 …
“Let us act to make our international
institutions more representative, because if they
are more representative they will be stronger, more
effective and more respected.” (A/63/PV.5, p. 13)

14

How do we proceed after so many years of
discussions? First, we must bear in mind that the
necessary expansion of the Security Council must be
aimed at strengthening its authority and effectiveness.
That is why we are in favour of an expansion of the
Council in its two categories of membership, with
Germany, Brazil, India and Japan as new permanent
members and permanent representation for Africa.
During the many debates on the topic, a great
majority of delegations have expressed clear support
for an expansion of the Security Council in its two
categories of membership — permanent and
non-permanent. That point is important and must not
be forgotten.
The second important point is that we must
acknowledge that, to date, none of the proposals for
final reform has gained the approval of two thirds of
the Member States of the General Assembly, a legal
requirement well known to all. That is why the idea of
interim reform to overcome the current impediments is
finding growing support. As is known, France and the
United Kingdom have expressed their readiness to
consider an interim solution that, without prejudice to
the end result, would enable us to move forward.
Specifically, we are open to considering an
interim solution that could provide for a new category
of seats with a longer mandate than that of the current
elected members, which would be renewable. At the
end of the initial phase, it could be decided to make
those seats permanent. That option should duly be
taken into account as part of the intergovernmental
negotiations, in accordance with paragraph (e) of
decision 62/577 of 15 September.
In general, my delegation believes that we should
promptly and fully consider the specific options within
the framework of the upcoming intergovernmental
negotiations. We believe that the decision adopted by
the General Assembly on 15 September is clear and
important.
We should honour the agreement reached on that
occasion by consensus by the Member States. Its
implementation will stand as a test of the credibility
and democracy of our Assembly, which we all value.
Together, we have taken the decision to set out the
framework for our work, the plenary of the General
Assembly, to specify the deadline for opening
intergovernmental
negotiations
no
later
than

08-60760

A/63/PV.53

28 February 2009, and to define the basis for the
negotiations in line with the work conducted thus far.
France will participate in discussions within the
framework of the Open-ended Working Group, which
has a legitimate place within our joint efforts. At the
same time, it is understood that the Working Group
cannot stand as a precondition and cannot impose
preconditions on the opening of intergovernmental
negotiations, and that conditions may not be imposed,
which would run counter to the General Assembly
decision of 15 September.
Only in a climate of trust can we progress jointly
and, in that spirit, we support the action of the
President of our Assembly. Moreover, we welcome the
mandate that he has entrusted to us and we wish him
every success. We count on his full involvement to
provide the necessary drive for our work. Security
Council reform is more necessary than ever. Thus,
together we must actively continue our efforts by
avoiding any step that would lead to procrastination or
division within the General Assembly on fundamental
reform of the United Nations. Thus, everyone must
assume their responsibilities. Let us not forget that
reform of the Security Council requires the political
commitment of the Member States at the highest level.
I have just reiterated our own commitment, and I
cherish the hope that it will be shared by the greatest
number of Members possible so as to achieve effective
reform.
Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to express our gratitude to the Ambassador
of Costa Rica for introducing the report of the Security
Council to the General Assembly (A/63/2) covering the
period of August 2007 to July 2008. My delegation
also wishes to associate itself with the statement made
by the Ambassador of Cuba on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries.
Following up that work requires the ongoing
attention of the Member States. Therefore, it is
appropriate that the Council retain and further the
practice of organizing briefing sessions so that
non-member countries may be aware of the work of the
Council and its subsidiary bodies. More frequent
presentations of special reports by the Security Council
would contribute to that goal.
With regard to the content of the report presented
on this occasion, we would like to highlight the work
of the delegation of Viet Nam, as President of the

08-60760

Council in July 2008, in drawing up the introduction to
the document, which outlines the Council’s work. We
also welcome the initiative of that delegation to inform
non-Council member States on the process of preparing
the annual report to the General Assembly. We urge
that this becomes a regular practice.
Colombia underscores how important it is that the
report of the Security Council to the General Assembly
not be a mere sequence of facts, but include elements
of qualitative and analytical information, such as the
criteria used by the Council in taking decisions. My
delegation observes with interest the increase in
interaction between countries presiding the Security
Council and other member States. The briefing
sessions at the beginning of every month, in addition to
providing indispensable information for keeping
abreast of the issues included in the monthly
programme of work of the Council, provide an
opportunity to establish a dialogue and express
concerns to the country in the presidency.
We are at a moment of great importance in the
history of our Organization. After several years of
debate, next February, pursuant to decision 62/557
adopted by this Assembly, we will launch a process of
intergovernmental negotiations to reform the Security
Council. We have reached this point thanks to the
constant work of the Open-ended Working Group on
the Question of Equitable Representation on and
Increase in the Membership of the Security Council
and Other Matters Related to the Security Council and
that of the Presidents of the General Assembly who
have chaired that Group. We must take this opportunity
to pursue progress, building on what has already been
achieved. The reform process has become imperative in
order to correct the inequities and inefficiencies
affecting the workings of the Council.
We must strive for a comprehensive reform to
make the Council a more democratic, representative,
transparent, efficient and accountable organ. In its
current configuration, the Council does not respond to
today’s realities. Thus, the reform should take into
account not only an increase in the membership and
composition of the Council, but also an improvement
in its working methods.
Colombia believes that only the category of
non-permanent members should see an increase in
numbers. Such a reform would be in accordance with
the purpose of effectively turning the Council into a

15

A/63/PV.53

more democratic, representative and transparent organ.
Retaining permanent membership and the related
privileges that it confers on a few countries would be
to the detriment of the participation of small and
medium-sized States in the Council. It would also
undermine their ability to influence the decisions and
actions of the Council. It is not consistent to preach
democratization of the Council while extending
privileges to a few States.
Colombia supports a balanced and fair reform of
the Council. We envision a Council that is more
equitable in terms of geographical representation, and
in which all States, large, medium or small, and
particularly those whose interests and hopes have been
underrepresented, enjoy the same chances of becoming
members of that organ.
My delegation believes that it is of paramount
importance to continue improving the methods of work
of the Council. Any progress in that area must be
aimed at greater transparency and more participation
by member States in the activities and decisions of the
Council. The Council should hold more frequent open
meetings, thus allowing greater access to non-member
States, particularly at meetings dealing with issues that
affect such States directly. A clear and predictable
decision-making process is also essential to ensuring
the transparency and legitimacy of the actions of the
Security Council.
Colombia believes that the Council should be
able to avail itself of more democratic decision-making
mechanisms. My country reiterates its historic
opposition to the veto and believes that any reform of
the Council would be incomplete without a thorough
examination of options to curtail its use with a view to
eventually abolishing it. In that regard, an initial option
would be restricting its use to situations pertaining to
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter. Another
possibility would be to establish a mechanism to
reduce or neutralize the use of the veto or to increase
the threshold required for it to take effect.
The coming weeks will be of great importance for
the success of the intergovernmental process to start in
February 2009. In this context, we welcome the
decision taken yesterday to retain the functions of the
Open-ended Working Group. This is consistent with
the letter and the spirit of decision 62/557.
If such processes are to be successful, they must
be open and inclusive. If our aim is to democratize the

16

Council, we must also employ democratic mechanisms
in the reform process. In that spirit, the Open-ended
Working Group must undertake a detailed analysis,
including the goals of the reform, its guiding principles
and the terms or procedures to be applied. It must also
include an agreement on the rules for negotiations,
guaranteeing open, transparent and participatory
discussions. At the conclusion of the work undertaken
by the Working Group during this preparatory phase,
we believe that it would be important for the General
Assembly to adopt a document to serve as a guideline
for our work.
Lastly, Colombia will continue to promote a
reform of the Security Council that achieves a Council
that responds to the interests and hopes of the various
countries and regions of the world in an equitable
fashion. Members can rest assured of our continued
participation and support in achieving this goal.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): Allow me to start by
expressing my delegation’s gratitude for the President’s
initiative to include the reform of the Security Council
among the six main priorities of his presidency of the
General Assembly at its sixty-third session and within
his initiative for the democratization of the United
Nations, in particular the Security Council. I would
like to also express my deep appreciation to Mr. Srgjan
Kerim, President of the General Assembly at its
sixty-second session, for his concerted efforts in
pushing forward this important issue, which constitutes
an integral part of the comprehensive reform of the
United Nations.
Allow me to also extend our sincere thanks to the
representatives of Bangladesh, Chile, Djibouti and
Portugal for their tremendous efforts in their capacity
as the vice-chairpersons of the Open-ended Working
Group on the Question of Equitable Representation on
and Increase in the Membership of the Security
Council and Other Matters Related to the Security
Council during the previous session of the General
Assembly.
As my delegation stated during our work in the
Open-ended Working Group and our consecutive
discussions of this agenda item in the General
Assembly, United Nations reform will not be complete
without achieving Security Council reform in both the
enlargement of its membership and the reform of its
working methods. Such a reform should be aimed at
rapidly addressing the serious historical injustices

08-60760

A/63/PV.53

committed against Africa, due to the lack of its
representation in the permanent membership category
of the Security Council, and the negative impact of the
continuation of this situation on the ability of the
Council to deal effectively with many of the conflict
situations in the African continent.
In this regard, I would like to associate my
remarks with the remarks made by the Permanent
Representative of Mauritius, Chair of the African
Group for the month of November, stressing the
African common position, as outlined in the Ezulwini
Consensus and the Sirte Declaration, calling for no less
than two permanent seats, with all the prerogatives and
privileges of permanent membership, including the
right to veto, and for two additional non-permanent
seats.
There is no doubt that General Assembly decision
62/557, adopted without a vote on 15 September 2008
upon the recommendation of the Open-ended Working
Group, constituted a breakthrough that was eagerly
awaited by Africa and many other stakeholders — the
agreement to start the intergovernmental negotiations
on this important issue during the sixty-third session of
the General Assembly. In order to ensure the success of
those intergovernmental negotiations, all of us must
abide by the letter and spirit of the delicate agreement
reached in the decision through difficult negotiations
on all procedural and substantive aspects of dealing
with the issue during the current session.
Speaking of procedural aspects, and specifically
of the timelines indicated in the decision, I am
confident that we all still remember those long
discussions on how to establish the correct balance
between the competence of the Open-ended Working
Group vis-à-vis the competence of the General
Assembly in dealing with the intergovernmental
negotiations with a view to ensuring their success. The
agreement on a timeline, as reflected in paragraphs (c)
and (d) of the decision, did not come about in a
vacuum. It came as a result of consultations on an
initial proposal to start intergovernmental negotiations
not later than the end of December 2008, which was
amended to start those negotiations not later than the
end of April 2009, until we settled on the current
formulation of starting the negotiations not later than
28 February 2009. This indicates that timing in itself
was an essential and integral factor in achieving this
important result.

08-60760

The sequence of the paragraphs was another
factor. Paragraph (c) was initially proposed as
paragraph (f), the second to last paragraph of the draft
decision, and was intentionally moved through
negotiations to become (c), just before paragraph (d),
which deals with the intergovernmental negotiations, in
clear sequencing that reflects the procedural
precedence of the work of the Open-ended Working
Group in preparation for the intergovernmental
negotiations.
From a substantive point of view, this agreement
on a specific timeline was closely linked to another
agreement on the substantive side, as reflected in
paragraph (c) of the decision, stating that the Openended Working Group would continue to address the
framework and modalities in order to — and I stress
this — prepare and facilitate the intergovernmental
negotiations, and that the Chairman of the Open-ended
Working Group would present the results of these
consultations to an informal plenary meeting of the
General Assembly no later than 1 February 2009.
So we all agreed that the work of the Open-ended
Working Group on the framework and modalities is
essential
to
preparing
and
facilitating
our
intergovernmental negotiations. Therefore, we do not
see the need to enter again into a procedural debate on
whether intergovernmental negotiations could start in
parallel with the work of the Open-ended Working
Group or not. Such a debate would only cast doubts on
the spirit of good faith and mutual respect that we
agreed to adopt as a basis for our work in paragraph (d)
of the decision and in the United Nations work at large.
To the contrary, we should allow the Open-ended
Working Group all the time it needs to consider the
many issues related to the framework and modalities
and to present its Chairman’s report before the end of
January 2009.
Therefore, we congratulate the President of the
General Assembly for his wise decision to cancel the
proposed meeting of the informal plenary of the
General Assembly on this issue and to allow full
opportunity to the Open-ended Working Group to
undertake its responsibilities properly.
Turning to the conduct of the intergovernmental
negotiations, the provisions of paragraph (d) are very
clear. They are:
“to commence intergovernmental negotiations in
informal plenary of the General Assembly during

17

A/63/PV.53

the sixty-third session … based on proposals by
Member States”.
I would emphasize that last part: “based on
proposals by Member States”. We all agreed that the
intergovernmental negotiations cannot start unless a
proposal is submitted by a Member State — or a group
of Member States, if they so wish — in clear exercise
of national ownership and full governmental
responsibility for the proposals, which should reflect
an exclusively governmental point of view, thus
making the negotiations truly intergovernmental. This
clearly excludes the possibility of a group of
representatives presenting any proposals in their
personal capacity, as has happened in the past, or of the
President of the General Assembly or any of his
facilitators or vice-presidents presenting a proposal, in
full recognition of the need to preserve their neutrality
and impartiality and to prevent the utilization of their
high offices to advance the positions of one
stakeholder or another.
From Egypt’s point of view, there are many
issues that require consideration in the Open-ended
Working Group in order to ensure success in the
intergovernmental negotiations. Those include the
conditions required to reach a solution that can garner
the widest possible political acceptance by Member
States, as required in paragraph (d) of the decision,
duly taking into account that the language used in that
paragraph is only a part of a wider agreement reflected
in paragraph 4 of the section entitled “Notions on the
way forward” of the report of the Open-ended Working
Group on its work during the sixty-first session
(A/61/47(Supp)). That report was approved in its
entirety without a vote, so there was agreement and
consensus on that part of the report.
We also considered the relation between this
provision and the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly that could allow the adoption of a resolution
on an issue of such seriousness and importance as the
reform of the Security Council by only a two-thirds
majority, thus excluding an important third of the
membership of the Organization. One third of the
membership could well exceed the membership of a
complete regional group, such as the African Group or
even the European continent.
Other issues that require consideration in the
Open-ended Working Group is how to manage the
negotiations in the informal plenary meeting, when to

18

move from the informal plenary meeting to the formal
plenary meeting, and what the rules are that would
govern such a move.
Furthermore, the Open-ended Working Group
should consider the role it will play in full
implementation of paragraph (f) of the decision to help
achieve general agreement among Member States in
the consideration of all issues relevant to the question
in a manner that could help the intergovernmental
negotiations achieve their objectives. Those objectives
include ensuring that the results of our work will meet
the acceptance that would ensure easy ratification of
the required amendments to the Charter.
Improving the working methods of the Security
Council is also a matter of paramount importance. We
have to continue working on implementing what was
agreed upon in the World Summit Outcome to make
the Council more efficient, transparent and accountable
and to further enhance its effectiveness and the
legitimacy and implementation of its decisions.
Africa accords the subject of improving the
working methods of the Security Council as much
importance as the enlargement of the Council and is
certain that both pillars of the reform of the Council
are indispensable to achieving the reform of the
Security Council. This was reflected in the decision on
the topic adopted by the African Union Summit in
Sharm el-Sheikh in July 2008, when African leaders
mandated a Committee of Ten to address all reform
issues of the United Nations system and present a
progress report to the next summit, to be held in Addis
Ababa in February 2009.
There has undoubtedly been some improvement
in the working methods of the Council, but these
improvements are still not enough. Reform of the
Security Council’s working methods is inevitable and
should be based on the need to achieve real balance in
power between members of the Council, particularly
between the permanent and non-permanent members.
The time has also come for agreement on permanent
rules of procedure to replace the current provisional
rules of procedure that have been in force for more
than 60 years.
We fully associate ourselves with the statement
by the representative of Cuba, who spoke on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM). In particular, he
stated that the starting point in reforming the methods
of the Council is that the Council should observe the

08-60760

A/63/PV.53

institutional balance laid down in the Charter between
the principal organs and should refrain from exceeding
the mandates entrusted to it under the Charter. In this
regard, the Council should cease encroaching on the
competence of other principal organs of the
Organization, particularly the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council.
Moreover, Egypt reiterates its support for the
initiative of the Small Five Group aimed at improving
the working methods of the Security Council. This
initiative constitutes an appropriate base for further
efforts seeking to improve the working methods of the
Council, particularly by restricting the use of the right
of veto in cases of genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity, until we reach the stage in which this
veto right can be finally abolished. However, until the
veto is eliminated, we reiterate that it should be
granted to all permanent members joining the Security
Council within an expansion plan.
Earlier proposals for improving the working
methods of the Security Council were submitted by the
Non-Aligned Movement when Egypt was a member of
the Security Council in 1996 and 1997. Moreover, the
NAM Summit in Havana mandated the Permanent
Representatives of the NAM countries in New York to
work on a General Assembly draft resolution giving the
Assembly the right to interfere in cases where the
Security Council fails to take action despite a threat to
peace and security owing to a lack of unanimity among
its permanent membership. This comes in conjunction
with the mandate given to the African Permanent
Representatives by the African leaders at the Sharm
el-Sheikh Summit concerning the process of Security
Council reform, and that is why Africa insists on
having the veto right as one of the main elements of the
reform of the Security Council.
In this regard, I stress that improvement in the
working methods of the Security Council should not
only be considered by the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, but
also by the general membership of the Organization.
As we consider the report of the Security Council
to the General Assembly, I would like to thank the
Permanent Representative of Costa Rica for having
presented the report. Last year, Egypt, like many other
delegations, regretted that the annual report of the
Security Council lacked analytical depth and had
limited value added for the membership at large.

08-60760

Examining this year’s report, we note that it contains
merely a comprehensive overview of the Council’s
meetings, activities and decisions. The enumeration of
the meetings and documentation in the report reflects
the major role undertaken by the Council in various
fields,
namely,
peacekeeping,
peacebuilding,
maintaining international peace and security, and so
forth. However, we continue to believe that the report
could better reflect the Council’s challenges,
assessments and rationale during the reporting period.
In our view, the report should be more
explanatory as regards the positions taken on the
various issues being dealt with in the Council,
including the reasons behind the failure or inability of
the Council to take decisive action in some situations,
particularly those related to the maintenance of
international peace and security, and the reasons
behind the different reactions on the part of the
Council, whether they be resolutions, presidential
statements, press releases or reports, as well as the
criteria followed and the arguments used by the
Council to select its reaction in each case.
In conclusion, I am confident that, under the able
guidance of the General Assembly President and VicePresident Tanin, we will reach an agreement on the
reform and expansion of the Security Council, built on
strengthening the principles of justice and equality in
rights and obligations, which would enable the
Security Council to become a platform for democracy
and transparency in dealing with the cases of Member
States.
Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): We welcome the
convening of this joint debate on the two related
important issues.
The annual Security Council report (A/63/2),
which was introduced by His Excellency Ambassador
Jorge Urbina, Permanent Representative of Costa Rica,
in his capacity as President of the Security Council for
the month of November, is an important component of
the work of the Council. We thank Ambassador Urbina
for his presentation of the report.
My delegation also commends the delegation of
Viet Nam, which held the presidency of the Council
during the month of July, on the consultations
conducted with Member States during the preparation
of the report, and we hope that this will continue to
remain the practice in the future.

19

A/63/PV.53

The report is intended to fulfil the obligations
stipulated under Article 24, paragraph 3, and Article
15, paragraph 1, of the Charter and forms part of the
Council’s commitment to promoting transparency and
accountability.
The report illustrates a diverse agenda for the
Council. During the period under review, the Council
adopted 58 resolutions and 50 presidential statements.
This prolific work is commendable.
We recognize, however, the continued need for a
more comprehensive and analytical report. Such a
report could facilitate a better and more in-depth
understanding of the context, dynamics and nature of
the issues that fall under the purview of the Security
Council. It would also be useful for United Nations
Members for the report also to include the status of the
implementation of the Security Council’s decisions.
The urgent need for reform of the Security
Council is beyond doubt. The Assembly’s Open-ended
Working Group has been the primary vehicle for
promoting that objective. Various permutations of
Security Council reform have been identified and
debated. Not least, the modalities for the discussion of
such reform have been endlessly deliberated. So much
so that there is very little that is new when it comes to
reform proposals. However, today, we stand at a
potentially crucial juncture.
By next February, an intergovernmental
negotiation in an informal General Assembly plenary is
set to begin, 45 years since the last reform of the
Council in 1963. In sharp contrast, the family of
nations is today marked by greater diversity and
pluralism. This and the attendant forces of
globalization mean that the Security Council is today
grappling with issues far more complex than ever
before — issues that test a common understanding of
what constitutes a threat to international peace and
security — issues that demand a Security Council
speaking with a single voice — and issues that are so
entwined and multifaceted that they require innovative
solutions other than the tried and tested, including the
application of “soft power”.
In addressing such challenges, Indonesia is
convinced of the efficacy of the democratic response.
At the national level, such a response has placed
Indonesia in a better position to deal with the myriad
challenges it faces as a nation. At the global level, a
democratic response, in the form of a reformed

20

Security Council, offers the promise of a Council able
to act truly on behalf of a United Nations, with
legitimacy and effectiveness.
No single country can work alone and it is
increasingly evident that even the most powerful ones
find that comprehensive solutions require that they
work closely with other nations. There is, thus, a need
for substantive change in the composition of the
Council. This would entail additional members, either
both permanent and non-permanent, or limited only to
additional non-permanent members.
What is most important is that the Security
Council must be made more representative of the
contemporary world, its geographic regions and the
rich diversity of its constituencies.
The arguments for a democratic reform of the
Security Council are compelling. All of us within this
Hall subscribe to the importance of Security Council
reform, yet, as the years of the reform process attest, it
is one thing to agree on the need for reform, and
another to agree on the nature of the reform. The list of
proposals is extensive and varied, each with its own
strong proponents pushing for acceptance, even if they
push United Nations unity to a breaking point, not least
of which are proposals which, rather conveniently,
appear to fit the aspirations of their advocates to
Council membership.
Indonesia believes that to yield tangible results,
we must strive to emphasize the collective interests of
Member States, rather than engage in an endless
mutually cancelling pursuit of individual national
interests. After years of debate within the Open-ended
Working Group, it may be timely to accentuate
consensus, where once there was division — to build
bridges. We must seek the common elements in the
various proposals that have been offered and recognize
areas where there may be convergence of views. We
should appreciate parties which have exercised
restraint in promoting their own national aspirations,
choosing instead to emphasize the collective interest in
reform of the Security Council.
A perfect solution may be beyond us. However, it
is essential that we strive for the widest political
acceptance possible. Without a real sense of ownership
and representation by Member States, the reform of
this eminent organ will hardly achieve its stated
objectives.

08-60760

A/63/PV.53

My delegation is committed to reform of the
Security Council. It wishes to position itself as part of
the solution to the reform process and not to the
contrary. Agreement must first be obtained on a
reformed Security Council and how a reformed
Council would be constituted. The States that are to
serve on such a reformed Council — that is for a later
decision, democratically decided.
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): First of all,
on behalf of the Vietnamese delegation, let me express
our deepest thanks to His Excellency Ambassador
Jorge Urbina, the Permanent Representative of Costa
Rica and President of the Security Council for
November, for presenting to the General Assembly the
report on the Council’s activities (A/63/2).
My delegation wishes to align itself with the
statement made by the representative of Cuba on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement on two important
agenda items, relating to the report of the Security
Council and the question of equitable representation on
and increase in the membership of the Security Council
and related matters.
It is a fact that the workload of the Security
Council is increasing every year. This means that
international peace and security remain challenged and
much is required of the Council to discharge its
responsibilities. From a body that formerly met only a
few times a month, the Council has become a body that
holds hundreds of meetings a year.
During the period from August 2007 to July
2008, the Council held 219 formal meetings and
177 consultations of the whole. On the ground, in
addition to 17 operating missions mandated by the
Security Council, the deployment of other
peacekeeping operations, particularly in Africa, is
increasing in order, to strengthen local peacebuilding
efforts.
While conflicts and deadly violence continue to
take place in Iraq, Afghanistan, the occupied
Palestinian territories and other regions, not to mention
the outbreak of new ones in the Balkans and the
Caucasus, United Nations-led peacemaking efforts,
including
preventive
diplomacy
and
conflict
prevention, have to some extent yielded encouraging
tangible outcomes, helping to strengthen peace and
stability in many countries in various regions of the
world.

08-60760

Against this backdrop, we take note of the efforts
made by the Security Council as well as the Secretariat
to fulfil their work, especially in facilitating the
implementation of the measures stated in the 19 July
2006 note of the President of the Council (S/2006/507).
As an advocate of the reforms which would increase
the efficiency, effectiveness, transparency and
interaction of the United Nations system, including the
Security Council, we are encouraged by the positive
developments to this end, particularly a growing trend
towards transparency with an unprecedentedly large
number of open meetings held by the Council and,
more than ever before, an active participation by
non-member States in the Council’s work.
In this regard, Viet Nam welcomes the open
debate the Security Council held on 27 August 2008 to
examine how to improve its working methods, as well
as to review efforts to intensify the Council’s
consultations with the broader United Nations
membership in its work, including the drafting of its
annual report to the General Assembly.
We are fully convinced that more should be done
to make the Council further accountable for its actions,
as expected by the large membership of the United
Nations. As the key part of the renewal of the United
Nations system, the reform of the Council should be
further expedited, both in terms of its representation
and working methods.
We would like to reiterate our position that a
modern Security Council must be more representative
and democratic with an enlargement in both permanent
and non-permanent categories of membership. At the
same time, a greater focus should be placed on
improving the Council’s agenda, working methods and
decision-making process. We wish to underline the
view of the Non-Aligned Movement that transparency,
openness and consistency are key elements that the
Council should observe.
To this end, we are in favour of creating more
opportunities for United Nations members to express
their views and proposals on issues of which the
Council is seized. Frequent consultations with
concerned parties would also do much to help ensure
the greatest support for the Council.
However, transparency must not be exercised at
the expense of overlapping the work of the Council
with that of other bodies such as the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council, the United Nations

21

A/63/PV.53

Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and other agencies. This would weaken needed efforts
at coordination. To improve its efficiency, besides
pursuing measures to streamline its work, the Council
should avoid involvement in issues which do not fall
within the purview of its mandate as stipulated by the
Charter of the United Nations and should devote more
effort to facilitating dialogue and mediation rather than
abusing sanctions by invoking Chapter VII of the
Charter.
It is high time for Member States to begin
genuine negotiations on the reform of the Security
Council. In support of decision 62/557, adopted by the
General Assembly on 15 September, my delegation
welcomes the determination of the Assembly President
to push ahead the process of Security Council reform at
the current session. We are convinced that under the
President’s wise leadership, the United Nations will
reap fruitful outcomes on the path ahead. We also
extend our support to His Excellency Mr. Zahir Tanin,
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, as Chair of
the intergovernmental negotiations. We are looking
forward to working closely with other members of the
United Nations in this process.
Finally, I should like to take this opportunity to
express our most profound gratitude for the support of
Member States that we enjoyed in carrying out our
duties as President of the Security Council during the
month of July, in particular in the drafting of the
current report of the Council.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): At the outset, I would like to
thank the President of the General Assembly, for
convening today’s plenary meeting to discuss the
report of the Security Council and Security Council
reform. I would also like to extend my appreciation to
Ambassador Jorge Urbina of Costa Rica for
introducing the report in his capacity as President of
the Council for November.
I should like to start with Security Council
reform. In order to enhance the functioning,
effectiveness and credibility of the Council, we must
urgently reform its composition to reflect today’s
world, not the world of yesterday, and to address
effectively the needs of the twenty-first century. To
achieve that goal, it is essential that those countries
which bear major responsibility in the implementation
of the decisions of the Security Council for
international peace and security should occupy

22

permanent seats on the Council. I would like to stress
that the Security Council must be reformed through the
expansion of both the permanent and non-permanent
categories. Only through such reform will the Council
become more representative, effective and credible.
The genuine desire of Member States to realize
meaningful reform of the Security Council was
manifested in the unanimous adoption of decision
62/557 by the General Assembly on 15 September. I
welcome this important and historic decision to
advance the reform process from the stage of
consultations that had continued for 15 years in the
Open-ended Working Group to the stage of
intergovernmental negotiations at the informal plenary
of the General Assembly. That decision has clearly
determined the course of action on how the
negotiations will be launched and organized. In line
with this decision, we should proceed speedily to
intergovernmental negotiations. Japan will work
actively and constructively towards achieving
meaningful reform at the earliest possible date. This
will garner the widest possible political acceptance.
The functioning of the Security Council should
also be improved by enhancing its transparency and
accountability.
The quality of the Security Council’s report this
year is vitally important. Its work during the reporting
period was occupied predominantly by issues in Africa.
The introduction of the report provides us with a
comprehensive overview of the Council’s work. The
report contains descriptions of Council meetings with
the core message of each briefing and the reaction of
its members. With more detailed information in the
introduction, we appreciate the effort which has been
made to present a fair reflection of the Council’s work
and to strike a balance between analysis and
information. The report is also candid about what the
Council was not able to achieve. It is important that it
effectively address emerging risks and threats to
international peace and security and speak in one voice
in such situations.
One of the new developments during the
reporting period is the interaction between the Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission. As the
Commission began its substantive work, its
relationship with the Council has evolved and practices
have been established, such as regular communication
between the President of the Council and the Chair of

08-60760

A/63/PV.53

the Peacebuilding Commission, with the participation
of the chairs of the country-specific configurations in
the relevant Council meetings. Japan welcomes the
further development of such practices and of the
relationship with the Peacebuilding Commission into a
more concrete and substantial collaboration to support
the work of the Council.
Another noteworthy effort was the organization
of the informal meeting on the draft report of the
Council before the report was finalized. It was
particularly useful for the Member States to reflect on
matters of interest in the process of the preparation of
the report of the Security Council. I understand that
this was the first time this kind of consultation with the
wider membership took place in the past decade. We
are very grateful to Ambassador Minh of Viet Nam for
proactively addressing the concerns expressed earlier
by Member States in the annual debate of the General
Assembly. For further progress, I would like to suggest
that the overview part of the introduction elaborate
briefly on the changing trends and significant events in
the work of the Council, any improvement in the
working methods and discussions on cross-cutting
operational and strategic issues in the Council.
Improving the working methods of the Council
continues to be a primary concern for both the Council
and the General Assembly. The adoption of the note by
the President, contained in document S/2006/507,
which my delegation had played a role in preparing,
helped to make Council members aware of the
responsibility that membership entails. We saw some
improvements in this regard. The types of meeting
formats have been clarified and the number of public
meetings has been substantially increased, in particular
those with the participation of the countries directly
concerned. Other efforts have also contributed to
increased accessibility of timely information for
non-Council members.
The reports of the Secretary-General have
become more concise and we have noted efforts to
clearly indicate observations, recommendations and
long-term strategies, as appropriate. For the purpose of
substantive discussion in the Security Council, the
timely distribution of the report is critically important.
While these improvements are welcome, some of
the recommendations contained in the note have not
yet been sufficiently implemented. The open debate of
the Council on 28 August illustrated the achievements

08-60760

and shortfalls over the years. We hope the Council will
undertake follow-up efforts to further improve its
working methods.
In conclusion, Japan, which is soon to become a
member of the Council, will make every effort to
enhance the accountability and transparency of the
Security Council, as well as to advance the process of
Security Council reform.
Mr. Wolff (United States of America): On behalf
of the United States, I would like to thank the President
of the General Assembly for helping the Assembly
engage in a constructive dialogue on this important
issue. I would also like to thank the President of the
Security Council, Ambassador Jorge Urbina of Costa
Rica, for his remarks as President, introducing the
annual report of the Council. This report, which was
capably drafted by the Vietnamese delegation, to whom
we convey our gratitude, provides Member States with
a transparent and comprehensive review of the
Council’s intensive work.
As called for in decision 62/557, we look forward
to continuing discussions in the Open-ended Working
Group between now and the end of January so that all
Member States can prepare the path forward for the
launch of intergovernmental negotiations on Security
Council expansion no later than 28 February 2009.
The United States is open to a modest expansion
of the Security Council. Only an expansion of
relatively small size will preserve the Council’s ability
to respond quickly, effectively and credibly to threats
to international peace and security. That ability is
essential for the Council to discharge its primary
responsibility under the Charter for the maintenance of
international peace and security, and it must guide our
discussions on any Council expansion.
The United States believes that qualified
candidates for Security Council permanent membership
must have demonstrated their ability to act as
responsible stakeholders in addressing global, not just
local or regional, challenges to peace and security.
They must maintain strong commitments to democracy,
human rights and non-proliferation and provide
substantial peacekeeping or financial contributions to
the United Nations. As we have stated in the past, we
believe Japan is qualified for permanent membership
on those grounds, and we are willing to consider other
nations as well.

23

A/63/PV.53

Although the Charter is clear on the two-thirds
requirement for amendment of the Charter, we continue
to believe that it is politically wise and important to
achieve the broadest possible support for Council
expansion to ensure that no significant portion of the
membership is alienated by the result and that it
constitutes an improvement over the status quo. For
that reason, we are pleased that decision
62/557 includes the political goal of a solution that can
garner the widest possible political acceptance by
Member States. Achieving the widest possible political
acceptance will greatly ease the ratification process by
Member States, including by all of the permanent
members of the Council.
The United States strongly believes that any
reform of the Security Council must be undertaken in a
manner consistent with the provisions of the Charter
and as part of a comprehensive effort to enhance the
effectiveness of the entire United Nations system,
including areas that are clearly in much greater need of
reform than the Security Council. A comprehensive
package must include reforms in other areas, such as
General Assembly financing and decision-making. We
have yet to see significant movement on those issues,
and we urge that an accelerated parallel process be
started that can accompany our efforts related to the
Security Council.
We look forward to hearing the views of other
Member States and hope that we can all work together
in a collaborative and collegial spirit to move forward
to achieving our shared goal of United Nations reform.
Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): Pakistan welcomes the
practice of holding this joint debate on two interrelated
and important items on the Assembly’s agenda. To
begin, Sir, let me, through you, congratulate President
d’Escoto Brockmann on assuming the Chair and thank
him for all his efforts in bringing this matter before the
membership of the Assembly. Let me also thank
Ambassador Urbina of Costa Rica for presenting the
Council’s annual report, and Ambassador Le Luong
Minh of Viet Nam for consulting the general
membership in July on the draft report. Our
appreciation also goes to Belgium and the S-5
countries for the initiative to hold an open debate on
working methods in the Security Council in August.
With responsibility comes accountability. This
debate is, first and foremost, a reaffirmation of
accountability of the Security Council to the general

24

membership of the United Nations. The purpose of this
accountability is an objective assessment of the
Council’s performance in carrying out its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, a responsibility conferred on it by
the Member States sitting here and on whose behalf the
Council acts.
Not only the Security Council, but also other
organs of the United Nations are required to submit
reports to the General Assembly for its consideration.
These Charter provisions are but tools for
accountability. But they must not be a once-a-year
phenomenon. In the case of the Security Council, the
Charter also envisaged special reports to the General
Assembly, which, of course, we have not had the
privilege of receiving.
Since the Security Council is in continuous
session, the exercise of accountability, we believe, is
also continuous. This is the reality with which the
Council needs to come to terms. Business as usual will
continue to erode the Council’s credibility and
legitimacy. That is also the crux of the effort to reform
the Council.
Despite its shortcomings, the Council is doing
important work in promoting peace and stability in
various parts of the world, and Pakistan has made a
tangible contribution to those efforts for the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
Council needs to do more to prevent conflict in the first
place. It needs to devise and implement comprehensive
strategies and should work more closely with other
United Nations bodies, including, specifically, this
Assembly and the Peacebuilding Commission.
It is, however, the Council’s poor record in the
handling of inter-State conflicts that is the object of
most criticism and the reason for the loss of credibility.
The Council does not deal directly with some of the
major conflicts and threats to international peace,
security and harmony. Some major issues remain
unsolved due to non-implementation of Security
Council resolutions, such as the Palestinian and the
Jammu and Kashmir issues. In the conflicts in the
Middle East, the Council’s role has been sidelined and
viewed mostly as ineffective and partisan. If the
Council were to do its job, it would have no time to
even think of encroaching on mandates and
responsibilities of other United Nations organs.

08-60760

A/63/PV.53

Improvement in the Council’s working methods
and more transparent and democratic decision-making
are long-standing legitimate demands of the entire
membership of the United Nations. Charter provisions,
such as those in Articles 11, 15, 24, 31 and 32, and rule
48 of the provisional rules of procedure, are not being
implemented.
Determination of the Council’s agenda depends to
a large extent on the positions and priorities of the
permanent members and major powers. There is
inaction and delay in the Council, even in the face of
the most obvious acts of aggression and breaches of
peace. On the other hand, sometimes there is proaction,
even interference, in the internal affairs of sovereign
States. The Council remains a closed club, controlled
and orchestrated by the few.
Most of the problems of the Council that we seek
to redress through reform are related to the permanent
members. I ask delegates here today, will not
increasing the number of individual permanent
members render the Council more ineffective, as the
interests of a greater number of permanent members
would then need to be reconciled? I ask whether we
can address these problems by enlarging the coterie of
the few or by strengthening the democratic
representation, the role and the influence of the general
membership in the Security Council. Logically, the
latter is the right and the only feasible approach. The
majority of the membership should support this
approach, even though some have been made to believe
otherwise and have been asked to state their case in the
name of Council reform. We believe the views of two
specific groups are inimical and opposed to genuine
reform as envisaged by the Member States.

to join the same club. It is obvious that the
compromises and bargains involved in this grand game
will achieve anything but reform for the Security
Council. Indeed, it may be inferred that the ambition of
this group is in reality to block any substantial reform
of the Council.
But others have moved on and caused their
positions to evolve. Expansion in non-permanent seats,
as we all know, is an option supported by all Member
States and groups. That reform is among the few
elements on which there is agreement, as noted by the
Task Force. The non-permanent seats provide the
maximum and the most equitable opportunities for all
Member States for representation on the Council.
Many Member States have also shown interest and
flexibility in exploring new ideas, including
intermediate options involving re-election and longer
terms than the regular two-year terms.
However, an approach which is truly reflective of
new realities and which carries strong potential in the
context of Security Council reform is regional
representation. The Arab States for example call for a
permanent Arab representation in any future expansion
of the Council. The Organization of the Islamic
Conference (OIC) has demanded that any reform of the
Council must ensure adequate representation of its
member States.

The first group is that of the permanent members
of the Council who do not want genuine reform and
who believe in the status quo. In particular, they do not
want to reform the use of the veto, which over six
decades has been used for their interests.

Then we have the African position on regional
representation. While the Group of Four (G-4)
countries have self-selected themselves, I congratulate
the African Union in its responsible act for the
selection of Africa’s representatives in the Council.
The members of the G-4 say that they support the
African position, but why then are they not willing to
accept the same for their own regions? There, the
members of the G-4 are asking for permanent seats to
be allocated to the regions but not for the regions.
Simply put, they want to have seats in the name of the
regions but then occupy those seats themselves.

The second group is comprised of a handful
of countries whose goal in the reform exercise is
to promote — and rightly so, as far as they are
concerned — their self-interest. These aspirants to
special status and individual privilege in fact want to
become permanent members at any cost. Interestingly,
they are also in the forefront in criticizing the
permanent members, whose power and influence they
claim to challenge. Paradoxically, however, they crave

No wonder that while Africa is united on its
principled position, the approach of the G-4 has created
serious rifts and divisions in Asia, the Group of Western
European and other States and the Group of Latin
American and Caribbean States. The Eastern European
Group, on the other hand, so far without any aspirant
for permanent membership, is comfortably placed with
its demand for an additional non-permanent seat, which
will be available for all the countries of that region. I

08-60760

25

A/63/PV.53

congratulate the members of that Group as well, for
their excellent choice of approach.
We have expressed on earlier occasions our
understanding for the principled African position,
which is shared by the Arabs and Eastern Europeans.
We believe that this model of regional representation,
if applied to all other regions, could garner the
reciprocal support of those regions, and thus promote a
feasible compromise for all.
The challenge is how to reconcile the various
positions. We have always believed that only a
negotiated solution can muster the widest possible
consensus required to bring about actual reform of the
Security Council. That approach would accommodate
the interests and positions of all Member States and
groups, and it would result in a strengthened and more
effective United Nations.
That is why we insist on a step-by-step approach
in accordance with decision 62/557, adopted in
September. To ensure success, we need to lay down the
parameters and ground rules for transparent, open and
effective intergovernmental negotiations. That is a
necessity and a must. Let me emphasize that that is
why the Uniting for Consensus group and others have
proposed that in accordance with decision 62/557, the
Open-ended Working Group should carry out its work
to address the framework and modalities in order to
prepare
and
facilitate
the
intergovernmental
negotiations to be held subsequently. We look forward
to engaging with all Member States to successfully
complete this important phase in the coming weeks.
Having participated in the last few meetings held by
the previous President of the General Assembly, I
would say to the representative of the United Kingdom
today that all members of the Uniting for Consensus
group, which has been working for consensus in the
General Assembly, are well aware that we decided to
go through the process of reaching consensus only
because it was in the interest of the membership at
large, and because it would be beneficial for the
organization of work to first seek to establish
modalities that would be likely to bear fruit when
intergovernmental relationships were discussed.

Once the negotiations start in February, we will
participate constructively and will make substantive
proposals on all aspects of reform, including working
methods and expansion of membership. Our proposals
will be consistent with the objectives of a more
democratic, equitably representative, transparent,
effective and accountable Council. They will conform
to the principles of the sovereign equality of States and
equitable geographical distribution. And that is the key
point. They will be reflective of the diversity and
pluralism
of
the
contemporary
international
community. We seek a comprehensive reform — not a
quick fix, which some want.
Through negotiations, we shall work for a model
that is responsive to the substantial increase in the
number of developing countries in the United Nations
membership since the last expansion of the Council in
the 1960s. The model that we support would contain
some of the following very important features.
First, the model would provide for allocation of
seats to correspond specifically with the legitimate
interest of the vast majority of small and medium-sized
States in serving as Council members. Secondly, it
would prioritize regional interests over individual
interests. Thirdly, it would accommodate the positions
of all Member States and regional and other groupings,
including in particular Africa, Eastern Europe and the
OIC/Arab States. Fourthly, the model will seek to build
consensus within and among regions in order to achieve
a stronger and more effective Security Council. Fifthly,
it can have no place, however, for outdated concepts of
permanency, individual privilege and special status. On
the contrary, it will enhance accountability and accord
primacy to principles over power.
This approach represents the only way to restore
the authority, credibility and legitimacy of the Security
Council, which are objectives we must all live up to in
this process of Security Council reform. It is an
approach that will protect and project and embrace the
future for all of our family of Member States, not
through the double-speak of diplomacy and nevernever land, but through the realization of where their
future lies.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

26

08-60760
