United Nations

A/RES/60/202

General Assembly

Distr.: General
8 March 2006

Sixtieth session
Agenda item 52 (h)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 December 2005
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/60/488/Add.8)]

60/202. Convention on Biological Diversity
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 55/201 of 20 December 2000, 56/197 of 21 December
2001, 57/253 and 57/260 of 20 December 2002, 58/212 of 23 December 2003 and
59/236 of 22 December 2004,
Recalling also the 2005 World Summit Outcome, 1
Reiterating that the Convention on Biological Diversity 2 is the key international
instrument for the conservation and sustainable use of biological resources and the
fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the use of genetic resources,
Taking note of the reports of the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, 3
Recalling the commitments of the World Summit on Sustainable Development
to pursue a more efficient and coherent implementation of the three objectives of the
Convention and the achievement by 2010 of a significant reduction in the current
rate of loss of biological diversity, which will require action at all levels, including
the implementation of national biodiversity strategies and action plans and the
provision of new and additional financial and technical resources to developing
countries,
Expressing its deep appreciation to the Government of Malaysia for hosting
the seventh meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on
Biological Diversity and the first meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the
Convention serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Cartagena Protocol on
Biosafety, held in Kuala Lumpur from 9 to 20 and on 27 February, and from 23 to
27 February 2004, respectively,
Expressing its deep appreciation also to the Government of Brazil for its offer
to host the eighth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on
Biological Diversity and the third meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the
Convention serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Cartagena Protocol on

_______________
1

See resolution 60/1.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1760, No. 30619.
3
Available from www.millenniumassessment.org.
2

05-49972

A/RES/60/202

Biosafety, to be held in Curitiba from 20 to 31 March, and from 13 to 17 March
2006, respectively,
1.
Takes note of the report of the Executive Secretary of the Convention on
Biological Diversity, transmitted by the Secretary-General to the General Assembly
at its sixtieth session; 4
2.
Notes the recent progress made with respect to the achievement of the
three objectives set out in the Convention on Biological Diversity;2
3.
Urges all Member States to fulfil their commitments to significantly
reduce the rate of loss of biodiversity by 2010, and emphasizes that this will require
an appropriate focus on the loss of biodiversity in their relevant policies and
programmes and the continued provision of new and additional financial and
technical resources to developing countries, including through the Global
Environmental Facility;
Reiterates the commitment of States parties to the Convention on
4.
Biological Diversity and the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety 5 to support the
implementation of the Convention and the Protocol, as well as other biodiversityrelated agreements and the Johannesburg commitment for a significant reduction in
the rate of loss of biodiversity by 2010, and to continue to negotiate within the
framework of the Convention, bearing in mind the Bonn Guidelines, 6 an
international regime to promote and safeguard the fair and equitable sharing of
benefits arising out of the utilization of genetic resources; and reiterates also the
resolve of all States to fulfil commitments and significantly reduce the rate of loss
of biodiversity by 2010 and to continue ongoing efforts towards elaborating and
negotiating an international regime on access to genetic resources and benefitsharing;
Reaffirms the commitment, subject to national legislation, to respect,
5.
preserve and maintain the knowledge, innovations and practices of indigenous and
local communities embodying traditional lifestyles relevant to the conservation and
sustainable use of biological diversity, promote their wider application with the
approval and involvement of the holders of such knowledge, innovations and
practices and encourage the equitable sharing of the benefits arising from their
utilization;
Notes the holding of the tenth meeting of the Subsidiary Body on
6.
Scientific, Technical and Technological Advice of the Conference of the Parties to
the Convention on Biological Diversity, as well as the meetings of the Ad Hoc
Open-ended Working Group on Access to Genetic Resources and Benefit-sharing
and the first meeting of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group on Protected Areas;
Notes also the progress made at the second meeting of the Conference of
7.
the Parties to the Convention serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Cartagena
Protocol on Biosafety and the continuing efforts made towards the implementation
of the Protocol, and stresses that this will require the full support of parties and of
relevant international organizations, in particular with regard to the provision of
assistance to developing countries as well as countries with economies in transition
in capacity-building for biosafety;
_______________
4

A/60/171, sect. III.
See UNEP/CBD/ExCOP/1/3 and Corr.1, part two, annex.
6
UNEP/CBD/COP/6/20, annex I, decision VI/24A.
5

2

A/RES/60/202

8.
Invites the countries that have not yet done so to ratify or to accede to the
Convention;
9.
Invites the parties to the Convention that have not yet ratified or acceded
to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to consider doing so;
10. Invites countries to consider ratifying or acceding to the International
Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture; 7
11. Encourages developed countries parties to the Convention to contribute
to the relevant trust funds of the Convention, in particular so as to enhance the full
participation of the developing countries parties in all of its activities;
12. Urges parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity to facilitate the
transfer of technology for the effective implementation of the Convention in
accordance with its provisions;
13. Takes note of the ongoing work of the liaison group of the secretariats and
offices of the relevant subsidiary bodies of the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change, 8 the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those
Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa, 9
and the Convention on Biological Diversity, and further encourages continuing
cooperation in order to promote complementarities among the secretariats, while
respecting their independent legal status;
14. Stresses the importance of reducing duplicative reporting requirements of
the biodiversity-related conventions while respecting their independent legal status
and their independent mandates;
15. Invites the States parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity to
provide the new Executive Secretary of the Convention with full support for the
fulfilment of his mandate and towards promoting the implementation of the
Convention;
16. Invites the Executive Secretary of the Convention on Biological
Diversity to continue reporting to the General Assembly on the ongoing work
regarding the Convention, including its Cartagena Protocol;
17. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-first session,
under the item entitled “Sustainable development”, the sub-item entitled
“Convention on Biological Diversity”.
68th plenary meeting
22 December 2005

_______________
7
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Report of the Conference of FAO, Thirty-first
Session, Rome, 2–13 November 2001 (C 2001/REP), appendix D.
8
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
9
Ibid., vol. 1954, No. 33480.

3
