S/2020/346

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 May 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 29 April 2020 from the President of the Security Council
addressed to the Secretary-General and the Permanent
Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith copies of the briefings provided by
the Secretary-General of the United Nations; Ms. Jayathma Wickramanayake, the
Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth; Ms. Olla Al-Sakkaf, Project Coordinator for
Youth Without Borders Organization for Development, Yemen; and Mr. Gatwal
Augustine Gatkuoth, Founder of the Young Adult Empowerment Initiative, South
Sudan/Uganda; as well as copies of the statements delivered by the representatives
of Security Council members Belgium, China, the Dominican Republic, Estonia,
France, Germany, Indonesia, the Niger, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, South Africa, Tunisia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Viet Nam, in connection with
the video-teleconference convened on 27 April 2020 regarding the maintenance of
international peace and security: youth, peace and security.
In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members in
relation to this video-teleconference, the following delegations and entities submitted
written statements, copies of which are also enclosed: Afghanistan, Argentina,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Djibouti,
Ecuador, El Salvador, the European Union, Fiji, Georgia, Greece, Hungary, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Liechtenstein, Malta, Mexico,
Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, Nepal, Norway, Peru, the Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Slovenia, Switzerland, Turkey, the United
Arab Emirates, Ukraine and Uruguay.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 2 April 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives of the
members of the Security Council (S/2020/273), which was agreed in the light of the
extraordinary circumstances caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, these briefings
and statements will be issued as an official document of the Security Council.
(Signed) José Singer Weisinger
President of the Security Council

*

Reissued for technical reasons 9 June 2020.

20-06400 (E) 070520 010620

*2006400*

*

S/2020/346

Annex 1
Statement by the Secretary-General of the United Nations, António
Guterres
I welcome this opportunity to present my first report on youth, peace and
security (S/2020/167).
Since the report was issued, our world has been shaken by the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Young people are feeling the impact acutely, from
lost jobs to family stress, mental health and other hardships. More than 1.54 billion
children and youth are out of school. Young refugees, displaced persons and others
caught up in conflict or disaster now face even more vulnerability. Persons with
disabilities may face new hindrances in accessing the services and support to which
they have a right.
Even before the current crisis, young people were facing enormous challenges.
The numbers are startling: one of every five young people was already not in
education, training or employment; one of every four is affected by violence or
conflict; and every year 12 million girls become mothers while they themselves are
still children.
Those frustrations and, frankly, the failure of those in power today to address
them fuel declining confidence in political establishments and institutions. When
such a cycle takes hold, it is all too easy for extremist groups to exploit the anger
and despair, and the risk of radicalization climbs. We can already see such groups
taking advantage of the COVID-19 lockdowns, intensifying their efforts on social
media to spread hatred and recruit young people who may be spending more time at
home and online.
Yet, despite those hurdles and risks, young people are still finding ways to
engage, to support each other and to demand and drive change. We see it in our battle
against COVID-19. In Colombia, Ghana, Iraq and several other countries, young
peacebuilders and humanitarians are delivering supplies to front-line health workers
and people in need. They are keeping communication open within communities to
maintain social cohesion despite physical distancing. They are supporting my call
for a global ceasefire. We see it every week in our battle against climate change.
The Fridays for Future movement continues because young people know that their
prospects and aspirations are at stake. And, as illustrated in the report, we see youth
engagement in their efforts to bring about lasting peace and security.
Just five years after the adoption of resolution 2250 (2015), encouraging
steps are being taken to enable young people to play their essential role in building
peaceful and just societies. From prevention to mediation and from humanitarian
assistance to post-conflict healing and reconciliation, young people are stepping up
through formal and informal mechanisms and by using traditional platforms and
new technologies.
Many of Member States have taken steps to facilitate that. In Colombia,
young leaders played a critical role throughout the peace process and had a direct
impact on the content of the 2016 peace agreement. In the Philippines, young women
peacebuilders organized interreligious dialogues to strengthen local ownership of the
Bangsamoro Organic Law. In South Sudan, young people used the online campaign
#SouthSudanIsWatching to assert their rights as observers of the High-level
Revitalization Forum. In Syria, young medical students are supporting engineers
to build medical supplies and are teaching others with special needs through online
messaging. Finally, in the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of

2/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

the Congo, Mali and the Sudan, more than 6,500 former combatants, mostly young
people, have benefited from programmes supported by peacekeeping missions.
I am encouraged to see that global networks have emerged to support young
peacebuilders. The African Union has begun to develop a Continental Framework
on Youth, Peace and Security. The Security Council meets often with young people
during its country visits. The Peacebuilding Commission has provided young
peacebuilders a platform to present their work and policy recommendations. Young
refugees helped shape the Global Compact on Refugees, and countries including
Finland, the Gambia and Nigeria are developing national road maps for youth and
peace and security.
The United Nations, for its part, is striving to integrate that agenda across the
Organization, guided by the United Nations Youth Strategy. Notwithstanding that
progress, the youth, peace and security agenda still faces formidable challenges.
Participation opportunities remain inadequate. Many young peacebuilders report
that their participation is not welcomed by the public or those in positions of power.
That is especially evident for young women. Exclusion from political decisionmaking further increases their vulnerability to discrimination, sexual violence
and exploitation, trafficking and child marriage. Only 2.2 per cent of the world’s
parliamentarians are under 30 years of age, so it is not surprising to see declining
turnout on the part of young voters in the world, reflecting growing dissatisfaction
with political establishments. Young women and men forced from their homes owing
to conflict and violence remain highly vulnerable. Reports of threats and human
rights violations against young peacebuilders and human rights defenders are also
of grave concern. Behind all of that lies insufficient investment in prevention and in
ensuring that young people have opportunities to advance in life.
Even before COVID-19, a global learning crisis already threatened to
undermine long-term prospects for development and social cohesion, particularly
in conflict-affected settings. Now this crisis is multiplying, coupled with massive
increases in poverty and unemployment. It is in that context that I am issuing a call
to action on youth, peace and security.
First, we must do more to address those challenges, guided by the findings
of “The missing peace: independent progress study on youth and peace and
security” (see S/2018/86). Secondly, we must invest in young people’s participation,
organizations and initiatives. The Peacebuilding Fund is an invaluable tool, and I
urge the Council to ensure it has the resources it needs. Thirdly, we must strengthen
human rights protections and protect the civic space on which youth participation
depends. Fourthly, we must emerge from the COVID-19 crisis with a determination
to recover better by massively increasing our investment in young people’s capacities
as we deliver on the Sustainable Development Goals.
Across that work, our efforts must reflect a fundamental understanding:
young people are not subjects to be protected, but should be seen as citizens with
equal rights, as full members of our societies and as powerful agents for change.
The world cannot afford a lost generation of youth, their lives set back by COVID-19
and their voices stifled by a lack of participation. Let us do far more to tap their
talents as we tackle the pandemic and chart a recovery that leads to a more peaceful,
sustainable and equitable future for all.

20-064003/123

S/2020/346

Annex 2
Statement by the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth, Jayathma
Wickramanayake
We are in the midst of an unprecedented global challenge. The coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic has swept through our world, leaving everyday life
as we know it at a standstill, schools, businesses, markets and bus stations deserted
and entire cities transformed into ghost towns overnight.
While decision-makers are trying to navigate unchartered waters, we have
seen an image grow from the media of the worlds’ young people acting irresponsibly
and recklessly, not understanding the gravity of the situation, putting the lives of
others’ in danger by going to beaches, pubs and parties. As usual, we have seen
a focus on the small minority of young people who disregard guidelines and
instructions, risking their own health and the safety of others, while the thousands
of young people who were already fighting on the front lines of the crisis have been
completely sidelined. Nowhere in the news did we hear about young peacebuilders
in Kenya and Cameroon who immediately adapted their peacebuilding organizations
and networks to prepare their communities to face COVID-19. The news did not
focus on the many young health workers and medical students attending to patients in
China and Italy. The news did not tell us about the Scouts, Girl Guides and Red Cross
volunteers running awareness and handwashing campaigns in Haiti and Jordan. The
headlines did not recognize young people 3D-printing face masks and fundraising in
support of charities here in the United States.
Therefore, allow me to dedicate my statement today to all the young people
who are putting their communities ahead of themselves in war zones, refugee camps,
favelas and settlements, showing grit and leadership that we sometimes fail to see in
our own political leaders.
Public discourse often portrays young people as an irresponsible, selfinterested group. We quickly categorize young men as easily attracted to violence
and as part of gangs and extremist groups, and young women always as victims in
such scenarios. But contrary to those popular narratives, if we care to take a closer
look at the communities most affected, what conflicts, disasters and crises teach
us over and over again is that young people are not only the most resilient but also
the most innovative and resourceful during turbulent times. Born into and growing
up in an exceedingly interconnected world, young people understand very well that
solidarity is the name of the game. They understand that, just like the COVID-19
pandemic, conflict, violence, inequality and climate change do not stop at national
boundaries. They understand that none of us is safe unless we all are.
This year, we mark the fifth anniversary of the adoption of the resolution
2250 (2015). We are also marking the 20 years of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security. With unprecedented global challenges surrounding us all,
the United Nations is getting ready to celebrate its seventy-fifth birthday, reflecting
on its past but, most important, looking to its future. This is an opportune moment
to take stock of the youth, peace and security agenda, its progress and successes,
its challenges and gaps. I am sure we all agree that the future of our communities,
countries and the entire world depend on building peaceful and resilient generations.
This is also a strategic moment to further increase synergies among those
various agendas so that young people in all their diversity can contribute as equal
partners and stakeholders in deciding what kind of a future they will inherit.
Therefore, allow me to thank the Government of the Dominican Republic for its
leadership in convening this Security Council briefing. I am pleased to join the
Secretary-General and two young peacebuilders, Olla from Yemen and Gatwal from
4/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

South Sudan, as we reflect on the key messages and recommendations of the firstever Secretary-General’s report on youth, peace and security (S/2020/167).
The report was published at a vital time when the challenges of the COVID-19
pandemic were emerging. In order to adjust to the current realities, innovative
and new approaches to translate youth, peace and security policy into practice are
needed. While the report documents important practices, lessons and commitments
that have emerged from the implementation of the youth, peace and security agenda,
a clear strategy co-led by young people and Member States, especially at the country
level, is needed.
Since 2015, the Secretary-General’s reports to the Security Council have
increasingly discussed the situation of young people, from 21 per cent of reports
in 2016 to 39 per cent in 2019. However, we still have a lot to do to mainstream and
embed youth, peace and security across United Nations efforts. For example, of the
253 resolutions adopted by the Security Council since 2015, only 16 per cent include
meaningful references to youth.
I am pleased to note that the Secretary-General’s report on youth, peace
and security is grounded in the five pillars of resolution 2250 (2015) and draws on
the comprehensive strategic recommendations formulated in “The missing peace:
independent progress study on youth and peace and security” (see S/2018/86),
presented to the Council in April 2018. Therefore, my key recommendations today
echo the voices of the young people I have interacted with during my country
missions around the world and of those who participated in the survey I carried out
online just before this briefing. They also echo the wider consultations carried out
by United Nations partners, Member States and civil society in preparation of the
Secretary-General’s report.
First, young people believe that there is a need to create more meaningful
partnerships among youth, civil society organizations and Government institutions
that work on the youth, peace and security agenda. To date, there are no national
action plans on youth, peace and security, but I am pleased to note that they are
being developed in some countries. For a national road map to be successful, a
participatory, transparent and youth-led process and adequate resources are needed.
Since resolution 2250 (2015) was adopted, we have seen an increase in the
creation of national coalitions on youth, peace and security. I encourage all Member
States to establish multi-stakeholder mechanisms to meaningfully engage young
people in the planning and decision-making on peacebuilding and post-conflict
reconstruction, as well as in discussions on resource allocations.
Secondly, the meaningful participation of all young people towards building
sustainable peace should be ensured. Participation is recognized as a human right
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. All young people have the right
to participate in the conduct of public affairs, and therefore are entitled to rights
and freedoms.
Such participation encompasses a wide range of actions, from formal
participation in political, electoral or peace processes to informal participation at
the community level and in digital spaces. Enabling spaces where they are seen and
respected as citizens with equal rights, equal voices and equal influence should be
created for young people.
Although inclusion has shown to positively impact the sustainability of peace
agreements, young people continue to be excluded from decisions that directly
impact their present and future prospects for peace. The key outcome of the first
International Symposium on Youth Participation in Peace Processes, hosted in
20-064005/123

S/2020/346

Helsinki in March 2019, demonstrated that young people will inherit either the longterm benefits or the long-term consequences of a peace agreement.
I therefore call on all Member States to create meaningful opportunities for
young people to participate in peace processes both informally and formally. As
acknowledged by the policy paper We Are Here: An integrated approach to youthinclusive peace processes, which I presented to the Security Council last year (see
S/PV.8577), that can be inside, around and beyond negotiation rooms.
Finally, young people believe that strong mechanisms should be developed to
protect young activists and peacebuilders. Young activists face various threats from
State and non-State actors for building peace in their communities, and reprisals
for cooperating with the United Nations. Those threats include physical, legal,
political, sociocultural, digital and financial threats. In the times of COVID-19, with
lockdowns, curfews and increased surveillance offline and online, civic space has
continued to shrink worldwide, risking stalling progress.
To date, no data are systematically collected on human rights violations
against young peacebuilders and human rights defenders throughout the world and,
in most cases, such violations remain undocumented or uninvestigated. I therefore
call on the support of Member States to facilitate an inclusive, safe, enabling and
gender-responsive environment in which young peacebuilders and young human
rights defenders are recognized and provided with adequate support and protection
to carry out their work independently and without undue interference.
What do we see as the collective way forward? As Security Council
members are aware, operationalizing the youth, peace and security agenda requires
coordination, coherence and integration, as well as political will and commitment.
These recommendations cannot be implemented without sufficient funding and
accountability from the United Nations system and its Member States. Flexible and
easily accessible funding for youth-led and youth-focused organizations and for the
United Nations and other civil society partners is urgently needed to further advance
the youth, peace and security agenda.
I strongly recommend the Security Council to consider regular and systematic
reporting on the implementation of resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018) in order
to ensure the sustainability and continuity of these important agendas. Tracking
progress is vital to ensuring accountability. Shifting to a meaningful, partnershipbased approach, especially with civil society and youth-led organizations, is critical
not only for this agenda but for youth engagement and participation in all aspects of
life, as outlined in Youth 2030: The United Nations Strategy on Youth.
In conclusion, if the United Nations, including the Security Council, fails to
translate agreed resolutions into action, in a nutshell, if this agenda is not brought
down from a global policy level to a regional and country level with programmatic
action, young people will lose opportunities to meaningfully participate and their
trust in institutions and multilateralism will further erode. We cannot afford to lose
the trust of young people, who are the greatest asset and greatest hope that we have
for a better future. I therefore urge the Council to put young people at the heart of its
efforts to bring about global peace and security. Young people are ready and up for
the challenge. The question is whether national, regional and international actors are
ready to bridge the intergenerational divide.

6/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Annex 3
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Belgium to the
United Nations, Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve
I take the floor today on behalf of Belgian youth. Exceptionally, our
intervention has been drafted by the Belgian United Nations youth delegates. This
programme not only helps to raise young people’s voices within the United Nations
but also serves as a channel to get them involved in our national decision-making.
We can only recommend it.
As youth delegates, we welcome the Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/167),
especially its call for continuous and meaningful youth participation. The fact
that we have the opportunity to address the Security Council shows what shape
participation can take.
Young people are faced with multiple challenges. For our contribution, we
have opted to focus on climate change and hate speech.
To start, we would like to echo our Government’s commitment to putting the
topic of climate and security on the Security Council’s agenda. The climate crisis, just
like the coronavirus disease pandemic, is not only a direct threat to the livelihoods
of billions of people; it also aggravates factors that contribute to conflict. Given that
fragile States frequently have younger demographics, young people are particularly
vulnerable and, sadly, often the first victims of conflict. United Nations Member
States need to address this issue, especially since the youth population across the
world is set to increase drastically.
Our generation will be the first to be heavily impacted by global warming.
As such, should we not be the first group to be consulted? It is only natural for the
younger population, especially those most affected, to have a seat at the table when
far-reaching adaptation and mitigation policies are being detailed. Our worldwide
actions of 2019 have proved that we are a considerable and positive force for change.
Young people stand ready to be structurally involved through frequent invitations to
relevant thematic and country-specific Security Council briefings.
Secondly, social exclusion, intolerance and racism all contribute to hate speech,
which often addresses the young as victims or as the subjects of indoctrination.
Extremism and violent acts following from such discourse could be prevented by
more inclusive societies. Young people should be offered opportunities to fulfil
their aspirations. In addition, we point to the effectiveness of campaigns such as
the Council of Europe’s project “No hate speech movement” and its dedicated
national activities.
To us, the Internet is a double-edged sword. Wisely used, it allows free access
to information and serves as a tool of empowerment. However, without adequate
governance, it allows fake news to spread, contributes to radicalization and heightens
the risk of the misuse of personal data. We appeal to Governments, at all levels, to
cherish individual freedom while ensuring the safety of young users. That requires
a coalition among Governments, private businesses and civil society. Platforms
gathering relevant material for young people and the attribution of labels that testify
to the quality of information are potential tools. The Internet’s global nature requires
a global approach. We think that the United Nations constitutes the right forum.
Allow us to conclude by repeating our call for continuous and meaningful
youth participation. The vital role of young people in the making and maintenance
of peace has been acknowledged. We note the progress made on the implementation
of resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018), but challenges remain. We urge Member
States and donors to support the work of young peacebuilders and to protect their
20-064007/123

S/2020/346

human rights. We hope that adequate attention will be paid to how climate change
and hate speech affect our future security and that Member States stand ready to
create, jointly with younger generations, a society that guarantees sustainable peace
and security. The challenges that we face require now more than ever a strong and
efficient multilateralism. Let us turn 2020 — the year when we celebrate the seventyfifth anniversary of the United Nations — into an example in that regard.
Finally, we thank the Dominican presidency for its leadership, and the briefers
for their personal engagement.

8/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Annex 4
Statement by the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Mr. Zhang Jun
China is grateful to the Dominican Republic for its initiative to convene this
meeting. I also thank the Secretary-General and his Envoy on Youth, Ms. Jayathma
Wickramanayake, for their briefings. We listened attentively to the remarks of the
briefers. We thank them for sharing their thoughts with us.
Young people account for 16 per cent of the world population, and they play
an important role in promoting sustainable development, maintaining international
peace and security and strengthening global solidarity and partnership.
China attaches great importance to the youth, peace and security agenda. We
are pleased to note the progress made in the implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018).
Meanwhile, it is also worrisome that young people in a number of countries
and regions still suffer from armed conflicts. As a result, they face the hardships of
poverty, unemployment and marginalization, et cetera. Some of them even fall prey
to terrorism. Currently, the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
also poses great challenges, putting the health, education and employment of young
people at risk. The impact should not be overlooked.
The international community should fully implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions, remain attentive to the development of young people, help them
to tackle the challenges arising from the pandemic and support them in playing a
bigger role in advancing world peace and development.
First, we must step up our efforts to protect young people by preventing
conflicts and by shielding them from the harm of terrorism and extremism. To that
end, the Security Council should uphold the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, promote the political settlement of hot-spot issues and work
towards conflict prevention and resolution through peaceful means.
Moreover, the international community should resolutely fight against all forms
of terrorism and violent extremism on the basis of unified standards, in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions. In particular, we need to combat the
terrorism and extremism ideologies that corrode the minds of young people, take the
necessary de-radicalization measures and crack down on the infiltration of terrorist
and radical groups among young people through the Internet.
Secondly, we should acknowledge and support the important role of young
people in advancing peace and security, and further unleash their potential in that
regard. It is important to fully take into consideration youth-related factors in the
political settlement of hot-spot issues, ensure the constructive participation of young
people in the peace processes of their home countries, draw on young people’s
strengths and listen to their views.
Young people should also be enabled to participate in conflict prevention and
resolution, contribute to social stability and development and take an active part in
post-conflict reconstruction.
The United Nations should enhance exchange and coordination on youthrelated agendas and achieve synergy with the African Union, the League of Arab
States, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization and other regional and subregional organizations.

20-064009/123

S/2020/346

Thirdly, we should promote inclusive development, create a favourable
environment for youth development and strive for lasting peace. The international
community should make young people a key driver in the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and pursue peace through development.
As the Secretary-General points out in his report on youth and peace and security
(S/2020/167), the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is a cornerstone of longterm prevention. Investing in young people and transforming systems of exclusion
into those of inclusion represent a central component of the 2030 Agenda commitment.
Countries also need to invest more in education and vocational training for
young people, create more employment opportunities, support entrepreneurship, lift
young populations out of poverty and help them to achieve all-round development so
as to lay a solid foundation for peace.
Given the COVID-19 pandemic, we must take the possible disruption in
education, employment and accessibility of health services for young people very
seriously and address the risks with concrete measures. Meanwhile, we should also
call on young people to join the pandemic response efforts, help the most vulnerable
and contribute to social prosperity.
China has been actively engaged in international youth programmes. We are
carrying out youth exchanges and cooperation with many countries and international
organizations, including establishing the China-Africa Innovation Cooperation
Centre to promote youth innovation and entrepreneurship, helping the Arab League
with the training of young professionals and launching the China-Latin American
Young Scientist Exchange Programme, among other things. Besides, we have been
providing Government scholarships to young students from all over the world to
study in China. We have also deployed excellent young peacekeepers, including
female peacekeepers, to various United Nations missions.
It is China’s sincere hope that, with our joint efforts, we can shape a brighter
shared future for all, including our younger generations.

10/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Annex 5
Statement by the Special Envoy to the Security Council of the
Dominican Republic, José Singer Weisinger
We would like to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing, and the
Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth for sharing her perspectives and challenges in
the implementation of resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018).
Our deep appreciation goes to Mr. Gatwal Gatkuoth and Ms. Olla Al-Sakkaf.
We listened carefully to their views and recommendations, and I must say that they
are both an inspiration. We had envisioned holding a ministerial open debate, with
the participation of young people from all over the world, but the circumstances did
not allow that.
I want to thank all youth organizations and young peacebuilders and activists
that have been actively supporting this debate and are watching us through the
United Nations Web TV and social media. This is for them.
This year marks the fifth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 2250
(2015). We welcome the report of the Secretary-General on youth and peace and
security (S/2020/167), and we echo his demand for an accelerated implementation
of resolutions 2419 (2018) and 2250 (2015) and the statement by the President of the
Security Council adopted last year (S/PRST/2019/15).
Those documents, along with the progress study “The missing peace:
independent progress study on youth and peace and security” (see S/2018/86), lead
us to concrete action at the national, regional and international levels. The 2030
United Nations Youth Strategy and initiatives by the African Union, as highlighted
by Mr. Gatkuoth, are important examples of that course of action. However, much
more is needed to institutionalize and increase the implementation of the youth,
peace and security agenda.
First, the creation of a regional young mediators network and a focal point
network within the United Nations system, including in peacekeeping and political
missions, is essential. Annual reporting by the Secretary-General on youth, peace and
security, backed by a global set of indicators to track progress on its implementation,
is crucial.
The strategies and active engagement on youth, peace and security by United
Nations missions in Colombia, Kosovo, Somalia and Iraq are inspiring examples. We
encourage other peacekeeping and political missions to emulate such efforts. More
mandate renewals and reports must include specific references pertaining to the
implementation of resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018).
We concur with today’s briefers. An increasing number of young people are
proactively combating the coronavirus disease pandemic. But we must recognize
its specific impact on young people, who must be included in the development and
implementation of its response and whose specific needs must be addressed.
Now and always, the protection of young people’s lives and human rights must
be a priority, including those of young peacebuilders and human rights defenders,
who sometimes face reprisals for their work.
The policy paper We Are Here: An integrated approach to youth-inclusive
peace processes concludes that young people continue to be excluded from peace
processes, inheriting peace agreements. But when agreements do not prosper, young
people bear the burden of doing damage control. Is that fair? Their meaningful
participation in peacebuilding and sustaining peace and security is essential to
achieving just, inclusive and peaceful societies. It is also their right.
20-0640011/123

S/2020/346

The report emphasizes that “the participation of young people requires
unrestricted civic space and breaking with practices of tokenism”. To that end, the
Dominican Republic launched its National Youth Plan to guarantee young people’s
participation in all stages of decision-making, including on access to justice and
citizen security, based on the principles of equality and non-discrimination.
The Secretary-General’s report also makes more evident the need for
complementarity between the women and peace and security and youth and peace
and security agendas, in particular with regard to the importance of the participation
of young women in building and sustaining peace. Hence, it is vital to invest in
young people’s initiatives, capacities and agency, as well as youth organizations,
especially at the grass-roots level, through substantial financial support.
In this regard, I would like to applaud the Peacebuilding Fund for its support
to youth-led projects, and the Peacebuilding Commission for strengthening youth
engagement in its work, including discussions on developing a youth and peace and
security strategy.
Efforts to open communication channels with young people must continue.
There are thousands of young people such as Santiago, who briefed the Security
Council on Colombia on 14 April (see S/2020/305), and Olla and Gatwal with us
today, who are working tirelessly on building and sustaining peace and in support
of Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire. We must continue to invite such
young people to brief the Council.
I wish to recognize the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on Youth and
her Office, as well as the United Nations Population Fund and the Peacebuilding
Support Office, for their tenacious work in promoting this agenda.
I would also like to thank the permanent and observer missions that have
submitted their statements for this meeting and encourage others not yet having done
so to do likewise. This is an important moment for all States to speak with one voice
and take unified action to accelerate implementation.
Finally, I wish formally to announce that, together with France, we will present
a draft resolution that we hope will have the support of all Council members. As the
report of the Secretary-General highlights, and as we mark the fifth anniversary of
the youth and peace and security agenda, it is time to accelerate the implementation
of resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018).

12/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Annex 6
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I thank today’s briefers for their excellent presentations, and the Dominican
Republic for its leadership in taking this topic forward in the Council.
We note with appreciation that, for the first time ever, we have a report of
the Secretary-General on youth and peace and security (S/2020/167). We hope such
reports can be provided as a regular occurrence to ensure a consistent focus on this
topic by the Security Council.
It is very simple: we cannot help build peaceful societies if we do not include
young people. The right to participate in public life is a human right. Meaningful
youth participation remains a challenge throughout the world, and those in power
do not always welcome it. As the Secretary-General’s report points out, in 2020
there are 1.85 billion young women and men aged between 10 to 24 in the world,
90 per cent of them living in developing countries and many in areas of conflict.
Providing young people of various backgrounds with meaningful and genuine ways
to participate in and shape their societies is one way to reduce tension and conflict
and, instead, ensure peace. If we fail to do that, we risk alienating the very people it
is who will take our societies and our world forward. We must all do more to create
an enabling environment for young people.
It is important that we recognize the growing role young people play in peace
and security. There are still visible barriers to youth participation in decision-making.
Youth activists continue to be subject to human rights violations and abuses. Any
threats, attacks or acts of intimidation against youth peacebuilders and human-rights
defenders, especially women activists, are unacceptable. Young women often face
multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination and marginalization. In addition
to harassment and acts of violence, the young women participating in political and
public life often suffer due to frequent limitation of their economic and educational
opportunities, which also leaves them more vulnerable in the long run.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s recommendation for the meaningful
participation of young people in peace and security efforts as well as for greater
interaction with youth representatives, young peacebuilders and young human-rights
defenders, including on its Security Council country visits.
Young people are a huge source of new ideas, solutions and innovation. During
the current pandemic, however, they could be among the worst victims. According
to estimates, an additional 42-66 million children could fall into extreme poverty.
UNESCO analysis shows that 91 per cent of the world’s students are affected by
school closures, and more than 1.5 billion students in 191 countries have trouble
continuing their studies normally. This will lead to increased educational gaps
and serious damage to their prospects for a better future, and could potentially
sow the seeds of radicalization among young people, constituting a threat to peace
and security.
Utilizing digital solutions and distance-learning platforms is one way to
alleviate the effects of school closures. Today, during the pandemic, such e-education
capacities have helped us avoid the paralysis of our educational system. Children
and young people being able to stay connected and carrying on studies is essential.
Broader implementation of digital learning would make education more accessible
for all groups and help limit the risk of increased social inequality. Bridging a digital
gender divide in this regard is crucial.

20-0640013/123

S/2020/346

We are glad to note that the European Union (EU) has been a frontrunner
in implementing the youth and peace and security agenda, and remains strongly
committed to implementing resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018), on youth
and peace and security. The EU was among the first multilateral organizations to
partner with the United Nations in the implementation of the agenda. It is currently
supporting close to 30 youth-oriented conflict-prevention and crisis-response actions
on four continents.
Young people are there to remind us that we need to take a long-term and
forward-looking approach on peace and security, as well as on climate and human
rights. It is their right. I am convinced that multilateralism has a lot to gain from
encouraging and supporting youth.

14/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Annex 7
Statement by Deputy Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Anne Gueguen
I first wish to join others in thanking the Dominican Republic for organizing
this timely meeting. I am grateful to the Secretary-General for briefing us on the
youth and peace and security agenda. France supports his recommendations and his
call in this regard. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth as
well as the young peacebuilders who are with us today virtually for sharing their
views and recommendations.
Young leaders are already mobilized and active in all parts of the world to
address major global issues. They did not wait for us to act. We see it in the unique
role they play in strengthening the response to climate change and to the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Last Friday, I had the opportunity to participate
in a lively and substantive exchange of views with seven young Mediterranean
peacebuilders from the Young Mediterranean Voices initiative, who shared
innovative and dynamic proposals and showed their technological proficiency. The
question is not whether but how we in the United Nations, at Headquarters and in the
field, can better engage with youth in a mutually enriching manner.
As the Secretary-General rightly pointed out, our awareness of young people’s
role is growing, but challenges remain. Young people continue to be victims of
stereotypes and discrimination. The COVID-19 crisis has also exacerbated the
vulnerability of young people, especially those least protected. They remain largely
excluded from decision-making processes, political institutions and the labour
market. Stereotypes are too often used as pretexts to ignore their demands and
violate their rights.
If their rights are not respected, if civic space is not protected, young people
cannot fully express their potential or be actively engaged in the establishment of
lasting peace. France has called for, as it will continue to do so, respect for the
freedom of expression and the right to peaceful assembly everywhere and for
everyone, in particular by supporting young human-rights defenders.
Young people need to be involved effectively and meaningfully in the
discussions and decisions on today’s challenges. In that regard, the European Union’s
cross-regional networks and initiatives that allow young peacebuilders to influence
decision-making are examples of best practices that can inspire others.
To strengthen the empowerment of young people, especially young women,
France invests in quality education. A total of €200 million have been channelled
through the Global Partnership for Education. For young leaders to emerge, we
must offer everyone the intellectual and moral tools that only quality education
can provide.
France will also put youth at the heart of the Generation Equality Forum,
organized jointly with Mexico and UN-Women, now scheduled to take place in
2021. This will allow young people — and especially young women — to contribute
meaningfully to the discussions. Their voices will be heard.
Five years after the landmark resolution 2250 (2015), we must continue
to mobilize to guarantee a central place for young people and harness their full
potential in restoring peace and security, and building just, peaceful and inclusive
societies. France will remain engaged so that young people and young women are
involved in our work at the United Nations, including, of course, at the Security
Council. We view both agendas — youth and peace and security, and women and
20-0640015/123

S/2020/346

peace and security — as essential to the Council’s work. You, Sir, can count on
France’s support to keep this issue on the Security Council’s agenda.
Following the leadership of the Dominican Republic, we will therefore
promote the adoption of a draft resolution on this agenda. I will conclude by
expressing our full support for the call just launched by the Secretary-General for
massive investment in young people in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic to make
sure we rebuild back better with them.

16/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Annex 8
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Germany to the
United Nations, Christoph Heusgen
The report of the Secretary-General on youth and peace and security
(S/2020/167) paints a mixed picture. On the one hand, we see some encouraging
developments. In many countries, the political participation of young people is
greater than it was five years ago. Young voices are taken more seriously, especially
in conflict-prevention and peacebuilding processes. That is very good. Building
perspectives for young people is crucial, especially in conflict and post-conflict
situations. We would like to encourage all United Nations missions, peacekeeping
and political alike, to adopt a mission-wide youth and peace and security strategy,
establish focal points for this issue and regularly report on it. The United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia is exemplary in this respect.
The fact that Governments are stepping up projects involving young
peacebuilders acknowledges the role that youth needs to play in building and
sustaining peace. In this vein, we very much welcome the written advice on youth
and peace and security submitted to the Security Council today, which encouraged
the Peacebuilding Commission to continue youth and peace and security work in
its respective considerations with a view to complementing and supporting efforts
undertaken in the Security Council.
When it comes to building and sustaining peace, Germany is funding a wide
range of projects for youth in many countries, for example, in the Sahel region,
particularly Mali. Let me cite just a few examples.
In Burundi, we support a project strengthening trust and positive relationships
between youth and the police. In Colombia, we support the United Nations Institute
for Training and Research in their youth-led peace and reconciliation approach. In
the Palestinian territories, we support efforts to create safe spaces for youth to initiate
and run their own projects, while enabling them to constructively engage with their
communities — for example, by establishing a community clinic for elderly persons
with disabilities, by revitalizing community gardens or by developing and running
awareness campaigns in their own communities.
Let me also say in this context that Germany is currently the strongest
supporter of the Secretary-General’s Peacebuilding Fund, which has a proven track
record of engaging in projects that advance the inclusion of women and young
people. Moreover, when it comes to humanitarian assistance, we attach particular
importance to projects that involve young people and take their specific needs into
account, for example, one in the Lake Chad region addressing psychological support,
or another, which built an educational centre for Rohingya children living as refugees
in Bangladesh.
Still, the Secretary-General’s report paints a mixed picture. On the one hand
are these very positive developments, but on the other hand huge challenges and
injustices clearly persist, which can be real obstacles to sustainable peace. Let me
refer to just a few. One in four young people are still affected by violence or armed
conflict. They lack educational and economic opportunities, and their human rights
are often violated and curtailed. Young women, especially, experience patterns of
intimidation and harassment when exercising their political rights and participation
in peace processes. These are attempts to silence their activism. In post-conflict as
well as conflict settings, young women are particularly affected by sexual violence.
All barriers to the political participation of young women need to be brought down.

20-0640017/123

S/2020/346

Conflict-prevention and peacebuilding must therefore include diverse
perspectives and involve youth from all backgrounds, including young women;
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons; and young persons
with disabilities.
Let me say a few words on youth and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
With schools closed and families confined to their homes, young people are being
assigned additional tasks, providing for their communities, often based on the
impression that they can bear increased health risks. In addition, with schools
closed, young people in all parts of the world are being deprived of education, and
young women and girls, in particular, are taking up care work at home, which often
interferes with their education. The Secretary-General called for “an aggressive
back-to-school strategy” in his report on the socioeconomic impacts of COVID-19.
We can only underline and emphasize the need to heed that call.
Before concluding, I would like to mention three very short sets of thoughts.
First, young people are a decisive pillar — as beneficiaries and as agents
of change — in numerous projects in the context of our crisis-prevention and
stabilization work. Across countries and continents, our world is witnessing a rise
in youth engagement and even a so-called youthquake. We look at the young climate
activists, for example, who are taking their activism from the streets to the digital
world. This is very encouraging.
Secondly, we look forward to the Dominican Republic’s draft resolution on
youth and peace and security, with the aim of institutionalizing this agenda.
Thirdly, and lastly, I would like to pick up a few of the recommendations of
German youth delegates Eva Croon and Paul Klahre regarding the advancement of
the youth, peace and security agenda.
The role of young people as meaningful stakeholders in building peace must
be recognized and promoted. The German youth delegates ask for youth participation
to be diverse, inclusive, democratic, meaningful, timely and trusted.
To conclude my statement, I would like to quote Eva Croon and Paul Klahre:
“Encourage, promote and institutionalize the meaningful participation of
young people in matters of peace and security”
in the United Nations as well as in Member States.

18/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Annex 9
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Indonesia to the United Nations, Dian Triansyah Djani
Let me begin by thanking the Dominican Republic for bringing the youth,
peace and security agenda forward, even at this difficult moment.
I wish a happy Freedom Day to South Africa and would like to say to Jerry,
in batik, he is truly free.
We also thank the Secretary-General and all briefers — Ms. Jayathma
Wickramanayake, the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth; Ms. Olla Al-Sakkaf; and
Mr. Gatwal Gatkuoth — for updating us on the important progress made on and the
gaps pertaining to the youth, peace and security agenda.
I would like to highlight the importance of unity, solidarity and renewed
multilateral cooperation in addressing the current coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
global pandemic. This crisis requires the active participation of multi-stakeholders,
including youth. We commend all young persons who work courageously as health
workers, refugee workers, young citizens and Samaritans on the front lines to fight
the pandemic.
Resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018) both clearly highlight the invaluable
role of young people in preventing conflicts and sustaining peace. Unfortunately,
violence has wrecked the future of a quarter of the global youth population. We
believe that their aspirations should be heard, particularly in the context of a series
of dialogues, so as to strengthen their meaningful participation. Young people
should not simply be subjects but also decision-makers. Youth from Taiz, Yemen,
to Juba, South Sudan, and from all parts of the world should be supported by the
international community. In that regard, allow me to highlight several pertinent
points on this matter.
First, the participation of young people can increase the legitimacy and
sustainability of peace efforts. Their voices matter in promoting mutual trust and
understanding. Leaving them out of the equation leads to an imbalanced approach
to peace and may create a perception of injustice and deepen existing challenges to
peace. A greater role in sustaining peace gives them a sense of belonging and a place
to engage in a constructive manner.
Secondly, it will enhance their social awareness and opportunities. Indonesia’s
current democratic system would have never been possible without youth participation
and movements. Youth drive our social progress and inspire political changes in a
democratic direction. Many members of our national Parliament for the period 20192024 are under the age of 30. Last year the President of Indonesia also appointed
several young people to prominent positions within the Government to provide fresh
and innovative ideas as well as sound advice. They are not only the beneficiaries of
development but also movers, influencers and drivers of development in Indonesia.
When they are provided with opportunities, capacity-building and quality education,
youth can become an engine for powerful social changes and peace.
Thirdly, youth can be agents of change in their local communities. Engaging
youth within their communities is vital in building sustainable peace and countering
violent extremist narratives that may incite terrorist acts. In 2019, we hosted a
regional workshop on establishing youth ambassadors for peace against terrorism
and violent extremism so as to build networks and spread positive messages through
social media. The more engaged young people are, the less vulnerable they are to
extremism. Thus, we believe in the importance of meaningful dialogue between
youth and local religious leaders. Last year Indonesia organized Santri for Peace,
20-0640019/123

S/2020/346

which brought together young religious actors to promote dialogue and foster
understanding in a diverse community.
We would like to echo the Secretary-General’s call for action on youth, peace
and security, on the need to do more for youth and on the need to invest in and
take into account the human rights perspective. For the sake of peace, we cannot
afford to exclude youth, now or in future. Together with youth, we will find a way
to make great strides towards future advancement. By engaging youth, including
young women, we can better understand the situation on the ground and gain their
trust, and we will be stronger in terms of preventing conflict and more likely to find
solutions with a view to sustaining peace.
Lastly, in this time of COVID-19, the need for young people to be involved
in the development process has become more apparent and pertinent, since they,
too, will be severely affected. Data reported by the United Nations Population
Fund in March 2020 show that more than 860 million children and young people
are affected by COVID-19 globally. And, as youth will inherit the world, it is their
right and solemn duty to be part and parcel of creating a new world post-COVID-19.
By investing in youth, we will have peace, we will have development and we will
rebound from COVID-19 hand in hand with our youth. They are not only influencers
but actors in shaping the future.
I should like to close with a famous quote by the first President of
Indonesia, Sukarno:
“Give me 1,000 old men, I will undoubtedly rip Mount Semeru from its roots;
give me 10 youths, I will undoubtedly shake the world.”

20/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Annex 10
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
Let me begin by thanking the Secretary-General, António Guterres, for
his participation, and today’s briefers Jayathma Wickramanayake, the SecretaryGeneral’s Envoy on Youth; Olla Al-Sakkaf; and Gatwal Augustine Gatkuoth for
their remarkable contributions.
The late Secretary-General Kofi Annan once said, “Have confidence in the
young people, give them a chance and they will surprise you”. Many of the world’s
major changes were ushered in by the dynamism, fearlessness and undying optimism
of young people.
Africa is the world’s youngest continent. It also has the fastest-growing
population in the world. While this is an unprecedented opportunity, it also presents
our African countries with a difficult task: to create the conditions for a secure
future in an interconnected world where the pace of change is accelerating. A fully
empowered youth population could allow African countries to harness the benefits
of the demographic dividend. However, if its potential is left untapped, a large
unemployed youth population could become a hotbed of social discontent, turmoil
and conflict. Unlocking the potential of the millions of African youth would be a
game-changer for Africa and for the world.
Last month, the Secretary-General published the first report (S/2020/167)
on youth, peace and security, specifically on the implementation of resolutions
2419 (2018) and 2250 (2015). One in four young people is affected by conflict and
violence. In the Sahel region, the security situation is having a disproportionate
effect on the youth. The majority of Boko Haram combatants are young people.
Young men disillusioned by high levels of unemployment and lured by easy gain
join terrorist groups such as Boko Haram. Young women are kidnapped into the
ranks as prisoners of war and used as sex slaves or as human bombs. Their future is
compromised, and so is that of our countries.
Young people, including young women, face multifaceted challenges and
inequality in access to education, and severe human rights violations such as
child marriage and various forms of violence. Those challenges limit their full
participation in the socioeconomic development of their communities and countries.
This translates into a cycle of systemic exclusion that creates deep generational
divides and grievances that ill-intentioned groups often exploit to indoctrinate and
recruit young people into their ranks.
We in the Niger recognize the necessity of disengagement and reintegration, one
of the five pillars outlined in resolution 2250 (2015). Since 2017, 240 ex-combatants
of the terrorist organization Boko Haram who had voluntarily surrendered to the
authorities joined a reintegration centre in the Diffa region. Through this centre and
the humane treatment that they receive there, the Niger intends to send a strong signal
to encourage those young people to lay down their arms and lead a new constructive
life in society.
Youth, particularly young women, play a critical role in peace processes.
Studies have shown that the most sustainable way to preserve and secure peace is
to involve women: they are the pillars of the consolidation of peace, and, above all,
of conflict prevention. Therefore, my delegation reiterates the need to continue to
protect and strengthen the full participation of women in peace and security. Young
women such as Captain Ouma Laouali, the first female pilot in the Niger’s air force,
who has just completed her training as a Herk pilot, is debunking stereotypes about
20-0640021/123

S/2020/346

youth and young women in particular. We must continue to reinforce the type of
partnerships that have allowed Captain Ouma Laouali and many others to hone their
skills, which will be essential to regional peacekeeping operations.
The latest Secretary-General’s report on women and peace and security
(S/2019/800) has established that young women human rights defenders face serious
levels of intimidation because of their essential work and service. Yet a report on
development finance notes that only 0.2 per cent of total bilateral aid for interventions
in precarious and conflict areas went directly to women’s organizations.
We recognize the essential role of young women in peace processes but regret
that only 20 per cent of peace agreements signed between 1990 and 2018 contain
special provisions for women. A gender-based approach to conflict prevention would
be a step in the right direction to enlarge and consolidate the civic space for young
women’s participation. Measures must account for the gendered dimensions of
conflicts and how they amplify existing inequalities.
Unless we tackle the structural barriers to youth representation in political
processes, we will continue to face a poor presence of young people in decisionmaking bodies. In the Niger, the Youth Parliament and the Youth National Council
are two platforms that have successfully ensured that the voices of youth are heard
at the highest levels of decision-making in national policies and at the local level.
When we do not involve young people, we silence them, and when we
silence young people, we silence our future and overlook new ways of tackling
seemingly intractable challenges. That is why my delegation would make the
following recommendations.
First, with regard to the disengagement and reintegration pillar of the youth,
peace and security agenda, we recommend the establishment of programmes to
support the reintegration of children and youth rescued from armed conflicts and
the adoption of a handover protocol for the transfer of children from military custody
to civilian child-protection authorities. We would like to stress the need for such
programmes to be gender- and age-sensitive and to be inclusive of those groups in
the process of building more resilient and sustainable communities.
Secondly, my delegation calls for increased funding and technical support
for the vital efforts of youth, especially young women, working in conflict areas,
in accordance with the recommendations contained in resolutions 2250 (2015) and
1325 (2000).
Thirdly, as the Envoy on Youth stated last July (see S/PV.8577), we support
the designation of a youth focal point in each peacekeeping mission to ensure and
consolidate the participation of young people in peace processes.
Lastly, we call on all Member States to set up bodies that allow for the
systematic participation of the youth in various national, regional and international
decision-making processes.
To conclude, at a time when the world is facing a common enemy and a global
pandemic, we are reminded of the importance of partnerships. We welcome the
institutionalization of the youth, peace and security agenda by the African Union
in its Peace and Security Council since 2018. This has created a unique platform
for reinforcing the role of African youth in the African Union Silencing the
Guns initiative.
The words of Wangari Maathai, “There are opportunities even in the most
difficult moments”, find greater resonance today in the African youth’s resolve to
silence the guns and as the world battles the coronavirus disease pandemic.
22/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Annex 11
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
We would like to thank the Secretary-General for his presentation of the
youth, peace and security report (S/2020/167). We are also grateful to the SecretaryGeneral’s Envoy on Youth, Ms. Wickramanayake, as well as to the other briefers,
Ms. Olla Al-Sakkaf and Mr. Gatwal Augustine Gatkuoth, for sharing their views.
It goes without saying that youth have a great potential and an important role
to play in the development of society, inter alia, through meaningful participation in
a wide range of peace-related tasks such as conflict resolution, peacebuilding and
sustaining peace. The need for the constructive engagement of youth in activities
aimed at maintaining peace and security in situations of armed conflict is also
reflected in Security Council resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018).
At the same time, the involvement of young people in any political activity
should be meaningful and based on their professional knowledge and skills, rather
than driven by the desire to produce beautiful statistics or to fill certain quotas
pertaining to age or gender. Moreover, young people should not be drawn into any
political activities until they reach the legal age to do so.
The task of promoting a positive image of youth should not overshadow
the real challenges we have to address as members of the Security Council. It is
well known that, unfortunately, young people are especially vulnerable to radical
ideologies. Their search for self-identification against the backdrop of a lack of
life wisdom, experience or education, as well as their efforts to find their place in
society, are often exploited by extremist and terrorist groups in order to involve
youth in illegal activities.
In this regard, United Nations anti-terrorism mechanisms could and should
be useful in helping young people by promoting stronger cooperation on the part
of the international community in shielding young people from the influence of
terrorist and radical ideologies, cutting off the channels through which such groups
incite young people and combating the use of the Internet by terrorist groups for the
recruitment of young people.
Special attention should be also paid to the phenomenon of external
stakeholders meddling in the internal affairs of sovereign States by indoctrinating
and brainwashing young people, in particular with the aim of shaping the domestic
political landscape or overthrowing legitimate authorities under the guise of
promoting democracy or human rights. External support for youth should not trigger
unrest or protests.
We are convinced of the importance of promoting a culture of peace and
tolerance among young people. To that end, each State has to create favourable
conditions to help young people realize their full potential and be well-integrated
into society and its social, economic and political activities. Providing youth with
high-quality education and employment opportunities are important steps in that
regard. It is also vital to encourage young people to participate in socially meaningful
activities, help them improve their skills and talents, boost their self-confidence and
self-esteem and teach them the value of peaceful coexistence.
In Russia we prioritize support for youth organizations and the promotion
of intercultural and interreligious dialogue among youth. The Russian Federation
is doing a lot to help young people to achieve those aims. They are at the core of
our national policy on youth until 2025, which was adopted by the Government in
2014 and has been implemented at the federal, regional and municipal levels. We
20-0640023/123

S/2020/346

also focus on preventing the spread of radical and terrorist ideology among the
younger generation.
We are holding numerous seminars and forums on this topic at the national
and international levels. In particular, in October 2017, we were pleased to host the
nineteenth World Festival of Youth and Students in Sochi, which assembled more
than 20,000 people from over 180 countries.

24/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Annex 12
Statement by the Second Deputy Permanent Representative of
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to the United Nations, Halimah
DeShong
We join Council members in thanking the Dominican Republic for arranging
this timely open debate via video-teleconference with a focus on accelerating the
youth, peace and security agenda. We also thank Secretary-General Guterres,
Ms. Wickramanayake, the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth, and Mr. Gatkuoth
for their insightful briefings, and we look forward to the upcoming briefing by
Ms. Al-Sakkaf.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines regards the participation and leadership of
youth as a key pillar of the whole-of-society approach that is necessary for achieving
lasting peace, security and sustainable development worldwide.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is encouraged by the continued evolution
of the youth, peace and security infrastructure in the Caribbean and Latin America.
We take note of initiatives to promote peace among Haitian youth through the use of
sports in neighbourhoods gravely affected by violence, and of the many contributions
of young people to the peace process in Colombia.
The youth, peace and security agenda is particularly relevant for Africa, the
continent with the largest youth population. It is heartening to see that young leaders
such as Mr. Gatkuoth remain committed to building a fairer, more peaceful future
on the continent by tackling a range of issues from terrorism and unemployment to
climate change.
National and regional progress notwithstanding, sufficiently funded,
focused and strategic action is required to accelerate this agenda all over the world,
especially in the light of enduring legacies of anti-youth ideologies and the increased
threat posed by the coronavirus disease. With that in mind, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines wishes to reiterate the following strategic interventions.
We must continue to fund the Peacebuilding Commission and to support even
greater policy coherence within the wider peacebuilding architecture of the United
Nations system. In particular, young people from diverse groups must continue to be
engaged as crafters of policies rather than simply as policy recipients. Funding must
target the high levels of unemployment and the barriers to education and training
that render youth vulnerable to recruitment, criminality and violence. That is even
more urgent considering the almost-universal drastic increase in unemployment and
overall despair occasioned by the pandemic. With the pandemic amplifying existing
inequalities, we call for responses that engage and account for the intersections of
the women and peace and security and the youth, peace and security agendas in
order to ensure young women’s leadership and participation in peacebuilding and
to address the escalating levels of sexual and gender-based violence. In addition,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines would welcome further reporting and focus on the
youth, peace and security agenda.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is inextricably linked to youth,
peace and security programming. Future generations must be offered the freedom of
a safe and secure world. That necessarily entails greater efforts from the international
community to mobilize the necessary resources to adapt to and mitigate the effects
of climate change — the greatest threat facing young people. Young people, in their
diversity, have often been misunderstood and silenced, but they have always spoken.
They have always had a voice. It is our responsibility to develop the apparatus with
which to meaningfully engage youth and ensure their full participation in decisionmaking as we collectively reimagine and craft a future marked by social justice and
social transformation.
20-0640025/123

S/2020/346

Annex 13
Statement by the Permanent Representative of South Africa to the
United Nations, Jerry Matjila
At the outset, I would like to thank Secretary-General António Guterres
and our remarkable trio of youth activists and briefers for their comprehensive and
enlightening briefings this morning. It is always encouraging to hear from the youth
about their role in, and contribution to, peace processes in various conflict zones
around the world.
South Africa welcomes the initiative of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan,
which, during its tenure in the Council in 2015, ushered in landmark resolution 2250
(2015). We also commend Peru for its important role in taking forward the youth,
peace and security agenda, especially with regard to the adoption of resolution 2419
(2018), and we welcome the Dominican Republic’s initiative to convene today’s
open debate in this uncertain environment resulting from the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic and its impact on young people worldwide.
During South Africa’s presidency of the Council, we sought to prioritize the
role of young people and their contribution to the youth, peace and security agenda
in our efforts to Silence the Guns in Africa by 2020. That resulted in the adoption
of a Council presidential statement (S/PRST/2019/15) containing six additional
measures to be taken in order to mobilize our youth to accelerate the implementation
of that initiative. That resonates with the Secretary-General’s call this year for a
global ceasefire.
The role of youth in relation to peace and security is of particular importance
to the African continent, where 60 per cent of the population, according to some
estimates, is under the age of 25. South Africa supports efforts to fully harness and
promote innovation in young people’s contribution to peace through investing in
their capacities, redressing the structural barriers that limit youth participation in
peace and security, and emphasizing partnerships and collaborative action where
young people are viewed as equal and essential partners for peace.
Those aspects are highlighted in the 2018 “The missing piece: independent
progress study on youth, peace and security” (see S/2018/86). They are also
reflected in the challenges presented in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/167),
compounded by the additional challenge of youth human rights violations. We would
like to share some thoughts on the five key pillars of action.
First, on participation, we acknowledge the role played by young people as
agents of change. They were instrumental in advancing the goals of the broader
struggle for liberation and democracy in our country. Young people who were often
at the front lines of the battle for freedom are now also at the forefront of combating
poverty, inequality and unemployment in South Africa. The South African
Government has therefore made the empowerment of youth central to its development
agenda and has set up programmes dedicated to job creation, development and youth
education. Today, thanks to the heroic role played by our youth throughout the anticolonial and anti-apartheid struggles, we celebrate the twenty-sixth anniversary of
our freedom in South Africa.
Secondly, on protection and prevention, South Africa supports ensuring a safe
and enabling environment for youth in conflict situations, particularly young refugees
and internally displaced persons. That is vital to creating a post-conflict environment
for their participation in the economy and society in general, and can serve as a
preventive measure for addressing inequality, discrimination, exclusion and human
rights violations as drivers of conflict — as identified by the Secretary-General. In
26/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

that regard, investment in the meaningful participation of young people in politics
and the socioeconomic sphere is therefore vital. The Council must also not forget the
plight of millions of young migrants in various corners of the world.
Thirdly, with regard to partnerships, disengagement and reintegration,
it is important to build on the active engagement of young people and youth
organizations in multilateral processes in order to ensure long-term partnerships
and to make sure that the voice of young people is reflected. Most important, we
need to mainstream and institutionalize youth participation and partnerships in all
peace and security processes.
In that regard, we would like to highlight the Continental Framework on Youth,
Peace and Security, developed by the African Union’s Peace and Security Council
as part of the continent’s peace and security architecture, as well as the study on
the roles and contributions of youth towards peace and security in Africa. These
serve as good frameworks to be replicated elsewhere. With regard to disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, it remains essential to prioritize young people who
have spent their formative years as participants in armed conflict and extremist
groups, as they are particularly vulnerable.
Fourthly, society must pay particular attention to Security Council reforms as
new Council organs are established for post-conflict situations.
Fifthly, with regard to the empowerment of young women, South Africa
continues to be concerned about a trend of youth programmes prioritizing the
societal role of young men over young women. That is further exacerbated by the
disproportionate targeting of young women in the form of sexual and gender-based
violence. Therefore, the outcomes of this meeting should advance the implementation
of Council resolution 1325 (2000) — adopted during Namibia’s presidency — the
twentieth anniversary of which we celebrate today, and its subsequent resolutions,
including resolution 2493 (2019), on women and peace and security, adopted in
October 2019 during South Africa’s presidency of the Council.
I would like to conclude by emphasizing that South Africa believes that we
must harness the dynamism and positivity of young people and build resilience in
order to counter recourses to violence as means of pursuing misguided interests.

20-0640027/123

S/2020/346

Annex 14
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the
United Nations, Kais Kabtani
At the outset, I would like to thank the Dominican Republic for convening this
debate on the important issue of youth, peace, and security. I also thank SecretaryGeneral António Guterres for being with us today and for his valuable briefing, as
well as the civil society briefers for their insights.
Young people represent the majority in the countries affected by conflict and
violence or in post-conflict situations. They are one of the most vulnerable strata
of those societies and endure the devastating impact of conflicts and violence at
all levels and stages. Inaccurate perspectives and stereotypes portray them as a
problem that needs to be solved, or identify them as either perpetrators or victims.
The upsurge in terrorism and violent extremism also tends to be linked to the role
of young people.
As we celebrate the fifth anniversary of the youth, peace and security agenda,
we reiterate the crucial role of young people, as recognized by resolution 2250 (2015),
for their contribution to efforts to maintain and promote peace and security, and to
prevent and resolve conflicts.
We call for the global implementation of resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419
(2018) in order to prioritize our youth in conflict- and post-conflict-related efforts.
We consider the five pillars highlighted by resolution 2250 (2015) — participation,
partnerships, prevention, protection, and disengagement and reintegration —
essential to promoting young people’s role and contribution to peace processes and
conflict resolution.
In the same vein, we underscore the need for youth empowerment strategies
to more effectively promote and enhance their role in conflict transformation by
considering young people as dynamic forces capable of strengthening the foundation
of societies and as key stakeholders in peacebuilding strategies and action plans.
They must have access to economic opportunities, political participation, social
services and security, and they must be protected from all forms of marginalization,
hopelessness and stigmatization that may lead to radicalization and violent extremism.
The considerable efforts being made by the international community and
within the United Nations system to recognize and promote the role of youth in
peacebuilding processes must be continued and enhanced to further operationalize
resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018) and institutionalize the youth, peace and
security agenda.
In that regard, additional measures can be taken, such as adding specific
language to mission mandates to encourage the meaningful participation of youth
in peace and security efforts, including in mediation and peace negotiations;
monitoring ceasefires and the implementation of peace agreements; integrating a
youth, peace and security analysis into thematic and country-specific reports and
briefings to the Security Council, and increasing the participation of young briefers
in the Council; and developing and adopting national road maps and action plans for
the implementation of resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018).
In conclusion, we reiterate the importance of youth in any society, and the
pivotal role they can play, when they are successfully empowered and engaged in
transformation programmes, in not only maintaining peace and security but also in
combating terrorism and realizing the Sustainable Development Goals.

28/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Annex 15
Statement by the Acting Deputy Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations, James Roscoe
I thank the President of the Council for calling this open debate today. We
are also very grateful to the Secretary-General, his Envoy on Youth and our other
briefers. We are particularly glad to hear those perspectives from the young briefers.
They have provided a broader and more personal context for the youth, peace and
security agenda, and have given us a great deal to reflect upon. I thank them all
very much.
Today I want to focus on three points. First, as others have done, I wish to
explore the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) on youth and on this
agenda. Secondly, I will talk about the critical role of education. Thirdly, I will stress
the importance of protecting young human rights defenders and young peacebuilders.
Allow me to begin with a quick word on COVID-19. I think we all know
that the world is experiencing an unprecedented challenge in the face of this global
pandemic. And it is clear that we can defeat COVID-19 only if we work together to
defeat it everywhere. That will require a global effort, but young people are going
to be key to the global response. That means we must listen to them and ensure that
their needs are taken into account and that they are involved in decisions about our
handling of the crisis, as it affects their lives.
As others have noted, more than half of the world’s population is under the
age of 30, and these young people will be hard hit by the second-order effects of the
virus. They will experience the uncertainty and hardship of the global economic
slowdown, social disruption and, in some places, humanitarian and conflict impacts,
if we do not respond quickly to the challenges that COVID-19 will mean for vulnerable
societies. We therefore need youth to join our efforts aimed at fighting the virus, and
we need to ensure that they do not bear the brunt of its impact.
The second point I wanted to address was education. It was really striking in
Gatwal’s story to hear of how his life pivoted when he was in Uganda and getting an
education, freeing him from the cycle of violence that had trapped his father. While
it is clear that shortcomings in education are not a new phenomenon in many parts
of the world, the pandemic is also clearly having a profound impact on education
systems, with over 1.5 billion children and youth out of school. More disruption will
follow as the virus spreads. It is important to note that missing out on an education is
a huge waste of young people’s potential. More important, lack of education makes
societies in which young people live less safe and less prosperous because, as Gatwal
said, it was an education that gave him hope and prospects. It is without education that
young people without hope and prospects turn to alternatives, including violence.
We also know that school closures have a disproportionate impact on girls’
lives, with girls facing increased risks of child marriage, teenage pregnancy,
gender-based violence, sexual exploitation and the risk of dropping out of school
permanently. It is therefore critical that, where we can, we get schools to open as
quickly as possible. It is also worth noting that it is not just COVID-19 that is closing
schools down. As we have heard in the Council over the last several months, in the
Sahel, increased violence has forced the closure of hundreds of schools and pushed
children out of education again, with a knock-on effect on the conflict there.
The United Kingdom is committed to standing up for the right of every girl to
have 12 years of quality education. We have consistently provided funding to deliver
on this promise, and we shall continue to do so. In fact, we have added an additional
20-0640029/123

S/2020/346

$6 million to the Education Cannot Wait programme in order to provide education
to the world’s most vulnerable children and youth, particularly as they are being
affected by COVID-19.
Finally, my third point is that young people must have the freedom and rights
to champion what they believe in. We have been gravely concerned by reprisals
against young human rights defenders and peacebuilders. Young people face attacks
and threats and restrictions on their freedom in attempts to stop them from doing
their critical work, including, sadly, their work at the United Nations. Young women
are at particular risk, especially when both age and gender can work against them.
That is why in February this year we co-hosted an Arria Formula meeting on
reprisals against women human rights defenders and women peacebuilders. Some of
the women who briefed the Security Council at that meeting were young. We believe
the Council must work together to foster an enabling environment for young people
working on peace and security.
The representative of South Africa reminded us earlier that today is South
Africa’s Freedom Day. In truth, it is impossible to imagine South Africa winning
that freedom without the energy and mobilization of its youth. It is important to
note that youth paid a high price for that freedom, from the Soweto uprisings in
1976 right through the violence that occurred in the lead-up to democratic elections.
As we reflect on that history, our job in the Council becomes clear: we must ensure
that the voice for the youth of the world becomes a central part of the way we
govern ourselves and decide on our future, but in a way that does not come at such a
great cost.

30/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Annex 16
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Kelly Craft
I thank Mr. Singer Weisinger for hosting this important discussion today. I also
thank Secretary-General Guterres for his briefing and for his report (S/2020/167) on
such a critical issue. I know I am not alone in saying that our future truly does rest
in the hands of our young people and that we must do everything in our power to
remove the obstacles that limit their meaningful participation in public life.
One way we can include young people is by listening to their voices. I am
therefore delighted that we were able to welcome to the Security Council today three
amazing young leaders: Jayathma, Olla and Gatwal. I wish to acknowledge their
courageous work in improving communities around the world.
Five years ago, the Security Council adopted resolution 2250 (2015), the first
resolution fully dedicated to the vital role that young people play in the maintenance
of international peace and security. Two years ago, we adopted resolution 2419
(2018), which urged the Secretary-General and his special envoys to incorporate
the views of young people and involve them at decision-making levels. Today we
have come together to take stock of the progress made and to consider the steps
required to improve youth participation and ensure the full implementation of these
resolutions. There should be no doubt that the Security Council takes young people
and their concerns seriously.
In so many conflicts, youth continue to be caught in the crosshairs. Ninety
per cent of the 1.85 billion young women and men in the world today come from
developing countries. Twenty-five per cent of them — more than 400 million
people — are directly affected by violence or armed conflict. Surely this cannot
continue to be the norm. When schools are shut down, hospitals are targeted or aid
gets blocked, it is youth who are the most vulnerable. Now the imperative to protect
them is even greater: on top of the social, education and health systems that have
already been weakened by conflict or disaster, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic is triggering multiple, interlinked crises affecting hundreds of millions of
young people.
The United States has already emphasized that effective mitigation of COVID-19
requires Government transparency and accountability, the full participation of civil
society and access to information. But as we heard from Ms. Al-Sakkaf today, the
situation also demands the engagement of young people. Unfortunately, barriers to
that engagement remain, including through intimidation and attacks violating young
people’s human rights and insufficient investments in systems that facilitate their
inclusion, and most especially education.
As States Members of the United Nations, it is our responsibility to guarantee
a safe environment for all human rights defenders, including young human rights
defenders and peacebuilders. We remain concerned about attacks and limitations
on young people’s freedom of speech, movement, assembly and association. Neither
they nor their family members should face retaliation or detention for speaking out.
All young women and men have the fundamental right to take part in public life —
a right they possess regardless of their nationality, ethnicity, caste, class, religion,
gender, sexual orientation or political affiliation.
As we strive to include young people, the Council must recognize that
leaders face a deficit of trust. Many young people do not have high levels of faith
in Government institutions. Furthermore, when young people are marginalized or
discriminated against, it becomes easier for terrorist groups to recruit and target
20-0640031/123

S/2020/346

them. I will repeat that because I think it is important that we understand that young
people, when marginalized or discriminated against, do become targets, and it
becomes much easier for terrorist groups to recruit them.
As leaders, we have real work to do in this space; indeed, we have a
responsibility. Thankfully, many young people are already showing us how to be
a part of the solution, just as our three young briefers have done today. They have
played an essential role in preventing violent extremism by reaching out to their
peers in positive ways through friends and social media. For our part, the Trump
Administration will continue to help young people acquire the skills they need
to shape the governance and politics of their countries. Our efforts are aimed at
building partnerships with promising young leaders around the world and across
the United Nations system, so that the voices and perspectives of young people can
be amplified.
In addition to the work undertaken by UNICEF, the United Nations
Development Programme and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to protect and strengthen youth participation, United Nations field
missions in the Central African Republic, Liberia and elsewhere are enabling young
people to develop national security strategies. We encourage this kind of engagement
in policymaking decisions, especially in post-conflict environments.
Just and peaceful societies are ones that listen to and incorporate the opinions
and aspirations of all their people. I know these are the societies we wish to build.
Accordingly, the voices of young women and men must be heard, their views must
be valued and their participation must be ensured.

32/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Annex 17
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam to the United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
We thank the Dominican presidency for the opportunity to continue our
engagement with this topic. We are also grateful to the Secretary-General for his
first comprehensive report (S/2020/167), and to all briefers for their briefings today.
This year marks the fifth anniversary of resolution 2250 (2015), the landmark
resolution on youth, peace and security. In the past five years, millions of children
have become young men and women, and millions of young people have entered
adulthood. But youth should not be simply defined as a transition from childhood
to adulthood. Youth is a unique period of dreaming big and aiming high, full of
potential, energy and creativity soon to be realized.
The report of the Secretary-General highlights many positive examples of
youth participation in peace processes and youth-led peacebuilding initiatives, from
the Philippines to Mali to Colombia. We are also encouraged to see the pioneering role
that youth is playing to address today’s challenges, including that of climate change
and, more recently, the coronavirus disease pandemic. However, those examples are
just a few of thousands of other untold examples, and many thousands more could
have been a reality if they had received due recognition and support. The lack of
awareness, the absence of a comprehensive youth framework and limited resources
are among the biggest impediments to the enhancement of the role and participation
of youth in many places around the world, especially conflict-affected areas.
To further promote the youth, peace and security agenda, we need to, first
and foremost, redouble our efforts aimed at raising public awareness about the role
of young people, particularly young women. At the national level, we dedicate the
month of March to youth, in celebration of our youth’s outstanding achievements and
to inspire young generations.
At the regional level, the leaders of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) hold annual face-to-face dialogues with youth representatives to hear their
thoughts and recommendations on issues of peace, security and development. Such
activities show how much we trust our youth as important partners. These dialogues
also serve to strengthen our young people’s sense of responsibility as future leaders.
Investment in youth policies always yields great returns, both tangible and
intangible. Viet Nam has enacted the Youth Law and, for 10 years, has implemented
a youth-development strategy as an integral part of its national socioeconomic
strategy. We believe that with a comprehensive framework for youth-related issues,
including education, vocational training, employment and health care, we are on
the right track to addressing the root causes of conflicts, violent extremism and
radicalization. For youth affected by conflicts, in particular youth in phases of
disengagement or reintegration, such a framework is key to helping them heal the
scars left by conflicts, regain confidence and rebuild their lives.
It is also necessary to further underscore the crucial importance of education
and a culture of peace. All initiatives on conflict prevention and resolution and
national reconciliation come primarily from the understanding of the values of
peace, tolerance and moderation. We welcome all efforts aimed at upholding and
instilling these values, especially with the active participation of youth.
Last but not least, we call for strengthened cooperation with respect to
youth. Regional and subregional organizations play an important role in this regard
by connecting and coordinating efforts related to youth, peace and security at all
levels. ASEAN has established youth-cooperation mechanisms at the ministerial and
20-0640033/123

S/2020/346

senior-official levels and is now implementing the ASEAN Work Plan on Youth.
ASEAN is also undertaking youth exchange programmes with external partners. We
encourage further youth cooperation among regional organizations and between the
United Nations and regional organizations in order to make meaningful progress in
this agenda.
In conclusion, all our efforts today will be continued and led by our youth
tomorrow. The value of their role, participation and contribution in issues of peace
and security cannot be overemphasized. We reaffirm our support for the youth,
peace and security agenda and its effective implementation, and believe that today’s
meeting is a meaningful commemoration of the anniversary of this agenda.

34/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Annex 18
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan to the
United Nations, Adela Raz
I want to thank the Dominican Republic, President of the Security Council for
April, for hosting today’s open video-teleconference debate on the topic of youth,
peace, and security. This year coincides with the celebration of the fifth anniversary
of resolution 2250 (2015), which, for the first time, included the consideration of
young people in Security Council discussions on international peace and security.
The participation of youth is based on the five key pillars of participation,
protection, prevention, disengagement and reintegration, and partnerships. This
concept was strengthened in 2018 through the presentation of “The missing peace:
independent progress study on youth, peace and security” (see S/2018/86), mandated
by resolution 2250 (2015), through the Secretary-General’s launch of the first United
Nations youth strategy, entitled “Youth 2030”, and through the adoption of resolution
2419 (2018), which reiterated and called for the increased role of youth in all levels
of decision-making related to security, conflict and peace, including in peace
agreements. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his report issued on
2 March (S/2020/167), and for the recommendations included therein.
A sustainable peace and an end to modern conflicts cannot be achieved
without the involvement of stakeholders from all segments of society. Recognizing
the role and importance of meaningful participation by young men and women in
preventing and resolving conflicts and sustaining peace must be a key factor in and
principle of peacebuilding efforts and post-peace development. That is especially
true in a country with a very young population like Afghanistan, where 63 per cent
of our population is below the age of 25 and 46 per cent of those are children under
the age of 15. Talking about the future of Afghanistan and its conflict resolution and
economic development means talking about the needs of those 27.5 million people
yearning for peace, education and opportunities in order to fulfil their dreams
and aspirations.
With that in mind, promoting the participation of youth in key decision- and
policymaking has been a priority in the agenda of the Government of Afghanistan,
as reflected in the Afghanistan National Peace and Development Framework, the
national priority programmes and the Afghanistan Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs). As a result of our commitment to our national framework and SDGs, some
of our young people have joined the ranks of high-ranking officials in the civil and
security sectors. Afghanistan has worked diligently to equip the new generations
with opportunities to become the leaders of our new Afghanistan.
As part of those efforts, the Government has instituted legislation to create
fair access to education and subsequent employment opportunities for young
men and women in our country. We have worked to eliminate child labour while
instituting policies for the retention of students, especially girls, through the 2019
girls’ education policy. Policies such as the Safe Schools Declaration have sought
to improve education infrastructure and mitigate the threat of insecurity that would
keep our children out of school. The Government has also continued its work to
strengthen the country’s tertiary education system and, through the second skills
development project, has established and reinforced institutions that impart
technical and vocation skills that can help our youth explore a diverse stream of
employment opportunities.
As part of our peace efforts, we understand the importance of including youth
in the intra-Afghan negotiations with the Taliban. In April 2019, the Government of
Afghanistan convened the consultative loya jirga on peace that saw the participation
20-0640035/123

S/2020/346

of 3,200 representatives from all parts of Afghanistan, including youth. The jirga
adopted a road map for peace highlighting the participation of youth and women
in peace talks. In line with that principle, the Afghan Government has stressed and
reiterated not only that should young women and men be considered as part of the
Government’s inclusive negotiating team, but also that the constitutional rights and
past advances secured for them should be preserved in any peace settlement. We
remain steadfast in our dedication to ensuring that the outcome of those negotiations
is an inclusive agreement that represents all segments of our society in keeping with
the principles of a democratic and representative republic.
Ensuring the protection and well-being of our youth has also been an area of
priority for the Government of Afghanistan. The Government has passed legislation,
including a revised Penal Code in 2018 and the Child Rights Protection Law in 2019,
to ensure Afghanistan’s proper compliance with the Convention on the Rights of the
Child and relevant international obligations. That has been further accompanied by
the institutionalization of zero-tolerance policies on such matters as the involvement
of children at the level of the Afghan national and local police and the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces.
However, there is more to be done. Despite our continued efforts, youth
remain one of the groups most harshly affected by the ongoing conflict. The rate
of child casualties has risen yearly since 2013, and illegal armed groups, including
the Taliban, continue to put children in harm’s way, using them as human shields
and child soldiers. That is an inexcusable and grave violation of international
human rights law. The current climate in Afghanistan, resulting from decades of
unrelenting conflict, has left generations disenfranchised and our youth vulnerable
in ways that the Taliban and other illegal armed groups have exploited. We have
consistently asked the Taliban to enter into a ceasefire with the Government so as
to prevent further loss of life among our youth and Afghans as a whole, and now,
with the arrival of coronavirus disease (COVID-19), we reiterate that call even more
emphatically. Our country demands peace, and we need to be able to address the
effects of the pandemic, including the precarious situation of many of our youth,
who are facing the effects of school closures and the loss of economic activities on
their well-being.
I would like to close by emphasizing that the aspirations of young Afghans to
a peaceful and stable Afghanistan are the aspirations of Afghanistan as a whole. At
a time when we are facing the challenge of COVID-19 as a common threat, there is a
need for all citizens, including youth, to play a key role in addressing that challenge
by raising awareness, following Government guidelines and, where possible, helping
those most vulnerable to the effects of the threat. The first and most urgent step
towards achieving that goal is to reach an immediate ceasefire with a view to ending
the suffering in Afghanistan and creating a suitable environment for the delivery
of humanitarian aid and assistance. As we start the holy month of Ramadan, we
stress our call to the Taliban to see this time of peace and reflection as a time to
institute the humanitarian ceasefire our people desperately need. We encourage our
international partners and allies to join our calls for the future and well-being of
Afghanistan and of the new generations who deserve peace and a future in which
their hopes can become realities.

36/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Annex 19
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Argentina to the
United Nations
Allow me first to express my delegation’s gratitude for the initiative of the
Government of the Dominican Republic to convene this video-teleconference
on youth, peace and security. In addition, I would like to welcome the briefings
submitted by the Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres; the Secretary-General’s
Envoy on Youth, Ms. Jayathma Wickramanayake; the Project Coordinator of Youth
Without Borders Organization for Development, Ms. Olla Al-Sakkaf; and the
founder of the Young Adult Empowerment Initiative for South Sudan and Uganda,
Mr. Gatwal Augustine Gatkuoth.
From the very beginning, Argentina has embraced the Secretary-General’s new
emphasis on conflict prevention and the development of the concept of sustainable
peace or peacekeeping, a narrative in which youth and women have a fundamental
role to play. Our country recognizes that peace and security are interrelated and
mutually reinforcing. We recognize the essential role of youth in conflict prevention
and resolution, as well as their involvement as a key aspect of the sustainability,
inclusiveness and success of peacekeeping and peace-building activities. Thus,
we support the implementation of resolution 2250 (2015), which promotes, at the
international level, young people as instruments of peace, dialogue, understanding
and the fight against poverty, violence and intolerance.
Indeed, Argentina considers that armed conflicts are highly detrimental to
the education and work opportunities of young people, who are vulnerable and
often exposed to dangerous situations that hinder their development and affect their
schooling. An estimated 300,000 armed children and youth live in conflict zones.
They are victims, forced to live in constant violation of their rights, being subjected
to situations such as recruitment, mutilation, kidnapping, sexual violence, attacks on
schools and hospitals and the denial of humanitarian aid.
In addition to violating their most basic human rights, conflicts affect youth
psychologically and socially, thus negatively impacting their development. They
might lose access to education and other age-appropriate activities. They might have
feelings of guilt or perceive violence as normal in the event that they have joined
armed groups, voluntarily or forcibly, or have witnessed or committed acts of extreme
violence. Furthermore, in many cases their suffering feelings of loss, uprooting,
sexual violence or addiction to toxic substances has negative consequences on their
mental health. Many young people in conflict contexts are involved in military
service or war-based, illicit sub-economies. They are repeatedly forcibly recruited
or, in other cases, are driven by cultural, social, economic and political pressures as
the informal economy associated with conflict can sometimes offer them social and
employment opportunities perceived as preferable to poverty and hunger.
It is essential to pay greater attention to the root causes of conflict and the
importance of finding solutions starting with national involvement, in which young
people can play a significant role in conflict prevention and the maintenance of
peace if they are assured of an inclusive environment through the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
In its participation in the Economic, Social and Cultural Council, Argentina
has pointed out that the Peacebuilding Commission acts as a consultative mechanism
and a bridge between the Organization’s peace and security efforts and its efforts
in the areas of development, human rights and humanitarian assistance. In line with
that vision, we believe that the Commission can, through its active role supporting
the Security Council, highlight the contribution of young people to the design
20-0640037/123

S/2020/346

and evaluation of the mandates of peacekeeping operations, especially in its the
peacebuilding phase. In that connection, Argentina supports UNICEF’s request for
urgent progress in efforts to protect children and youth affected by conflict through
the development of legislation, policies and actions at the national level to protect all
young people.
Education is key to peace, security, development and the full enjoyment of
human rights, and continued access to safe education helps protect young people
from the dangers of armed conflict. Education is not only a human right but also an
essential protection mechanism for youth affected by armed conflict, helping them
to reach their full potential and contribute to building stronger communities. In turn,
safeguarding the security of young people allows them to become relevant actors in
the post-conflict peacebuilding, reconstruction and reintegration processes.
Recognizing that young people constitute a large portion of civilians strongly
affected by armed conflict and that the interruption of young people’s access to
education and economic opportunities has definite consequences for sustainable
peace, Argentina led, together with Norway and Spain, the Safe Schools Declaration
and the Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities from Military Use during
Armed Conflict, adopted in Oslo in May 2015. The initiative aimed to raise global
awareness of the seriousness of attacks against students, teachers, schools and
universities and of the military use of schools and universities and to universalize
the Declaration. In that connection, Argentina, Spain and Norway held the third
International Conference on Safe Schools in 2019.
Argentina believes that it is essential that young people, as the leaders of the
future, increase their meaningful and inclusive participation for the consolidation of
peace with transformative potential, rather than engage in violence. Young people
certainly have an important role to play in shaping their own future and in building
peace. They need to be involved in relief, recovery and reconstruction programmes
and be a part of transition and national reconciliation processes. Governments and
civil society, including in partnership with the private sector, must harness the
energy, ideas and experiences of young people to create a new post-conflict society.
Argentina reaffirms what was stated in the Ibero-American Pact for Youth with
regard to encouraging the role of young people as promoters of a culture of peace
through the creation of training programmes on the prevention of violence and
conflict resolution.
The outbreak of an unprecedented worldwide crisis owing to the spread of
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and its shattering consequences, just as the United
Nations commemorates its seventy-fifth anniversary, represents a turning point at
a time when the world is demanding a paradigm shift in multilateralism in order to
achieve the future we want and the United Nations we need. This milestone in the
history of the Organization gives us the opportunity to bring the United Nations
closer to youth, to listen to their voices, aspirations and concerns and to actively
engage them in global dialogues on working together towards an inclusive, peopleoriented United Nations with a view to shaping a better future for all.
At present, the younger generations face multifaceted and difficult challenges
as the world fights relentlessly against COVID-19, and these challenges will be
even harder in the aftermath of the pandemic, when its devastating effects will
result in further lack of employment, training and education, violence and armed
conflict, labour market transformation and impact of climate change. In that context,
Argentina highlights the importance of “Youth 2030: The United Nations Strategy
on Youth”, which clearly identifies peacebuilding and resilience as priorities in the
work of the United Nations system by and for youth. In that regard, resolution 2250

38/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

(2015), on youth, peace and security, adopted in 2015, marks a significant shift
towards recognizing the role of young people as agents of peace.
However, as the Secretary-General stresses in his latest report (S/2020/167),
while progress on including young people in public life has been made, meaningful
youth participation in the maintenance of peace and security remains a challenge. It
is critical that the international community support young people in achieving their
full potential as a positive driving force for building peaceful, sustainable and just
societies. To address that challenge, all relevant stakeholders must work together to
ensure channels for meaningful participation of young people in decision-making
processes and foster inclusive institutions that fully represent and address their
needs and expectations.
In the face of the unprecedented spread of COVID-19, the rapid use of
knowledge and information is of utmost importance when it comes to developing
effective responses to the pandemic. In that respect, young people can play a key
role in mitigating risks and engaging in community outreach during the crisis by, for
instance, using technology, such as mobile applications and social media platforms,
to spread awareness messages on protection and prevention measures in order to
help break the chain of infection, spot cases of violence and abuse and provide peer
support and help to victims.
Moreover, it is important to highlight that young people are taking active,
committed and leading roles in making their voices heard and in demanding a
multilateral system that actively and meaningfully engages them. A new narrative
is in the making — one that sees young people not only as beneficiaries but also
as active agents in peacebuilding and conflict-prevention processes. They can also
play a key role in working jointly with other main stakeholders by helping those
facing different hardships as a result of long-standing conflicts, now intensified by
the pandemic, and by actively engaging in peacebuilding dialogue to ensure that
their rights and well-being are taken into account while building the foundations of
sustainable peace.
Argentina welcomes and strongly supports the global call for peace made by
the Secretary-General on 23 March, in which he stressed the urgent need “to put
armed conflict on lockdown and focus together on the true fight of our lives”. In
that regard, the effective implementation of ceasefires by parties to conflict will
give us an opportunity to put the rights and well-being of young women and men at
the centre of peacebuilding dialogues, fostering a humanitarian, development and
peace approach to their reintegration into societies in order to carry out a process
that is restorative, future-oriented and focused on their specific needs and build the
foundations of sustainable peace.
Finally, we would like to emphasize that the ideals and energy of young people,
who are key agents of social change, economic development and technological
innovation in their communities, constitute an essential potential to help prevent
conflicts and participate in the shaping of lasting peace. That is why we consider it
appropriate to continue dealing with this issue within the framework of the Security
Council, as well as to continue to deepen our understanding of the interrelation
between the role of young people and the maintenance and construction of peace
and peacebuilding.

20-0640039/123

S/2020/346

Annex 20
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Armenia to the
United Nations, Mher Margaryan
I would like to thank the presidency of the Dominican Republic for convening
this video-teleconference on the subject of youth, peace and security. Amid
the challenging circumstances caused by the spread of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19), the important anniversary of the youth, peace and security agenda
should not be overlooked.
Five years ago, in adopting resolution 2250 (2015), the Security Council
recognized the essential role of young women and men in preventing and resolving
conflicts and in sustaining peace. The landmark anniversary is an important
opportunity to reflect on the progress of Member States and to scale up the efforts
of the international community in promoting the meaningful participation of young
people in advancing peace, justice, dialogue and reconciliation and in bringing
the youth perspective to better respond to the multiple challenges posed by the
COVID-19 pandemic.
The first-ever report of the Secretary-General on youth and peace and
security (S/2020/167), released in March, depicts numerous challenges that young
people face, including the violation of their human rights, exclusion, inequality,
deficiencies of education, unemployment and the shrinking civil space. It highlights
the importance of the meaningful participation of young people in public and
political life at all levels and the need to create an enabling environment for young
people in which they are seen and respected as equal citizens with equal rights and
equal voices. I commend the efforts of the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth, Ms.
Jayathma Wickramanayake, to advocate active youth engagement across all pillars
of the Organization.
The Government of Armenia places considerable priority on the promotion
of the inclusive participation of young people in political and public life, most
importantly, at the decision-making levels. The young people in Armenia represent
a very vibrant and active part of our society. Young men and women played a key
role in the democratic transformation in Armenia throughout the peaceful velvet
revolution in May 2018 by fully exercising their rights to freedom of expression and
peaceful assembly in a non-violent manner. Remarkable progress has been achieved
in terms of empowering young leaders, as reflected in the current composition of the
Government, the Parliament as well as the regional authorities in Armenia.
Young people are important agents of change and social transformation.
Attempts to restrict the fundamental freedoms of expression and movement of
young people or to impede their dialogue and interaction, in particular in conflict
situations, result in deepening the dividing lines and can further lead to the
most serious manifestations of intolerance, such as hate crimes and atrocities on
ethnic and religious grounds. Young people are especially prone to radicalization,
in particular in an environment of a State-led policy of the promotion of hatred.
Employing divisive narratives and ethnic profiling at educational institutions and
the glorification of perpetrators of hate crimes as models for young people should
be resolutely condemned by the international community. By contrast, education
policies that aim to promote human rights, dialogue and inclusion represent an
important tool for the prevention of the radicalization of young people, fostering
an understanding of cultural diversity and tolerance towards different religions
and cultures.
We firmly believe that young people can play a key role at all stages of
conflict resolution, particularly in promoting dialogue and confidence-building
40/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

across the dividing lines. The young generation of the Armenians in Artsakh —
Nagorno Karabakh — who have been raised free from outside oppression and foreign
domination, are direct contributors to a conducive environment for the realization
of their fundamental human rights and meaningful participation in public and
political life, including through the exercise of the right to vote and to take part in
the Government. The recently held free, competitive and democratic parliamentary
and presidential elections are illustrative in that regard.
We acknowledge the important work of civil society and youth organizations
in empowering young people to raise their voice for peace, non-violence and
reconciliation. The inclusive and meaningful engagement of young people, in
particular those residing in conflict areas, in peacebuilding initiatives, the promotion
of dialogue, confidence and trust as well as the building youth partnerships are key
to sustainable peace.
Armenia is committed to advancing the youth, peace and security agenda,
harnessing the untapped potential of young people and amplifying their voices and
aspirations in building a safer world.

20-0640041/123

S/2020/346

Annex 21
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Azerbaijan to the
United Nations
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM).
At the outset, we would like to express our gratitude to the delegation of
the Dominican Republic, a fellow country of the Non-Aligned Movement, for
having organized this meeting on the theme “Towards the fifth anniversary of the
youth and peace and security agenda: accelerating implementation of resolutions
2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018)”, and for submitting the concept note on the topic
(S/2020/302, annex).
We are also grateful to His Excellency Secretary-General António Guterres
and other briefers for their statements.
The world today is home to the largest generation of young people in history —
1.8 billion. Close to 90 per cent of them live in developing countries, of which the
States members of the Non-Aligned Movement constitute an absolute majority.
Among civilians, young people account for many of those adversely affected
by armed conflict, including as refugees and internally displaced persons. The
disruption of their access to education and economic opportunities has a negative
impact on durable peace and reconciliation. As the Secretary-General points out
in his report on youth and peace and security (S/2020/167), submitted pursuant
to resolution 2419 (2018), one in four young people is affected by violence or
armed conflict.
The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its call on parties to armed conflict to
comply with obligations applicable to them under international law relevant to the
protection of civilians, including young people. NAM resolutely condemns all acts
of violence, attacks and threats against civilian populations, which may amount to
war crimes, and stresses the importance of ending impunity for such acts.
This year marks the fifth anniversary of resolution 2250 (2015), on youth and
peace and security, which for the first time recognized the important and positive
contribution of youth to efforts for the maintenance and promotion of peace and
security, as well as in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and as a key aspect
of the sustainability, inclusiveness and success of peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts. This was reaffirmed in 2419 (2018).
Promoting and sustaining international peace is a key issue to the NonAligned Movement. The Movement and its member States have historically opposed
war and supported peace.
The Movement has consistently emphasized the need for the involvement
of all segments of society in peace processes, including women and youth, who
can play an important role in the prevention and resolution of conflicts, as well as
in peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts and in building peaceful and resilient
societies. Inclusivity is key to advancing national peacebuilding processes and
objectives in order to ensure that the needs of all segments of society are taken
into account.
At their eighteenth Summit, held in Baku on 25 and 26 October 2019,
under the theme “Upholding the Bandung Principles to ensure a concerted and
adequate response to the challenges of the contemporary world”, the Heads of
State and Government of the Non-Aligned Movement considered ways to increase
the meaningful and inclusive participation of youth in peacebuilding efforts by
42/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

creating policies, including in partnership with the private sector, where relevant,
that would enhance youth capacities and skills and create youth employment to
actively contribute to sustaining peace. The Heads of State and Government of the
Movement also reaffirmed the importance of the inclusion of youth in the process of
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
On the margins of the NAM Baku Summit, the first-ever NAM Youth Summit
was organized upon the initiative of the Republic of Azerbaijan, as an outcome of
which the NAM Youth Network was established to enable the youth representatives
of NAM member States to exchange ideas, visions and perspectives on current
challenges that they face in ensuring sustainable progress and how these difficulties
could be overcome through concerted and adequate responses of their States.
In conclusion, we would like once again to commend the initiative of the
Dominican Republic in convening this meeting to review the implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions, share best practices and lessons learned and
discuss further action on the role of young people in relation to peace and security.

20-0640043/123

S/2020/346

Annex 22
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh to the
United Nations, Rabab Fatima
I thank the Dominican Republic presidency of the Security Council for
organizing this open video-teleconference. I also thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing. I echo the sentiments of the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth and
the other young briefers. Their concerns and aspirations must be taken into due
consideration by us.
Today’s meeting comes at a time when the whole world is fighting against
the dreadful coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Many young medical
professionals, emergency personnel, peacekeepers and peacebuilders are at the
forefront of this battle. Yet many others are stranded in their homes, passing through
an uncertain time. The pandemic has far-reaching impacts on our young generation.
We must therefore pay heed to their voices with regard to overcoming the crisis and
reversing its potential adverse impacts on our peace and development gains. We need
to invest more to help them to adapt to new situations and to be part of the solution.
Bangladesh welcomes the adoption of resolution 2250 (2015). We consider the
subsequent progress study, entitled “The missing peace: independent progress study
on youth and peace and security” (see S/2018/86), and its follow-up resolution 2419
(2018) to be important contributions to the youth, peace and security discourse. They
helped to put the youth, peace and security agenda on a truly multidimensional and
forward-looking trajectory. We also welcome the first-ever report of the SecretaryGeneral on the agenda (S/2020/167). Its recommendations provide a comprehensive
framework for promoting the potential role of young people as active agents of
building and sustaining peace. It is crucial that young people all over the world
have the opportunity to unleash their positive energy and realize their potential
to create a sustainable and peaceful world. To that end, peace and development
actors must work hand in hand, building on the momentum of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
As a fairly young country, Bangladesh will enjoy a demographic dividend from
its large youth population until 2035. They carry forward the proud legacy of earlier
generations of young people who played a leading role in our nation’s independence
and democratic struggles and now play in our strides towards peace and development
through their participation in nation-building efforts. We are working to harness
those historical and demographic dividends into development dividends. We are
making policy interventions to tap into the immense source of transformative energy
of our young women and men and to turn them into true agents of change. Our
Honourable Prime Minister, Sheikh Hasina, has launched the vision of an inclusive,
knowledge-driven economy, under the slogan “Digital Bangladesh”, where young
people are the foot soldiers. Our Youth Development Policy 2017 exemplifies our
efforts not to leave any young person behind. The policy upholds our constitutional
provisions to ensure rights, justice and equity for all young people.
We actively encourage a whole-of-society approach to inculcate in young
people the moral and ethical values of human dignity, pluralism, diversity and nonviolence. We have been actively working towards greater inclusion of the voices
of young people in major policy debates, as well as involving them in the planning
and implementation of our national development plans, including the Sustainable
Development Goals. The new generation of leadership occupies a greater space both
in Government and the private sector.
We have already started receiving rich dividends from such multilayered
initiatives. Our entrepreneurial young generation is leading in e-commerce and
44/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

e-business alleviating unemployment issues and social frustration. In crises and
calamities, they have always been at the forefront through spontaneous engagements
and left their mark. During the COVID-19 pandemic, for example, they have been
contributing in many ways, starting from innovative digital tools and ideas for
tracing infections to raising awareness at the community level.
Going forward, we wish to work more closely with the international community
and the United Nations in implementing Youth 2030: The United Nations Strategy on
Youth in alignment with our national priorities. We also hope to spearhead further
dialogue involving young people around implementing the youth, peace and security
agenda. We look forward to drawing up a comprehensive national action plan on
youth, peace and security.
Investment in the youth, peace and security agenda makes eminent sense from
all considerations. The key challenges faced by our youth today are not necessarily
unique to any particular context, but they have global ramifications. Keeping that in
mind, we would like to underscore the following specific points.
First, the youth, peace and security agenda should be used to develop stronger
narratives to change the general mindset about the youth’s potential to contribute
to peacebuilding, to support and recognize their role in preventing conflict and
sustaining peace, and to restore their trust in Governments and multilateral systems.
For that, we underscore the importance of adequate financing for national and locallevel initiatives aimed at amplifying the participation of the youth in peace processes.
Second, we must institutionalize the involvement of young people in the
promotion of a culture of peace, and thereby promote tolerance and intercultural
and interreligious dialogue within and across societies. We also need to use them
as agents to tackle stereotypes and to counter hate speech and xenophobia sweeping
the globe.
Third, we must utilize the technical savviness of young people and provide
them with some alternative spaces for engagement through youth associations and
networks. That would allow them to guide decision-making and ensure their overall
inclusion. For that, we need to empower young people through the promotion of media
and information literacy, as well as through constructive social media engagement.
Fourth, young men and women remain vulnerable to violent extremist
narratives that can lead them to the path of radicalization and terrorism. They
are also easy prey to organized crime networks. That is particularly worrying in
conflict situations and humanitarian crises, as we are experiencing around the
world. We need to engage young role models to dissuade them. We also need to
develop practical ways at the global, national and community levels to include the
youth in the development of relevant programmes and initiatives aimed at preventing
terrorism and violent extremism.
Fifth, quality, inclusive and transformative education can turn our youth into
truly global citizens, help shape global discourses, foster their critical thinking and
provide them with skill sets for building social cohesion as well as civic and economic
engagement. We must ensure them affordable access to such type of education.
Sixth, with the right environment and tools, young people can indeed prove
to be a force for conflict prevention and sustaining peace to reckon with, even in the
most difficult situations. As a major troop- and police-contributing country, we have
experienced how the young people among our troops and police continue to make a
difference in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Seventh, the youth, peace and security and women, peace and security
agendas have many essential common threads. They need to reinforce each other in
20-0640045/123

S/2020/346

their efforts to overcome the traditional gender norms and practices, which have a
disproportionate impact on the potential of young women in many contexts across
the world. In that regard, the Peacebuilding Commission and Peacebuilding Fund
have demonstrated some useful precedents and results, such as the Gender and
Youth Promotion Initiative. We need more structured engagements for sharing good
practices among United Nations agencies and national Governments in that respect.
Eighth, we need to collect and analyse age-disaggregated data to yield
stronger evidence-based policy interventions, build institutional capacity for the
implementation of the youth, peace and security agenda and reduce structural
barriers to youth participation.
Finally, the COVID-19 crisis has truly demonstrated the digital transformation
that we have gone through during the past couple of decades. In developed parts
of the world, the digital connectivity is helping immensely to maintain business
continuity during this difficult time. Yet, in many other parts of the world, Internet
connectivity and digital platforms still remain a faraway thing. We need to work
together to eliminate this digital divide, particularly among the youth. We must
ensure equal opportunities for the youth from every corner of the world so that they
can thrive together.

46/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Annex 23
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Canada to the United Nations
Canada welcomes the opportunity to contribute to this open debate on youth,
peace and security. We strongly support the inclusion of this issue as a standing item
on the Security Council’s agenda. We welcome the Secretary-General’s first report
on youth, peace and security (S/2020/167), his leadership in engaging young people
in global governance and the call to action that he issued at today’s meeting.
All of us were once young people and, hopefully, we can remember the
challenges we experienced in terms of access, agency, inclusion and accountability.
The evidence is irrefutable. As noted in the 2018 reports entitled “The missing
peace: independent progress study on youth and peace and security” (see S/2018/86)
and the Pathways for Peace: inclusive approaches to preventing violent conflict,
including the young and addressing their aspirations is critical to conflict prevention.
Excluding young people from social, political and economic life deprives them of
their human rights. Moreover, a lack of youth engagement leads to bad decisions and
policies.
The coronavirus disease pandemic is not just a health crisis; it is a human
crisis that has cast into sharp relief the inequalities that existed in all our societies.
It has disproportionately affected women, girls, young people and those already
vulnerable. Heeding the Secretary-General’s call to build back better from this
crisis will require investment in the capacities and resilience of young people,
strengthening their human rights and protecting the civic space that makes their
participation possible.
The inclusion of young people in decision-making is an issue Canada takes
seriously. Last year, Canada launched a National Youth Policy after a broad set
of consultations with thousands of young Canadians. The Policy commits the
Government of Canada, starting in 2020 and every four years thereafter, to release
a report highlighting the state of youth in Canada, covering six priorities, ranging
from leadership, skills, health and employment to truth and reconciliation, and
climate action.
The Youth Policy is grounded in three principles directly relevant to the
implementation of the youth and peace and security agenda. First, young people
have the right to be heard and respected and to influence decisions that affect them
now and will affect them in the future. Secondly, young people have the right to
equal access to opportunities and support. Canada will apply principles of equality,
including Gender-based Analysis Plus, when creating engagement opportunities and
support for young people. Gender-based Analysis Plus assesses how diverse groups
of people experience Government initiatives and considers many identity factors,
such as sexual orientation, gender identity, race, ethnicity, religion, disability,
education, income, culture, geography and age. We know that there are different
outcomes depending on where in Canada you were born and we need to improve data
so we can learn how to target such forms of exclusion through our policies.
When young reach their full potential, it benefits all Canadians. Supporting
young people and amplifying their voices will help build a stronger and more inclusive
Canada. Treating young people as equal members of society helps strengthen social
cohesion and build stronger communities. Building on these principles, we would like
to make the following recommendations to strengthen our collective implementation
of the youth and peace and security agenda.
First, implementation of the youth and peace and security agenda should
be grounded in a developmental and rights-based approach that treats youth as
20-0640047/123

S/2020/346

an investment in our collective future and not a threat to be managed. We should
prioritize the creation of opportunities for political, economic and social inclusion of
the young in all aspects of public life. That means understanding drivers of exclusion
and targeting them through policies that promote equality and equity.
Failure to invest in the capacities and resilience of young people can undermine
trust in institutions and leave young people susceptible to recruitment by armed
groups, violent extremists and gangs, and organized criminal groups. Moreover,
societies where young people cannot reach their full potential will fall short of
realizing the Sustainable Development Goals.
This point is particularly critical in areas such as Africa, where the number of
young people joining the working-age population will exceed that of the rest of the
world combined by 2035. In order to harness this demographic dividend, the region
will need to create 20 million jobs per year and ensure that African young people are
given the education, skills and training needed to join the workforce.
Secondly, we must hold ourselves accountable for encouraging, promoting
and institutionalizing youth participation in conflict-prevention and sustaining
peace. We encourage the Security Council to include youth and peace and security
as a standing agenda item and support the preparation of an annual report by the
Secretary-General on its implementation.
We encourage the Council to regularly consult young people and include their
perspectives and advice in Security Council decisions to promote the creation of
safer environments for young peacebuilders around the world, ensure that Council
mandates encourage greater inclusion of youth representatives in coalitions and
partnerships that aim to support peacebuilding initiatives and processes, and focus on
ways of empowering local peacebuilders. We encourage all Member States to adopt
national action plans on youth and peace and security and to link implementation
with action plans on women and peace and security.
Thirdly, we must find concrete ways to support youth-led peacebuilding
organizations and initiatives, both politically and financially. Lack of adequate
funding for youth-led organizations and the challenge that such organizations face
in meeting fiduciary requirements and accessing existing funding streams are
major obstacles limiting opportunities for young people to contribute to building
and sustaining peace. We welcome the efforts of the Peacebuilding Fund to support
young people’s contributions to peacebuilding, but more work is needed by all of us
to find creative mechanisms to support youth-led organizations at the national and
local levels.
Finally, we believe that the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) has an
important role to play in supporting the implementation of this agenda. As Chair of
the PBC for 2020, Canada is committed to ensuring that the PBC consistently and
systematically consults young people on their peacebuilding priorities as part of our
ongoing country-specific, regional and thematic work. In its advice to the Security
Council and other United Nations bodies, as well as its engagement with regional
and subregional organizations and international financial institutions, we will
ensure that the PBC consistently advocates for the inclusion of youth perspectives
and the creation of opportunities for youth participation in decision-making and
peacebuilding processes. We look forward to working with PBC members as we
develop an action plan to strengthen the PBC’s implementation of the youth and
peace and security agenda.
It is fitting that today’s debate is taking place on the anniversary of the
adoption of the 2016 resolutions on peacebuilding and sustaining peace. Engaging
and empowering the participation of young people in peacebuilding is crucial to our
overall success in preventing conflict and building and sustaining peace. Canada
48/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

looks forward to working with all Member States to ensure that we collectively
deliver on this important agenda.

20-0640049/123

S/2020/346

Annex 24
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Colombia to the
United Nations, Guillermo Fernandez De Soto Valderrama
[Original: Spanish]
I thank you, Sir, for convening this meeting, providing for an exchange of
practical experience in implementing resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018), as
well as an exploration of recommendations on actions to strengthen the role of young
people in strengthening peace and security.
Colombia has reiterated its commitment to young people by promoting the
establishment of legal tools promoting their participation in conflict-resolution and
peacebuilding processes. Moreover, these norms seek to prevent and protect against
the violation of young people’s rights, to promote the effective exercise of their
rights, to provide access to the necessary resources for their full enjoyment of their
rights, and to ensure their participation in society’s various dialogue and decisionmaking mechanisms.
Established under the technical coordination of the “Young Colombia” National
Youth System Directorate under the auspices of the presidency of the Republic, the
Sacúdete programme is one of the national Government’s principal tools for driving
social transformation, highlighting the importance of young people as agents of
change in the transition towards an inclusive society, based on the three principles
of the Government of President Iván Duque: legality, equity and entrepreneurship.
Under this programme, there are currently 1,400 activity centres, such as
conservatories; youth counsellors are being elected across the country; and there is a
virtual marketplace, among other things. This tool equips young Colombians with the
tools they need to overcome social, cultural and economic barriers to their potential.
Colombia recognizes that the only way to achieve stability in areas afflicted
by violence is to create opportunities for the participation and empowerment of
young people. That is why the implementation of projects designed by young people
for young people is among the integral components of Government policy, especially
the policy of peace with legality.
It is in the context of vulnerability and discrimination that phenomena such as
forced recruitment by illegal groups most frequently occur. It is therefore necessary
to tackle the lack of employment and recognition for this segment of the population
in all regions of the country. Young people have potential and play a crucial role in
conflict resolution, violence prevention and peacebuilding, thereby breaking cycles
of violence.
The grave situation facing the world today due to the coronavirus disease
outbreak is a matter with far-reaching consequences. We are all exposed and young
people play a vital role in stopping its spread, primarily by ensuring that the most
vulnerable do not fall sick. Young people should approach the pandemic crisis as an
opportunity to show that by working together in solidarity, not only at the local level
but also at the national and even international levels, we can overcome this crisis.
We are facing a new kind reality unlike any seen in our lifetimes. While we
know that the outbreak affects everyone, its consequences are most acute in the most
vulnerable areas. We must therefore devote attention to the most disadvantaged and
marginalized groups, such as pregnant and lactating young women and girls, persons
with disabilities, ethnic minorities, refugees and displaced persons, and make use of
relevant channels of communication to ensure that the years of hard-won progress in
these communities do not fall by the wayside.
50/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

The Government of Colombia will continue making every possible effort to
build a country and a world in which the human rights and fundamental freedoms of
young people are protected and respected, including those relating to their freedoms
of movement and of expression and their political and civic participation, and
supporting the establishment of a safe environment so that they may work in peace
and security.
Colombia will not stop at peacebuilding. This process with young people calls
for commitment and support on all sides to continue forging ahead on the promising
path we are on. I thank you, Sir, for providing a venue for a range of stakeholders
to share their visions and understand those of others, for recalling the goals and for
recognizing the achievements thanks to the Security Council’s resolutions on youth
and peace and security.

20-0640051/123

S/2020/346

Annex 25
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Djibouti to the
United Nations, Mohamed Siad Doualeh
[Original: French]
At the outset, Djibouti would like to commend the Dominican Republic for
convening this open debate on the theme of youth and peace and security, as well as
for preparing the concept note (S/2020/302).
Issues surrounding young people and the challenges relating to their
participation, their greater inclusion and the prevention of violence remain, for us,
topics of concern and urgency.
The first report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/167) submitted pursuant to
resolution 2419 (2018), on the implementation of resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419
(2018), provides valuable and informative analysis of and insights into the situation
of young people around the world and articulates targeted recommendations.
We take this opportunity to commend the efforts of the Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan in promoting this theme in the Security Council and for the adoption
of resolution 2250 (2015). We thank South Africa for its initiative of December
2019, which led to the adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2019/15, on the
crucial topic of youth mobilization in the context of the major continental initiative
promoting peace and security in Africa, “Silencing the guns by 2020”.
The report entitled “The missing peace: independent progress study on youth
and peace and security” (see S/2018/86) illustrated how young people had for too
long been portrayed as a challenge or problem. While it is true that one’s youth is
the period of life when rebellious potential is highest and there is a lack of trust
in institutions, as well as a conscious effort to unmask them as illegitimate, we
must also stress the vital importance of creating links, structures and institutions
allowing for the full and robust participation of young people in building a peaceful
and prosperous society. To achieve that goal, their motivations, expectations and
aspirations must be taken into account.
Based on our belief that young people can make a significant contribution to
transmitting the ideals of peace and help resolve conflicts, Djibouti incorporated a
major youth pillar into its mediation strategy for the Somali crisis that began in 2000,
better known as of the Arta peace process. In a conscious effort to link generations,
young people, women and traditional leaders have comprised what we refer to as the
“forces of peace”, as opposed to the warlords and cynical actors who have dominated
the Somali political stage since the collapse of the Somali State in 1991.
Numerous studies show that the lack of sufficient attention to material and
economic issues or to mechanisms of exclusion highlights the disturbing phenomenon
of the recruitment of young people into terrorist networks and transnational organized
crime. The radicalization and recruitment strategy of Al-Shabaab militants — a group
whose name means “young people” in Arabic — primarily targets this category of
the population.
An analysis of the geography of terrorism, as highlighted in national plans to
combat and prevent violent extremism, further illustrates the importance of creating
space for the inclusion of young people, in particular, but not only, in large, densely
populated metropolitan areas.
The global COVID-19 crisis and this shared historical experience could
represent an opportunity to create a global civic awareness among young people.
52/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Experience shows that young people have acted and can still act selflessly while
demonstrating unfailing solidarity in the face of challenges.
In conclusion, Djibouti reiterates its support for your efforts, Mr. President,
and supports the concrete recommendations of the Secretary-General concerning
the four Ps — participation, prevention, partnership and protection — formulated
with regard to the Security Council, Member States and the United Nations.

20-0640053/123

S/2020/346

Annex 26
Statement by the Permanent Representative of El Salvador to the
United Nations, Egriselda González López
[Original: Spanish]
We thank the presidency of the Dominican Republic for having included this
debate in its programme of work, in the framework of the fifth anniversary of the
youth, peace and security agenda. We thank it also for the efforts made to hold,
within current constraints, a meeting that is open to the membership of the United
Nations. At the same time, we thank the Secretary-General for the presentation of
his report on youth, peace and security (S/2020/167).
We welcome the progress set out in the report, and, concerning the inclusion
of young people in peace processes, we would highlight the participation of young
leaders and their crucial role in the peace process in Colombia and in the interreligious
dialogue in the Philippines and in other countries and regions around the world.
We deplore the continuing serious human rights violations against young
people, as reflected in the report, which we see as a call to continue working towards
the fulfilment of the objectives of the agenda.
Young people represent a majority of the population in countries and regions in
conflict, yet, regrettably, they continue to be excluded from political, economic and
social decision-making processes that have direct implications for their lives; they
also lack opportunities, as can be seen in societies with high youth unemployment
rates and limited training and development options. Such marginalization fosters
distrust of political systems and of those institutions that are aimed at ensuring
their well-being. Hopelessness and mistrust provide fertile ground for criminal or
extremist actors to very easily exploit and manipulate such frustration.
For example, in my country the phenomenon of criminal groups or gangs
flows from a series of economic and social factors, including a peace agreement
lacking measures for the reweaving of the social fabric. All those factors have
created a breeding ground for gangs to establish themselves and expand. This
phenomenon, which was ignored by various Government Administrations, over time
has crystallized into organized criminal structures that feed on young people — the
same segment of the population that suffers first-hand from the consequences of
violence and the acts committed by gangs. Violence is a phenomenon and a social
problem that does not spare young people; it represents a negative factor that limits
their opportunities to achieve optimal sociocultural and economic development.
That is why the Government of El Salvador is committed to empowering
young people through public policies that allow for their personal, social and cultural
growth, maximizing their potential for integration into the productive sector.
The measures taken by the Government of El Salvador in the context of the
commitment to make available alternatives for young people include the appointment
of a presidential commissioner for youth, in addition to the already established
National Institute for Youth, which will be in charge of implementing an integral
programme aimed at addressing situations that affect and limit the development
of young people. Its cross-cutting axis is its direct participation in the processes
of transformation.
The Institute is also comprehensively engaged in assisting youth at social
risk through the “Cosostenible” programme, which seeks to create an equitable
social environment that is more dynamic and free of expressions of violence, thus
strengthening the sense of belonging to the community as well as organizational
54/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

structures in order to prevent violence and promote community sports, urban art,
culture and access to technology as tools to achieve that goal.
Keeping in mind the need to provide comprehensive health care to young
people with an emphasis on mental health, the Institute, through the POSITIVELY
programme, provides psychological treatment to young people who traditionally have
not felt comfortable receiving care from an adult professional who might stigmatize
or discriminate against them because of their age.
In addition, the Directorate for the Reconstruction of the Social Fabric was
created, with the aim of reaching out to and assisting the territories most affected by
crime and violence. Last October the “Young Government” programme was launched,
which seeks to link the portfolios of various public institutions, international
organizations, the Legislative Assembly, communities, non-governmental
organizations and civil society, with the sole purpose of working for youth.
Lack of security is a concern not only for young people but also for Salvadoran
society in general. The Government is therefore implementing the territorial control
plan, a strategy aimed at ensuring security for, and the coexistence of, its citizens.
One of the plan’s key aspects is prevention and the reweaving of the social fabric
through programmes that offer opportunities for professional development and life
options to young people at risk.
The President announced the second phase of the territorial control plan,
“Opportunities”, an ambitious undertaking involving cooperative efforts on the
part of institutions to assist municipalities throughout the country, providing
basic education, health care, drinking water and recreation services, among other
measures. The Salvadoran Government is also implementing a project to build
30 cubos, or youth development centres, mainly in communities that are stigmatized
or at risk of violence. These development centres include, in a single location,
libraries, early-childhood areas, play areas, areas for accessing new technologies
and foreign-language courses, among other areas of development and learning. The
CUBO project is a Government strategy that seeks to keep young people involved in
productive activities and prevent them from joining gangs.
We recognize that it is urgent to help youth get jobs and to invest in them during
the transition from education to employment, offer vocational training and work on
formulating strategies in the area of youth employment and entrepreneurship, in
order to increase development potential in the short term.
The “Empléate Joven” plan, which is part of the Young Government strategy,
seeks to coordinate, along with various strategic partners including private
companies, actors in the area of international cooperation, academia and civil
society, a nationwide strategic effort aimed at benefiting youth at varying levels
of intervention.
Ongoing work with young people is extremely important in order not only
to strengthen their knowledge base and provide opportunities, but also to create
and intensify their commitment to working for a culture of peace and improve their
environment and that of their families in order to build a better country.
Given the urgent need to include consideration of this issue in a variety
of multilateral forums, El Salvador promoted and sponsored General Assembly
resolution 74/121, on policies and programmes involving youth, in recognition
of the importance of realizing their human rights, addressing their needs and
achieving their well-being, which is fundamental to achieving the common goals of
the Organization.
In addition, El Salvador, during its tenure as a member of the Peacebuilding
Commission, proposed the holding of a meeting, which took place in November
20-0640055/123

S/2020/346

2019, that was aimed at providing a platform for young peacebuilders to present
their work and policy recommendations. El Salvador has promoted the holding of
specialized meetings in various forums and multilateral bodies in order to achieve
the meaningful participation of young people during and after armed conflict, with
the goal of developing a youth, peace and security strategy.
As the Secretary-General points out in his report, young people face various
difficulties, including the short- and long-term effects of the global coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Furthermore, we deplore the fact that the response
to the pandemic has exacerbated hate speech, inequality and restrictions on access
to medical care, among other restrictions that undermine the human rights of all
people and hamper the efforts of young people to make progress in the area of peace
and security.
El Salvador welcomes, and has joined the Secretary-General’s call for, a
ceasefire, which would allow countries to provide a more effective humanitarian
response on their territories. We hope that this response will soon be complemented
by one from the Security Council in order that solutions may be provided in the
context of peace processes around the world in the midst of this global emergency,
principally to counter those threats that affect the most vulnerable groups,
including youth.
The inclusion of young people in peace processes should be aimed not only at
legitimizing our work but also at taking advantage of, and maximizing their potential
in, the areas of peacekeeping, the creation and implementation of programmes that
promote a culture of peace, and the strengthening of democracy and transparency,
inter alia. We firmly believe that young people are the main authors of this story,
and that as players therein, they have a key role in building a peaceful, sustainable
and prosperous world.
We want to thank the Secretary-General and his Envoy for Youth for their
work in creating spaces within the United Nations for youth organizations, youth
representatives of various Governments, students and youth in general. Young
people now can have access to and participate actively and purposefully in the
United Nations, for instance in the Youth Forum and the Youth Climate Summit,
among other forums that have provided specific recommendations for Governments
around the world in fulfilling the commitments they have undertaken in various
multilateral bodies.
Finally, we call for the youth, peace and security agenda to be strategically
integrated into national, regional and global plans, policies and guidelines. At the
same time, funding, in keeping with national capacity, should be increased for
programmes that increase youth participation in peace, development and human
rights protection processes.

56/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Annex 27
Statement by the Head of Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations, Olof Skoog
I speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member States. The
candidate countries the Republic of North Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and
Albania, the country of the Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
Partnering with young people is in the DNA of the European Union. Some of
our most emblematic programmes are all about youth, such as Erasmus+ and, more
recently, the European Solidarity Corps. These programmes have enriched the lives
of more than 10 million young people from Europe and beyond over the past three
decades. All young people have the greatest stake in getting our policies right, for the
present and for the future. They are among our most important interlocutors, change
agents and leaders in implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, as well as in peacebuilding and
sustaining peace.
Today’s global youth population, the biggest in history, carries a unique
potential for, and is at the forefront of, driving problem-solving. Together, we need to
speed up significantly our collective actions to accomplish transformation towards a
sustainable world. Our efforts on sustainable development and on addressing climate
change go hand in hand with our efforts to build peaceful, just and inclusive societies,
based on gender equality and human rights. Each and every country and stakeholder
must aim high. States, multilateral organizations and societal stakeholders, including
young people, must strive for ever-closer partnership.
Reinforcing partnerships with young people and their organizations is central
to our efforts to strengthen rules-based multilateralism. The year 2020 marks a
special moment for multilateralism. The United Nations is celebrating its seventyfifth anniversary, and it is also the fifth anniversary of the youth, peace and security
agenda. And, through the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the year 2020
has also brought a stark reminder of the fact that strong multilateral cooperation
and strong multilateral organizations are more important than ever. As COVID-19
has the entire global community in its grip, we are reminded of the importance of
solidarity, across borders and across generations. Young people are playing a key
role in fighting the virus, including in delivering an effective COVID-19 response
within conflict-affected communities. They are already contributing substantially
to the well-being of their families and communities, shouldering additional tasks.
Young people can be an important force in efforts to answer the Secretary-General’s
call for a global ceasefire. As for the EU’s contribution to fighting the pandemic, our
global response to COVID-19, the Team Europe package, will amount to more than
€20 billion and will prioritize regions and countries that are home to the youngest
populations, including in Africa.
The EU welcomes the publication of the first-ever report of the SecretaryGeneral on youth, peace and security (S/2020/167). We strongly support regular
reporting to the Council and regular deliberations on this matter. We applaud the
leadership of the Dominican Republic and of former Council presidencies on youth,
peace and security. We urge future presidencies to keep the Council engaged on this
issue, both as a thematic issue and mainstreamed into country-specific discussions.
Young people do not need institutions to give them a voice. They have a
voice. However, institutions can work harder to amplify the already strong voices of
youth. Institutions can also work to ensure that their voices are taken into account
20-0640057/123

S/2020/346

in policies, decision-making and actions. That is central to the EU’s approach to
partnering with young people. And that is how we approached this open debate as
well. We asked our United Nations youth delegates in the EU what they have to say
to the Council on youth, peace and security.
This is the message of European youth to the Council:
“We call for a broader understanding of peace and security when solving
security challenges, an understanding that incorporates all risks to human
security. We urge Member States to boost financial support to youth-led
peacebuilding initiatives, which contribute to peaceful societies. We ask that
all United Nations bodies and States create an enabling environment for young
people’s meaningful and effective participation in conflict prevention and
resolution, peacebuilding, post-conflict processes and humanitarian action.
Young people must play a consultative role on security issues. The women and
peace and security agenda is an inspiring role model in that regard. Activating
the potential of young peacebuilders ultimately depends on the accessibility
of knowledge and the sharing of information.”
Young people are making their voices heard. Youth-led civil society and
environmental organizations, as well as young human rights defenders and
peacebuilders — including indigenous youth — are playing a key role in calling out
human rights violations and abuses, while demanding action to protect our people,
planet and climate. It is our generational duty to deliver for them. Ensuring the full
realization of human rights for young people and protecting and empowering young
human rights defenders is part and parcel of the youth and peace and security agenda.
The European Commission adopted a new EU Action Plan on Human Rights
and Democracy for 2020-2024, with specific actions to support the inclusion of
young people — particularly young women — and their participation in all efforts
to prevent conflict and to build and sustain peace. New age- and gender-responsive
actions will be put in place in order to increase the meaningful participation of
women and youth in all spheres of public life. We will focus on addressing challenges
faced by youth with disabilities and those facing multiple and intersecting forms of
discrimination. The EU is particularly concerned about the rise of reprisals and
attacks against young human rights defenders. The EU Human Rights Defenders
mechanism, which has benefited 30,000 human rights defenders since 2015, is open
to any young defender who is at risk.
From the outset, the EU has been a frontrunner in implementing the youth,
peace and security agenda. The EU was the first multilateral organization to join
the Champions of Youth, Peace and Security group at the United Nations. In May
2018, the EU hosted its first-ever Conference on Youth, Peace and Security, held in
partnership with the United Nations, civil society and young people. The Conference
brought together 70 young change makers from 27 EU member States and 29 partner
countries in an interactive dialogue with the leaders of the EU and the United Nations.
Over the past years, we have been working with partner countries, multilateral
institutions and young people and their organizations to jointly translate policy
to practice in order to implement the youth, peace and security agenda on the
ground. We have supported the creation of extended networks and initiatives with
young people from Europe, Africa, the Middle East, Asia and elsewhere. We have
established open channels of communication to discuss global, regional and local
issues in order to connect young people and leaders from the EU and from our
partner countries. Our Young Mediterranean Voices initiative connects civil society,
educational institutions and policymakers across the Euro-Mediterranean region to

58/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

promote mutual understanding and foster youth engagement and leadership in order
to shape solutions to common challenges.
Indeed, the EU delegation and the Permanent Mission of France to the United
Nations just hosted an exchange with young leaders from the Young Mediterranean
Voices community in order to jointly prepare for this open debate. The discussion
confirmed that young people are part of the solution and must be given the platforms
and tools to deliver, including with regard to their economic and physical safety. As
summed up by a youth leader from Libya: “Younger people are asked to fight wars,
but when it comes to creating peace they are excluded.”
In the Sahel, our programme entitled La voix des jeunes du Sahel has offered
thousands of young people a chance to exchange views with policymakers and to
co-create development policies that impact them. Our Erasmus+ Virtual Exchange
programme connects youth in Europe and the Southern Mediterranean in a meaningful
intercultural online experience to enhance dialogue, media literacy and active
citizenship. Our network of Young European Ambassadors fosters cooperation and
sustainable links between young people and youth organizations from the EU and
our eastern neighbours, focusing on people-to-people contacts and dialogue-driven
activities. We support the One Young World Peace Ambassadors initiative, dedicated
to preventing and countering violent extremism, promoting peacebuilding efforts
and resolving conflict through youth-led initiatives in vulnerable communities. We
also support the European Youth Forum, a platform of over 100 youth organizations
in Europe.
Crucial to the success of the youth and peace and security agenda is our ability
to make a difference on the ground for all young people and other generations.
Presently, the EU spearheads nearly 30 crisis prevention and response initiatives
on four continents in order to strengthen youth resilience and to promote youthled peacebuilding. Many of them are run in cooperation with the United Nations.
For instance, together with UNICEF, we are working with adolescents and youth in
Rohingya refugee camps in Bangladesh to enhance peaceful coexistence, empower
young people as agents of change and help prevent negative and violent behaviours.
Also in cooperation with UNICEF, we have strengthened the resilience and civic
engagement of adolescents and youth in conflict-affected eastern Ukraine. Together
with the United Nations Population Fund, we are contributing to the stabilization of
the Far North region of Cameroon by increasing the resilience of the most vulnerable
young people — especially women and girls — in the face of violent extremism. One
global action initiative with UNESCO aims to increase equitable access to quality
education for children and youth in crisis situations by supporting the education
sector in fragile and crisis-affected countries.
Since last year, the EU has also been contributing to the Secretary-General’s
Peacebuilding Fund and welcomes its increased focus on empowering women and
youth through the allocation of 25 per cent of its total funding to this issue for the
period 2020-2024. We particularly welcome the recent call for proposals under the
Gender and Youth Promotion Initiative 2020. The meaningful inclusion of young
people is an important aspect of the 2020 comprehensive review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture. In that context, we echo the call of youth delegates for the
creation of a youth, peace and security strategy in the Peacebuilding Commission.
We are inspired by the passion, conviction and energy of our millions of young
people making their voice heard on our streets and in our hearts. It is young activists,
young human rights defenders and young peacebuilders who bring the youth, peace
and security agenda to life, including through their own initiatives. Working across
countries and generations, we can achieve our ambitions for today and for tomorrow.
We can win the fight against COVID-19, we can overcome the existential threats
20-0640059/123

S/2020/346

of climate and environmental degradation and we can transform our societies and
economies in a way that unlocks the potential of all people, including those left
farthest behind. And together, we can fulfil the promise of the youth and peace and
security agenda.

60/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Annex 28
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Georgia to the
United Nations, Kaha Imnadze
I would like to begin by expressing my profound gratitude to the presidency
of the Dominican Republic for convening today’s important open debate via videoteleconference. I would also like to thank the speakers for their comprehensive
briefings on the implementation of resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018), on youth
and peace and security.
Georgia aligns itself with the statement delivered by the observer of
the European Union (EU), and would like to add the following remarks in its
national capacity.
First of all, let me avail myself of this opportunity to express solidarity with
the Member States that are fighting the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
I offer my country’s heartfelt condolences for their losses. Only through solidarity
and multilateral cooperation can we turn the tide against COVID-19 in the world.
As essential partners for peace, youth represent a cornerstone in preventing
violence, resolving conflict and building and sustaining peace. Addressing the
needs and supporting the agency and leadership of young people is a critical lever to
leave no one behind. We should therefore prioritize all forms of meaningful youth
participation in the promotion and maintenance of peace and security.
With that in mind, we welcome the Secretary-General’s first-ever report on
youth, peace and security (S/2020/167), and convey our appreciation for the work the
Council has done over the past five years to promote youth inclusion in its agenda.
One of the report’s key findings is that there is worldwide progress in
acknowledging young people’s indispensable role in peace and security. The report
also provides ample evidence that young people around the world are striving for
peace, justice, inclusion, gender equality and human rights. We must therefore
not forget that persistent human rights violations and many structural barriers
limiting young people’s capacity to influence the decision-making process remain
key challenges that must be addressed. In addition, more resources are needed to
operationalize resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018) at all levels and across diverse
stakeholders, including youth-led and -focused civil society organizations.
Young people in Georgia enjoy growing recognition of their potential in
sustaining peace, preventing conflict and transforming processes. In that light, the
Government continues to facilitate the engagement of youth in public-diplomacy and
confidence-building projects. One of the latest peace initiatives, Step to A Better
Future, aims to enhance young people’s educational opportunities and ease access
to numerous State services. As a result, every year an increasing number of young
people from Georgia’s occupied regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/South Ossetia
have an opportunity to enrol in Georgia’s higher education institutions. Free health
care services is yet another success story of the Georgian Government’s peacebuilding
and engagement policy. The residents of the Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions,
including young people, are able to access various State health care programmes.
Georgia’s commitment to promoting a culture of peace through youth
empowerment has also been borne out by the Government’s decision to include
young people in identifying Georgia’s priorities for the presidency of the Committee
of Ministers of the Council of Europe. Strengthening democracy through education,
culture and youth engagement is a core value of Georgia’s presidency from
November 2019 to May 2020.
20-0640061/123

S/2020/346

Nevertheless, Georgia’s capacity to ensure the full participation of young
people in peace processes will remain limited as long as its regions of Abkhazia and
Tskhinvali/South Ossetia continue to be under illegal Russian military occupation.
Russia’s protracted occupation of those two regions continuously deprives ethnic
Georgians of their basic human rights, including the right to the freedoms of
movement and to be educated in their native language. Furthermore, they often fall
victim to ethnically motivated violence and other forms of ethnic discrimination. On
several occasions, such actions have resulted in the dreadful and regrettable deaths
of young Georgian citizens.
To make matters worse, the provocative actions of the Russian Federation
persist even amid the coronavirus pandemic and during religious holidays. In these
extraordinary times for the whole world, when it is particularly important to care for
this population living in conflict — a people who have long suffered from growing
restrictions — the Russian Federation continues its illegal process of erecting socalled border signs along the occupation line of the Tskhinvali region, specifically
in the vicinity of the village of Takhtisdziri, in Kareli municipality, in clear violation
of international norms and principles and the EU-mediated ceasefire agreement of
12 August 2008.
Against that bleak background, I would like to stress that Georgia remains
committed to promoting the active engagement of youth in peace processes. Let me
conclude by calling upon the Russian Federation to immediately cease its provocative
and destructive actions and to implement its international obligations, including the
EU-mediated ceasefire agreement of 12 August 2008.

62/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Annex 29
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Fiji to the United Nations
Fiji congratulates the Dominican Republic on assuming the presidency of
the Council during this particularly trying period for the whole world. Fiji thanks
the President for continuing to schedule open debates via video-teleconference
and for allowing non-members of the Council to contribute, particularly given the
current restrictions.
As we celebrate the fifth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 2250
(2015), we recognize that young people play an important and positive role in the
maintenance and promotion of international peace and security.
Resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018) stress the need for the equal and full
participation of young people in peace and security. In the Secretary-General’s firstever report to the Council on youth, peace and security, he highlights that there is
“growing recognition of young people’s essential role in peace and security”, but that
“core challenges remain” (S/2020/167, para. 10).
Across so many conflicts, young people are among the first to suffer when
livelihoods are destroyed. They suffer when their access to education is thwarted
or denied. They suffer when merchants of conflict prey upon their uncertainties
to radicalize and turn them into weapons of war and conflict. They suffer even
more when we, the United Nations, are unable or unwilling to give this issue the
urgency that it requires. That must change. When our young people suffer, so does
our collective future, and so do we all — countries in conflict and countries not
facing extreme conflict.
Fiji welcomes and supports the 2030 United Nations Youth Strategy. We fully
support its call for increasing youth engagement in sustainable development, human
rights, peace and security — both in forums and in humanitarian action. Effective
youth partnerships take time, resources and skill. For many countries, adequately
resourcing such action plans remains a challenge.
Fiji has established policies within our national development plan to empower
young people. National youth exchange programmes, national youth conferences
and national youth parliaments are some initiatives implemented by the Fijian
Government to listen directly to youth voices.
Fiji has made a habit of ensuring that its young are able to participate in forums
such as the United Nations Climate Change Conference and the 2019 United Nations
Climate Action Summit, held during the seventy-fourth session of the General
Assembly, so that they can directly project their voices to the world. But our young
people, like young people everywhere, face challenges and pressures of an intensity
not seen since the Great Depression.
The report of the Secretary-General brings many of these challenges and
pressures home to us. Nearly 1.9 billion of the world’s young people live in or
face the threat of extreme poverty. The Secretary-General’s report indicates that
young people are gravely underrepresented in peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
development interventions. The report also suggests that the world’s young are
facing an increasingly uncertain future. All these pressures are more intense and
more widespread in poor, small island and landlocked developing States.
The President has drawn attention to another grave challenge before us: the
COVID-19 pandemic. This pandemic is undoubtedly affecting young people around
the world. The health, economic, social and eventual political pressures that this

20-0640063/123

S/2020/346

pandemic will create will be far greater in the poorer and conflict-affected regions of
the world, and they will be far greater in small island developing States like my own.
The United Nations system, and in particular the Security Council, should
be called upon to assess the implications of the COVID-19 pandemic on the youth,
peace and security agenda. An early discussion will be useful in framing a Security
Council’s response and, more broadly, a United Nations response, even though the
tragedy is still unfolding.
We must take note that poorer countries, including small island and
landlocked developing States, have woefully insufficient access to the scale of
resources needed to cushion the impacts of COVID-19 on their communities. The
livelihoods, opportunities and health of our young, and of especially girls and young
women, are being destroyed, affecting the lives of tens of millions of people across
many countries. This is a problem for countries making a transition out of conflict,
a problem for countries torn by conflict, a problem for countries at high risk of
conflict, a problem for small island developing States and for all poor countries.
Only last week, an Arria Formula meeting was held by members of the Security
Council on climate change and security. Climate change is a threat multiplier
that affects all regions of the world. We all know the numbers: for every 0.5°C in
warming, the risk of conflict increases by around 20 per cent. The combined impacts
of climate change and COVID-19 on young people are even more worrisome, which
is why today’s debate on the importance of youth in the areas of peace and security
is so timely.
Allow me to address three issues in response to the questions the President
has raised.
First, the Security Council will benefit from direct briefings by young people
who are heroically leading efforts aimed at rebuilding and maintaining peace in
many conflicted-affected regions, especially in countries where the United Nations
has deployed political missions and peace operations. The Council does not hear
their voices directly or often enough. Young people’s expectations from resolutions
2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018) need to be heard.
Secondly, we suggest that the Secretariat provide a detailed analysis of how
the security impacts of climate change are affecting young people, especially women
and girls, around the world, particularly in countries where United Nations political
missions and peace operations are deployed.
Thirdly, we suggest that youth advocates for the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) examine more carefully the interconnected nature of peace, security and
development. In recent weeks, peace operations have become even more complicated
than they were before. The implications of amended mandates for peace operations
must be carefully considered. United Nations peacebuilding programmes need to
work more closely with young men and women and focus on their vulnerabilities
and the imperative of bringing their talents into the process of creating opportunities
for development.
The world’s compass — the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the SDGs — remains more relevant than ever. We have not paid enough attention
to unleashing the full creative and political force of the world’s young people in our
efforts aimed at achieving the SDGs. We will fail if we continue with a business-asusual approach.
The youth, peace and security mandate and the women and peace and security
mandate are two fundamental signposts for the international system to use to
steer us through this turbulent period. Combined, they will be a powerful tool in
64/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

creating the foundations for making more solid and irreversible progress towards the
achievement of the SDGs.
It took 70 years for the Security Council to recognize the critical role that the
young can play in the peace and security agenda. We need to act comprehensively
to implement resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018). Fiji pledges its full support
to the Security Council in maintaining international peace and security during this
difficult period and to its efforts aimed at implementing these resolutions.

20-0640065/123

S/2020/346

Annex 30
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Greece to the United Nations
Greece would like to congratulate the Dominican presidency of the Security
Council for organizing today’s video-teleconference on youth, peace and security.
Greece would also like to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, for his
thorough and comprehensive — and first-ever — report on the subject (S/2020/167).
While aligning itself with the statement submitted on behalf of the European
Union, Greece would like to point out the beneficial role that young people can
play as drivers of peaceful change in building democratic, resilient and genderequal societies, very often by engaging informally in peace activism, grass-roots
peacebuilding and online human rights campaigns. Nonetheless, as the report of
the Secretary-General sadly illustrates, despite certain progress accomplished so
far, meaningful youth participation in the maintenance of peace and security and in
governance and political processes remains a serious challenge.
In addition, very often, in many parts of the world, we are witnessing human
rights violations and abuses directed against young people that highlight the urgent
need for more effective protection mechanisms that can address threats against
young peacebuilders and human rights defenders, journalists, bloggers and media
actors; gender discrimination and gender-based and sexual violence, which are often
perpetrated in the context of armed conflict, disproportionally affecting young women
and girls and setting up obstacles to their access to sexual and reproductive-health
services and information; and abuses committed against the human rights of young
members of such vulnerable groups as refugees and internally displaced persons.
Needless to say, the impact of such violations and abuses to human insecurity is
further exacerbated nowadays by the outbreak of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
Assessing the progress made so far in the implementation of the youth, peace
and security agenda suggests the need for the adoption of more systematic, coherent,
tailor-made and results-oriented approaches thereto, while maintaining ambitious
standards and close links with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the women and peace and security agenda. In this vein, within the context of its
first national action plan on women and peace and security, which is currently
in the development process, Greece is giving special focus to the protection and
empowerment of young women and girls.
Moreover, coordinated action in the field of youth, peace and security by all
members of the international community enhances the creation of a safe, enabling,
gender-responsive, inclusive and diverse global environment, where young people
can meaningfully fulfil their right to participate in decision-making at all levels
and take part in educational and economic opportunities in a non-discriminatory
manner, and where young peacebuilders and human rights defenders can carry out
their work independently and without undue interference.
Cooperation and partnerships among all stakeholders in this endeavour can
serve as fertile ground for cultivating a culture of peace, tolerance and intercultural
and interreligious dialogue, all of which better serves in the prevention of violence.
Indeed, Greece recognizes that, through culture and sport, young people, as agents
of change, can largely contribute to the realization of human rights, sustainable
development and peace. Accordingly, Greece, together with a core group of likeminded States, regularly submits a draft resolution to the Human Rights Council on
promoting human rights through sport and the Olympic Ideal. It is a truth universally
acknowledged that, in order to save future generations from violence and conflict,
primary focus should be placed on building and sustaining peace by means of
66/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

preventive diplomacy, mediation and peacekeeping, while investing in the capacities
and leadership of young people.
Finally, yet importantly, only by putting in place institutional frameworks
that effectively address the structural obstacles to meaningful youth inclusion
and promote fruitful synergies can young people substantially contribute as equal
partners to shaping in future a more peaceful, resilient and secure world, with fewer
or no armed conflicts and pandemics.

20-0640067/123

S/2020/346

Annex 31
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Hungary to the
United Nations, Katalin Annamária Bogyay
I wish to thank the Dominican Republic for convening today’s important
meeting and for making it as open and inclusive as possible under the current
circumstances engendered by the coronavirus disease pandemic. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his thoughtful remarks and for his first-ever report on youth,
peace and security (S/2020/167). I would also like to thank the Secretary-General’s
Envoy on Youth and the briefers for sharing their perspectives and bringing the
voices of youth to us from across the globe.
We align ourselves with the statement made on behalf of the European Union
and wish to make some additional remarks in our national capacity.
As we celebrate the anniversary of resolution 2250 (2015), Hungary remains
committed to strengthened cooperation in fully implementing the youth, peace and
security agenda. More than ever, we see the power of youth shining through the
insecurity caused by the pandemic worldwide. More than ever, we see young people
stepping up all around the globe, using creative means and new technologies to
gather and disseminate information, inspire and guide action and create a narrative
of shared responsibility. More than ever, they are leading the world in terms of
interconnectedness, flexibility and readiness to take action. More than ever, we
see the power of peer-to-peer education and advocacy, which is inspiring us also
to follow.
However, the global health crisis has not swept away existing challenges,
conflicts and inequalities, but rather amplified and exacerbated them. Now more
than ever, we need to invest in, encourage the involvement of and ignite action for
young people, in order to accelerate progress on the youth, peace and security agenda.
First of all, we need to invest in youth. What this health crisis teaches us is
that it is not always possible to predict breakdowns, or even prevent them. Success
therefore lies in building robustness and resilience to respond to breakdowns.
Building resilience is possible by investing in young people. As UNICEF Executive
Director Henrietta Fore highlighted recently, what we give the next generation today
is not charity or a donation; it is an investment. Peace is not merely the absence of
war: peace starts with inclusion, opportunity, empowerment and resilience.
In order to build resilience, we have to take a holistic approach, reinforce
all three pillars of the United Nations and use every tool at hand. This approach
includes upholding human rights and fundamental freedoms and getting on track
with implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action — and the list goes on.
We should start with foundations, namely, with high-quality and affordable
education and skills development, especially the development of the digital skills of
young people. We are aware more than ever of the changing digital environment and
the pressing digital divide, which can become a defining issue for a student’s future.
Innovative solutions and a new system of Government instruments are needed to best
seize the opportunities presented and tackle the risks children and young people are
exposed to online. In recent years, my Government has established and developed
a digital child-protection strategy and a digital-education strategy aimed not just at
youth, but also at teachers, parents and youth officers. These strategies have become
all the more timely in the current global health crisis.
Besides education, investing in youth should ensure their physical and
mental health and well-being and protection from violence, discrimination and
68/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

marginalization, which requires upholding the rule of law, good governance, access
to justice and opportunity to participate in all aspects of life. We should equip youth
not only with knowledge, but with the values and critical thinking that will be their
compass as they strive to counter exclusion, intolerance and incitement to hatred and
violence. Our approach should be intersectional and pay particular attention to those
who are at risk of being left furthest behind, be they young women, adolescent girls,
minorities, persons with disabilities or others.
Secondly, we need to involve youth. Youth does have a voice. We just need to
give young people the space and attention to raise that voice. Young people do have
educated opinions. We need to listen to and act upon them, as their perspectives are
the perspectives of the next generation. We need to support youth-led and youthfocused organizations by building capacity and agency and by ensuring safe and
ample civic space, including for young peacebuilders and human rights defenders,
who are often at the forefront of peace efforts.
Moreover, we need to involve youth organizations as partners in decisionmaking processes and institutionalized mechanisms and bring them together with
civil society organizations, Government entities and other partners. The United
Nations system, both at Headquarters and in the field, should interact on a regular
basis with youth groups. In Hungary, the National Youth Council serves as a forum
to represent young people and youth organizations, shape youth policies and engage
in exchanges with national and international partners. Hungary’s participation in
the United Nations Youth Delegate Programme also gives direct representation and
voice to Hungarian youth at the United Nations and in national machineries.
Participation is all the more important when a nation is fighting for its future
and for peace. It was the youth in Hungary who took to the streets and ignited the 1956
revolution against oppression. It was the youth in Hungary who raised their voice
and catalysed democratic transformation in 1989. But revolutions and ceasefires can
be washed away: only inclusive peace can be sustainable. Young people need to
participate meaningfully and inclusively in mediation, peace processes and wider
decision-making structures, and in implementing ceasefires and peace agreements.
Through its resolutions, the Security Council should give clear mandate to ensure
their inclusion.
Young people also have a key role to play in disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration. In this regard, Hungary welcomes and congratulates the peace
and disarmament education efforts undertaken by the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs. We are eager to see the innovative programmes designed
to involve young people in these crucial efforts. In addition, the United Nations
Youth Champions for Disarmament is an excellent initiative recognizing and giving
visibility to real heroes. The young generation includes many such heroes who are
worthy of being recognized.
Thirdly, youth should ignite cooperation for peace. As torches give light to one
another, youth voices for peace have to be amplified across borders and regions so that
they can cooperate and exchange, not only internationally but also transnationally,
horizontally and regionally, to create networks that cut across sectors, social groups
and religions.
Let me finish by conveying the message of the Hungarian youth delegate for
the open debate, who said that:
“Creating peace has always been a cardinal issue in the history of
humankind because it is only in peacetime that countries can thrive and people
can live a balanced, happy life. I believe that today, young people play a key
role in defining the social atmosphere. With an education appropriate for the
twenty-first century, they will find it easier to understand and appreciate their
20-0640069/123

S/2020/346

differences, be they of religion, gender, race or physical or mental ability. This
attitude is indispensable to avoid conflict and create a more tolerant society.”

70/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Annex 32
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Ireland to the United Nations
Our thanks go to the presidency for organizing this open video-teleconference
on the fifth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 2250 (2015), on the youth,
peace and security agenda.
Ireland fully aligns itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the
European Union.
We in Ireland know from our own experience that peacebuilding is an
intergenerational process. Young people remain at the centre of our efforts to build
peace on our island, and we are grateful to have had the input of Ireland’s United
Nations youth delegates for this statement.
Worldwide, a shocking one in four young people are affected by violence
or armed conflict. Just as it is no longer acceptable to exclude women, we can
no longer tolerate the exclusion and marginalization of young people from peace
and security discussions. The Security Council can and should foster the active,
systematic and meaningful participation of young people in peace and security
efforts. The contribution of young people to peace needs to be fully reflected in
reports to the Security Council. United Nations mission mandates should include
language requiring young people’s meaningful participation in peace and security
efforts, including in mediation, the monitoring and implementation of ceasefires and
peace agreement negotiations.
Too often we see harmful stereotypes about youth, whereby the role of young
men and boys is reduced to combatants and young women and girls are portrayed as
victims. But globally, countless young people are building and sustaining peace in
their countries. In Irish, our native language, we have the saying “Mol an óige agus
tiocfaidh sí” — “Praise the young and they will prosper”. In that sense, we must
encourage the inclusive representation of youth in the prevention and resolution of
conflict and in peacebuilding, ensuring investment to give youth the tools they need
to lead and engage in the political or civic space.
Ireland is concerned by the threats that many young peacebuilders and
activists are facing. We urge the United Nations to implement the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation to develop dedicated guidance on the protection of young
people, including those who engage with the Organization in the context of peace and
security, to protect young peacebuilders and human rights defenders. Furthermore,
strengthening the role of youth-promoting United Nations entities, such as the Office
of the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth, and countering the dangerous shrinking
space of civil society are vital to support the needs and rights of young people.
Together, governing institutions and youth civil society movements can create longterm dialogue and peacebuilding.
Ireland knows that young people are central to the nexus of peace and security,
development and human rights. Their participation is critical for the achievement
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and its Sustainable Development
Goals. It is also vital for the promotion of human rights and for wider peace and
security agendas, such as those on women, peace and security and children and
armed conflict. Ireland’s third national action plan on women, peace and security
recognizes the importance of the inclusion of youth voices and commits to supporting
youth engagement, intergenerational dialogue and the engagement and empowerment
of young women and girls.
Ireland calls for a broader, more inclusive understanding of peace and
security. It is time to move beyond the understanding of peace as just the absence
20-0640071/123

S/2020/346

of violence and armed conflict. The risks and challenges that young people face
today, including relating to physical and mental health, discrimination, racism, hate
speech, marginalization, inequalities, climate change, migration, unemployment and
financial insecurity and much more, are often root causes and drivers of violence
and conflict. Today, as we face the uncertainties caused by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, we are seeing how pre-existing patterns of inequality and
exclusion can exacerbate and deepen crises.
However, it is in the midst of challenges like the COVID-19 crisis that we see
young people at the heart of solutions. For example, in Burkina Faso, young people
are initiating local awareness campaigns to support the most affected and vulnerable
people in their communities and positioning themselves as actors for positive
change. Much is to be gained from investing in the resilience and resourcefulness of
young people.
Five years from the adoption of resolution 2250 (2015), much remains to be
done, and Ireland is committed to advancing the youth, peace and security agenda as
a candidate for a non-permanent seat on the Security Council for the term 2021-2022.
We urge States to join the Secretary-General’s call to build on the recommendations
of the “The missing peace: independent progress study on youth and peace and
security” (S/2018/86), which Ireland is proud to have supported. Inadequate
resourcing remains a challenge to the implementation of resolutions 2250 (2015)
and 2419 (2018), and accessible resourcing, in particular the improved structuring
and implementation of funding, for youth-led and youth-focused organizations
must be made available. For those reasons, Ireland joins the Secretary-General in
his recommendation on regular reporting on youth, peace and security to track the
progress of resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018) using a global set of indicators
that could serve to measure their implementation.
“This [violence] has a very negative effect on us, but it has equipped us with
knowledge to prevent it from reoccurring.”
This quote from an independent study on youth, peace and security exemplifies
the determination of young people to build a better society for themselves and for
future generations to come. Ireland believes young people must be part of peace
and security discussions because they are an essential part of the solution. Only by
ensuring that the voices of young people are incorporated into our work here can we
make the progress they deserve.

72/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Annex 33
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations, Ishikane Kimihiro
At the outset, I would like to thank the Dominican Republic for convening
this important meeting on youth, peace and security. Also, I wish to extend my
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his first report on this issue (S/2020/167).
As the Secretary-General’s report points out, it is of critical importance to
encourage the meaningful participation of youth in efforts for peace and security.
Their future depends so heavily on whether or not they are entitled to freedom from
fear and freedom from want and equal opportunity to enjoy all their rights and
fully develop their human potential. If given the opportunity, they can make critical
contributions to achieving peace and security for all.
The human security crisis caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic is seriously affecting the most vulnerable communities around the world, in
particular those in conflict and post-conflict situations. Youth in those communities
are no exception. They could be either a factor of fragility or a proactive contributor
in overcoming the crisis.
Japan is fully committed to supporting the active participation of young
people in the peace and security agenda. They are key players in promoting peaceful
and inclusive societies for sustainable development, Goal 16 of the Sustainable
Development Goals. We are thankful to the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth,
Ms. Jayathma Wickramanayake, for visiting Japan in February to interact with
young people in Hiroshima and other cities and for promoting the #Youth4Peace
agenda as well as the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Japan’s engagement with youth for peace and security is based on the human
security approach, which calls for the twin strategy of protection and empowerment.
First, youths need to be protected from armed conflict, terrorism, gender-based
violence and other physical threats to their lives, livelihoods and dignity. Japan echoes
the point in the Secretary-General’s report on the need for additional investment
in a whole-of-society approach to prevent violent extremism and promote genderresponsive policies and programmes. Secondly, youths need to be empowered so that
they can protect themselves and also fully develop their potential, enabling them to
contribute to building peaceful societies. Let me share some concrete programmes
for youth empowerment Japan has been supporting.
Japan provides extensive training in the field of peacebuilding and development
for young civilian experts from Japan and many other countries in Asia, the Middle
East and Africa, in collaboration with United Nations Volunteers. The programme for
global human resource development for peacebuilding and development has enrolled
around 350 youths with diverse backgrounds since 2007. In addition, Japanese
participants are subsequently deployed to overseas field posts in peacebuilding and
development as United Nations volunteers. Many who completed the course are now
actively contributing to the peace and security work of the United Nations system.
Japan supports capacity-building for youths in post-conflict countries, such
as Iraq, South Sudan, States in the Sahel region and Afghanistan, in partnership
with the Hiroshima office of the United Nations Institute for Training and Research.
We invite young entrepreneurs and leaders, particularly women, from a wide range
of sectors, including the public and private sectors, academia, media and nongovernmental organizations, to participate in training courses to strengthen their
leadership, business planning and entrepreneurial skills. Alumni are active in the
fields of humanitarian affairs, public health, education, agriculture, environment,
20-0640073/123

S/2020/346

anti-corruption and many other areas critical to the establishment of sustainable
peace and development. The total number of trainees from those countries since
2015 amounts to 320.
Japan has been working with UN-Women in Bangladesh for a project aimed
at empowering women to counter the spread of violent extremism. A forum was
established in close cooperation with local universities to raise awareness of the role
of women in preventing violent extremism and radicalism. It has attracted more than
300 young participants to discuss issues such as gender equality, the empowerment
of young women and the role of young women in peacebuilding.
Since the adoption of resolution 2250 (2015) by the Security Council in 2015,
young peoples’ role in peace and security has been increasingly recognized not
only by Governments but also by civil society worldwide. However, we need to do
more. Japan reaffirms its unwavering commitment to building a world where human
security is ensured and young peoples’ future is better protected and promoted. We
look forward to working closely with the United Nations in that joint endeavour.

74/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Annex 34
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Jordan to the United Nations
I would like to start by thanking all the essential workers, particularly the
technicians who made this video-teleconference possible during this difficult time.
I would also like to thank the Permanent Mission of the Dominican Republic for
organizing this important meeting and wish them success in their presidency of the
Security Council for this month. My thanks also go to the briefers who enriched our
discussion today with their experiences and views. These young builders are our
capital in the face of threats to peace and security.
We are going through a very difficult unprecedented time that is affecting
us all. The repercussions and implications of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic have far reaching effects on our countries, our societies, our economies
and our lives. These times are casting us into unclear circumstances, but two things
remain very clear: the crucial role of youth in society and the importance of garnering
their energy and potential.
Jordan strongly believes in the important role of young people in building
healthy and peaceful societies, in realizing the Sustainable Development Goals and
in ensuring a better future. In 2015, Jordan introduced for the first time a resolution
on youth, peace and security, which was adopted unanimously. We celebrate this
year the fifth anniversary of resolution 2250 (2015), which created a launchpad for
working together towards empowering and enhancing the participation of youth
around the world. In that regard, I would like to extend my country’s support to the
Secretary-General’s first report on youth, peace and security (S/2020/167), published
in March.
The Secretary-General’s report emphasizes the importance of collaboration
among countries, regional organizations, non-governmental organizations, the
United Nations and civil society. In 2017, Jordan launched the Jordanian coalition
on youth, peace and security, operating under the umbrella of the Ministry of Youth,
the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and the Crown Prince Foundation. It
is the world’s first coalition of Government, non-governmental organizations and
United Nations agencies to collaborate together on the implementation of resolution
2250 (2015) at local and national level. The coalition set up a voting body composed
of youth representatives, which had an active role in developing a national youth
strategy for the period 2019-2025. The strategy rests on several main pillars, including
education and technology, the rule of law, active citizenship, entrepreneurship and
economic empowerment, participation and active leadership, as well as health and
physical activity. This year, UNFPA and Generations for Peace will collaborate to
coordinate the coalition, particularly its efforts to reach out to youth from different
communities in Jordan through small-scale projects designed following an in-depth
context analysis and to develop outcomes.
Youth unemployment is one of the most pressing issues the world is facing
today and will be certainly be compounded by the COVID-19 pandemic. Job creation
for young women is a challenge we all face. Low wages, lack of childcare provision,
poor public transport infrastructure, along with cultural and societal constraints,
are among the reasons that discourage or stop young women from achieving their
economic potential and contributing to the economy. We need to encourage initiatives
that nurture a culture of entrepreneurship and creativity and to support business
incubators at universities and enterprises to provide sustainable employment
opportunities and promote economic growth. The role of public-private partnerships
in developing an environment that supports entrepreneurship and innovation is
particularly key. We also need to mobilize every effort and encourage Governments,
20-0640075/123

S/2020/346

leaders and international donors to direct more resources to youth programs and
policies that foster youth political inclusion, promote civic engagement and support
young people in their transition from school to work.
The Amman Youth Declaration on Youth, Peace and Security of 2015 was
the culminating point of the first Global Forum on Youth, Peace and Security,
hosted by Jordan. At the Forum, which brought together young people, youth-led
organizations, non-governmental organizations, Governments and United Nations
entities, participants agreed on a common vision and road map for partnering with
young people to prevent conflict, counter violent extremism and build lasting peace,
as well as promote gender equality.
Youth play a critical role in conflict prevention and peacebuilding, but the
spread of COVID-19 and the emergency measures undertaken to contain it will likely
curtail the ability of young peacebuilders and human rights defenders to mobilize
efficiently in their communities. We must continue to support young peacebuilders
so that they can play an effective and meaningful role in implementing the SecretaryGeneral’s call for a global ceasefire.
Social media platforms are playing an important role during this pandemic as
young people use social media to raise awareness and share good practices during
these difficult times. Promoting the positive role of those online platforms is crucial
to combat misinformation and extreme narratives, both online and offline, to prevent
young people from falling into the traps of misinformation, frustration, violence and
despair. Social media can and must be used to promote the culture of peace and to
encourage young people to be agents of peace and positive change.
Now is the moment in history that we need, more than ever, to collectively seize
in order to empower youth to create a better future and be resilient in confronting the
many challenges facing them and the world.

76/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Annex 35
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Kazakhstan to the United Nations, Kairat Umarov
I commend the presidency of the Dominican Republic for highlighting the
important role of young people in the maintenance of international peace and security.
My delegation not only thanks the Secretary-General but fully endorses his detailed
and insightful report of 2 March (S/2020/167) on the implementation of resolutions
2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018) and recommendations for the future. Kazakhstan fully
supports both those resolutions. We were honoured to actually be fully involved in
the substantive negotiations on resolution 2419 (2018) during our term as an elected
member of the Security Council.
The theme of this meeting is most relevant in the light of numerous violent
conflicts raging in several regions of the world, the unprecedented coronavirus
disease pandemic and the threats of climate change that we encounter today. We
therefore need young people, who are the drivers of change with their openness
to new experiences, creativity, innovation, enduring energy and commitment to
building partnerships as world citizens. Youth constitute a quarter of the global
population, of whom 500 million are living in conflict zones, which is also a cause
of concern.
The international community must therefore address the socioeconomic,
cultural and political factors that lead young people to violence. Likewise, every
country must also launch its own youth, peace and security agenda with a view
to realizing its young people’s potential. To counter terrorist and extremist ideas,
investment must be made in the youth’s health, education, employment opportunities,
and go beyond policies to concrete measures to address inequalities and boost all
kinds of opportunities for young people. We need to move from remedial responses
to genuine prevention efforts, investing in young people and the fight against
racism and ensuring that both age and gender remain integral to peace and security
discussions. We are therefore called on to support and protect young agents of peace
and youth human rights defenders.
It is important to turn away from the myopic perspective that focuses on
youth as a problem and involve them in charting policy frameworks, adopting
legislation, participating in national parliaments and commissioning national road
maps for peace and security. Mission mandates, in particular, must also focus on
youth capacity-building and leadership, with greater investment in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes, as well. Firm action must also be
taken against perpetrators who threaten the security of young people, including
young women, and ethnic minorities deprived of access to power, resources and
political participation. Young people are vital to truth and reconciliation processes
and should have a seat at the negotiation table. Young people must be made to feel
that their votes count and that they are key actors in democratization, elections,
institution-building, disaster risk reduction and the fight against corruption.
Furthermore, we must envision the role of young people in making the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development an effective tool for conflict prevention and
mitigation. The huge amounts of money spent globally on military action should
instead be spent on advancing the 17 Sustainable Development Goals. Young people
must be considered as partners and leaders in addressing their own marginalization.
However, that will be possible only if States invest in building young people’s
capacities and leadership at the national, regional and global levels through dialogue
and consultation platforms.

20-0640077/123

S/2020/346

To achieve the youth, peace and security agenda, action is critical at the
national level in order to have an impact globally. Kazakhstan therefore believes that
young people are key players in democratization, elections, institution-building, the
fight against corruption and disaster risk reduction. Voicing support for the proposal
to allocate $1.8 billion by 2025 — the tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
2250 (2015), we propose that the international community develop a comprehensive
framework relating to youth and the global security-development nexus. My country
focuses on poverty eradication, employment and education opportunities, and has
introduced the countering religious extremism and terrorism programme, which
continues even now.
The young in Kazakhstan today make up almost half of the total population,
which is nearly 9 million people aged under 29. The critical importance of young
people to Kazakhstan’s future is one of the reasons why 2019 was declared the Year
of Youth, with the aim of identifying gaps where improvements are needed in order
to fully optimize our demographic trends. To develop favourable conditions for
volunteer activities, the Government of Kazakhstan declared 2020 as the Year of
the Volunteer.
In order to increase the inclusive representation of youth in decision-making
at all levels, the President of Kazakhstan, Mr. Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, introduced
a major project to attract qualified young personnel to the civil service by providing
the most talented young people with the opportunity to take leading positions in
public administration and the quasi-public sector. Some 300 young professionals
were selected on a competitive basis for the presidential cadre reserve out of nearly
3,000 applicants. Starting early this year, many of them have already been appointed
to decision-making posts and have started to contribute to the development of
our nation.
Kazakhstan also strongly focuses on prevention by eradicating poverty,
educating youth and creating employment opportunities to support their dynamic
ideas and aspirations. Our country has adopted various national schemes and a
comprehensive set of policies to provide free education, vocational training, intensive
job creation and entrepreneurship. Kazakhstan’s Bolashak Scholarship, or Future
Generation Scholarship, which was launched in 1993, provides the opportunity for
hundreds of Kazakh young men and women annually to study in leading foreign
higher education institutions. It has been recognized as among the best academic
mobility programmes in the world.
We also dissuade young people from using violence that serves extremist
causes by implementing comprehensive development programmes. In particular,
we have successfully completed the national programme on countering religious
extremism and terrorism, allocating hundreds of millions of dollars for preventive
measures for the entire youth population.
Finally, this year, the United Nations family marks its seventy-fifth
anniversary. That is an important milestone, which represents a unique opportunity
to take a critical look at the problems and challenges that confront us. My country
has always supported young people in using their potential as the most valuable asset
for sustaining peace and security, and will continue to do so.

78/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Annex 36
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Kenya to the
United Nations, Lazarus O. Amayo
The young have taken ownership and have become implementers of significant
global agendas that touch on international peace and security. It is incumbent upon
the international community to rally around these constructive contributions and the
emerging leadership of the young.
In that regard, my delegation commends the Dominican Republic for
prioritizing the youth, peace and security agenda during its presidency. As we look to
mark the agenda’s fifth anniversary this December, Kenya stands behind the call to
accelerate the implementation of the related resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018).
We congratulate the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan on the initiative to adopt
resolution 2250 (2015) and for taking leadership of the youth agenda within the United
Nations system. We also commend Peru and Sweden for spearheading resolution
2419 (2018), which is complementary to resolution 2250 (2015). My delegation would
further like to highlight the presidential statement presented by South Africa in 2019
(S/PRST/2019/15), which focuses on the provisions of Agenda 2063 of the African
Union and the role that African youth can play in silencing the guns in Africa by
2020, in particular, and peace and security, in general.
In addition, we welcome the first-ever report of the Secretary-General
(S/2020/167) on this agenda item, published in March. This report, read alongside
the Secretary-General’s Youth 2030: The United Nations Strategy on Youth,
provides important action points and tools for communities seeking to empower the
youth demographic.
Kenya supports the localization of these resolutions and initiatives in order
to make the recommendations relevant and accessible at the grass-roots level. As
Member States, we need to develop contextual road maps that reflect measurable
implementation benchmarks for the youth, peace and security agenda.
The experiences and insights shared by the diverse group of youth
representatives this morning not only were informative but also demonstrate that
young people are indeed agents of positive change and need to be an integral
part of peace processes and conflict resolution at the local, national, regional and
international levels. This morning we heard the reiterated call from young people
for the translation of policies pertaining to youth into practice, including access to
sufficient funding for the effective operationalization of youth-led projects.
The five pillars of action embodied in resolution 2250 (2015) — namely,
participation, partnerships, prevention, protection and disengagement and
reintegration — need to be put into practice and integrated into the work of the
Security Council. The inclusive participation of youth in decision-making should
be approached from a partnership perspective. Working with the youth is more
beneficial than attempting to work for the youth.
Our youth need to be protected during conflicts. Young men and young
women need to be protected from all forms of sexual and gender-based violence.
The reintegration of young men and women directly involved in conflict or those
returning from refugee situations needs to be comprehensive and sustainable. The
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is further compounding pre-existing
social and economic challenges, which has the potential of leading to further
disenfranchisement of the youth. Our collective mitigation measures should prioritize
ensuring that young people are not left behind.
20-0640079/123

S/2020/346

Investment in youth is a preventive measure. Preparing young people to
positively focus their creativity and aspirations on resolving societal challenges in
various fields, such as the targets of the Sustainable Development Goals and information
and communications technology, including innovation, cybersecurity and low-cost
technologies, will contribute to sustainable peace and sustainable development.
In Kenya, we have rolled out initiatives geared towards ensuring that the
youth are part and parcel of the formulation of national strategies pertaining to
sustainable peace. The Government has established a State Department of Youth
under the auspices of the Ministry of Public Service Youth and Gender. This
initiative ensures that the youth work alongside Government officials, community
leaders, civil society, the private sector and international partners to contribute to
the peace agenda. Currently, the Department of Youth is utilizing social media to
disseminate important facts and guidelines with regard to COVID-19. We thank the
United Nations Envoy on Youth, Ms. Jayathma Wickramanayake, for her recognition
of this Kenyan youth initiative this morning.
1n 2019, Kenya’s National Youth Service, which has been in existence since
1964, was transformed into a fully fledged semi-autonomous State corporation
that is aimed at training and mentoring our youth through technical and vocational
programmes. Other related national initiatives that ensure strategic investments in
young people include the Uwezo, or Ability, Fund, which finances businesses for
young entrepreneurs.
At the international level, resolution 2282 (2016), on the review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture, reaffirms the important role that youth can play
in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and the success of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts. The Peacebuilding Commission, as an intergovernmental
advisory body to the Security Council, has further engaged with youth peacebuilders
in country-specific contexts. We encourage the Council to continue to seek the
Commission’s recommendations, including with regard to how young people’s
potential can be positively harnessed in fragile and conflict-affected countries. That
was well articulated by Mr. Gatwal Gatkuoth, the youth representative from South
Sudan, who reminded us that peacebuilding in such contexts is not just a process but
a necessity.
We welcome the reaffirmation by the Secretary-General of the 2018 progress
study on youth, peace and security, entitled “The missing peace: independent
progress study on youth and peace and security” (see S/2018/86), published by the
Peacebuilding Support Office and the United Nations Population Fund. The study
embodies the important principle that most young people are resilient and peaceful
and are a positive force for building peaceful and just societies.
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates that the implementation of the youth,
peace and security agenda should not be in isolation from the women and peace and
security agenda. Gender equality is an important tool for any peace and security
initiative, not to mention that gender-equal societies have proved to have more
resilience to the threat of conflict and violent extremism.

80/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Annex 37
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Kyrgyz Republic
to the United Nations, Mirgul Moldoisaeva
First of all, let me express my gratitude to Mr. José Singer Weisinger, Special
Envoy of the Dominican Republic to the United Nations, for the invitation to
today’s open debate of the Security Council. We commend him for the choice of
this very timely and critical issue for consideration on this month’s agenda during
his presidency.
I would like to thank His Excellency Secretary-General António Guterres;
Ms. Jayathma Wickramanayake, the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth;
Ms. Olla Al-Sakkaf, Project Coordinator of Youth Without Border Organization for
Development, Yemen; and Mr. Gatwal Augustine Gatkuoth, Founder of the Young
Adult Empowerment Initiative, South Sudan/Uganda, for their very informative
addresses. Let me thank the organizers of today’s event for the opportunity to speak
on the important topic of youth, peace and security.
In 2015, the Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 2250 (2015), in
which it encourages States to consider creating mechanisms that would enable young
people to engage constructively in peacebuilding to prevent violence and establish
world peace and to clearly identify youth as an important partner in global efforts to
strengthen peace and counter extremism.
In September 2018, the Secretary-General introduced Youth 2030: The United
Nations Strategy on Youth, which emphasizes the intention of the United Nations to
increase its efforts to work with the youth and for its interests in order to provide
every young person with the opportunity to fully realize their potential, highlighting
the positive contribution of young people as key agents of change.
Kyrgyzstan is making significant efforts to comply with the requirements of
resolutions 2419 (2018) and 2250 (2015). In that context, Kyrgyzstan is interested in
active cooperation with the United Nations and all international partners to fulfil the
requirements of these important resolutions.
The Kyrgyz Republic fully supports the vital and positive role of the youth in
solving problems concerning maintaining peace and security, developing friendly
relations among nations, cooperating in resolving development problems, reducing
poverty, promoting respect for human rights, environmental protection, fighting
diseases and many other challenges and issues facing humankind.
The National Development Strategy of the Kyrgyz Republic for 2018-2040
sets out that young people should be actively involved in the country’s development
processes, an effective youth development system, the conditions and the necessary
legal framework for the effective implementation of the State youth policy aimed at
shaping young people into one of the main assets of the development of the State and
society and the promotion of youth initiatives in the political, economic and social
spheres. In August 2017, the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic also adopted a
youth policy development programme for 2017-2020, which contains a vision for
the future, goals, the main priorities, tasks and key public policy measures aimed at
developing the youth of Kyrgyzstan, including the creation of the relevant legal and
infrastructural conditions, by the end of 2020.
It should be noted that the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic is actively
working with the United Nations system to increase youth participation in the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). There are many successful
international projects aimed at peacebuilding, capacity-building, counteracting the
spread of violent extremism, strengthening friendly relations among young people
20-0640081/123

S/2020/346

of the States of the region and involving young people in decision-making related to
security, conflict and peace. We fully support the vital and positive role that young
people are playing in the coronavirus disease outbreak response in relation to peace
and security in Kyrgyzstan today.
In particular, in 2019 the United Nations system in Kyrgyzstan, in partnership
with the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic, launched a new programme for young
activists to promote the SDGs among young people in Kyrgyzstan and to mobilize
them towards achieving the SDGs at the local, national and international levels.
At the regional level, the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia (UNRCCA) and Central Asian States launched a new
initiative in 2019, entitled the UNRCCA Preventive Diplomacy Academy, aimed
at implementing the United Nations Youth Strategy and the youth and peace and
security programme in Central Asia.
The well-being, participation and empowerment of young are key factors in
sustainable development and world peace. Achieving the Goals of the 2030 Agenda
requires strong and inclusive partnerships between youth and all stakeholders in
order to address youth development challenges and recognize the positive role of
youth as a partner in promoting development and peace. The Government of the
Kyrgyz Republic intends to continue to support and actively cooperate with all
Member States, the United Nations system and all international partners to achieve
our goals.

82/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Annex 38
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Liechtenstein to the
United Nations
I thank you, Sir, for convening this open debate, which is only the second
that has been held since the Council was forced to switch to working remotely. We
appreciate the progress the Council has made under your leadership in devising
working methods that enable the participation of Member States in the Council’s
open debates. Continued transparency and openness remain key to the Council’s
effectiveness. The convening of the present open debate also offers an important
opportunity; the negotiation of any Council outcome should be conducted in the
light of written inputs provided by Council non-members, thereby benefiting from
the views of the broader membership.
The ongoing coronavirus disease pandemic is creating significant challenges
for young people across the world. Many are missing crucial months of their education,
deprived of social contact, quarantined in difficult or even dangerous domestic
situations, or losing out on important early-career employment opportunities. These
challenges will themselves have knock-on effects. The data show that young people
out of school are more prone to forced recruitment into armed forces, radicalization,
sexual and gender-based violence and teenage pregnancy, and are more vulnerable
to modern slavery and human trafficking.
For young people living in situations of armed conflict, these issues are even
more acute. Many will have to choose between staying in active conflict zones
or fleeing to overpopulated areas with insufficient hygiene facilities. The global
ceasefire suggested by the Secretary-General is a vital first step to ameliorating
the potential damage caused to young people by the pandemic. It must be followed
by sustained humanitarian assistance and committed efforts towards negotiated
conflict settlements.
However, even in situations where a ceasefire is possible and efforts towards
broader agreements can begin, young people are often left on the sidelines of
negotiations, even though they make up the majority of the population in most
situations on the Council’s agenda. Efforts to integrate young people into peace
negotiations should harness their long-term perspective on peace; they will be
responsible for the long-term implementation of peace settlements for longer than
the adult signatories to peace agreements and therefore have a far greater interest in
forging long-lasting and sustainable peace settlements. Mechanisms such as youth
councils strengthen peace agreements by creating a broader sense of ownership
across communities. At the same time, youth inclusion helps inoculate young people
against radicalization at a time when they may be most susceptible to it, thereby
preventing the spread of old hatreds to new generations. Our assistance to the Centre
for Humanitarian Dialogue on inclusive peacemaking has helped teams engage
young people in peace processes in the Sahel, Mali, Senegal and the Philippines in
recent years.
Engaging young people is also key to long-term prevention, reconstruction
and reconciliation. Many States and territories emerging from conflict have placed
education reform at the centre of their post-conflict peacebuilding strategies. In
particular, attempts to ensure a shared history curriculum have proven important in
providing a space for young people to encounter pre-existing grievances in a shared
setting, thereby creating the conditions to build bridges between communities, jointly
to pursue the right to truth and to help break the cycle of violence. United Nations
missions in post-conflict settings have also taken positive steps to engage young
people, for example through the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia’s
20-0640083/123

S/2020/346

creation of a specific youth, peace and security strategy. We hope that this initiative
will be mirrored in other situations on the Council’s agenda.
The leadership of young people on the critical issue of climate justice illustrates
the long-term perspective they bring to issues of peace and security, as well as an
understanding of the need to take immediate action to secure a liveable world for
future generations. We know that the impacts of climate change are exacerbating
existing vulnerabilities in fragile situations, and will lead to increased insecurity
and instability for all. We extend our wholehearted support to young people who
have been front and centre in advocacy for climate action, and hope that the Council
will draw from their examples in its efforts to address global warming as an ongoing
threat to peace and security.

84/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Annex 39
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Malta to the United Nations
We thank the Dominican Republic for organizing this open debate on the
importance of looking towards accelerating the implementation of resolutions 2250
(2015) and 2419 (2018), which is greater today than it has ever been as we look forward
to celebrating the fifth anniversary of the youth and peace and security agenda.
Malta fully aligns itself with the statement delivered earlier on behalf of the
European Union and would like to add a few remarks in her national capacity.
Malta believes that young people have an essential role to play in fostering
and maintaining peace and security. In this regard, it is necessary to adopt a holistic
approach that empowers youth and, at the same time, counteracts the conditions —
oppression, injustices, disaffection due to youth unemployment — that provide
a breeding ground for terrorism, and to tackle its multiple facets, including
countering terrorism and violent extremism, promoting border security, combating
terrorist financing, preventing radicalization and addressing the problem of foreign
fighters, in full compliance with human rights obligations and in accordance with
international law.
There is a growing recognition that young people are agents of change in
conflict prevention and sustaining peace. Indeed, Malta recognizes that the young
can contribute actively to building peace and promoting solidarity. Conscious of the
need to empower our young people by opening up additional avenues for participation
through which they may express their views and ideas about this important
interdependence, Malta has embarked on a number of initiatives at the national level,
seeking to give our young people a stronger voice. One such initiative is the lowering
of the voting age in local elections to 16 years of age. The early involvement of
our youth in decision-making processes, particularly but not exclusively in those
that impact them directly, will help ensure that efforts to tackle issues benefit from
this additional perspective and that young people, who are themselves the decisionmakers of tomorrow, gain a sense of ownership over such processes.
Today’s debate will provide an invigorated impetus to our engagement with
the leaders of the future. It will, in particular, reinforce the United Nations capacity
to engage more extensively and systematically with young people.
Over time, we have observed that not only are our young people ready to
participate as active contributors in debates, but that they have also become
advocates for change. Indeed, it has been made abundantly clear that young people
are thrilled to participate and envisage multilateralism as an avenue through which
they can voice their ideas, cause positive social change and make a difference in their
communities and society.
In conclusion, we cannot deny the essential contribution of youth to today’s
society. Firm in this belief, we underline the importance that young people must
be empowered and provided with the appropriate tools if we expect them to grow,
develop and further shape society. Furthermore, in acknowledging that today’s
young people represent our future, we must ensure that they are able to develop their
leadership skills by instilling in them principles and values. We need to invest in
them today to safeguard our future.

20-0640085/123

S/2020/346

Annex 40
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Mexico to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
Mexico commends the Dominican Republic for the way it has conducted
its presidency of the Security Council this month amid the unprecedented and
particularly complex global context resulting from the coronavirus disease pandemic.
We thank the presidency in particular for its efforts to ensure that the Security
Council maintains the same level of transparency in its work.
We agree with the first report of the Secretary-General on the subject of this
debate (S/2020/167), which recognizes that young people make a crucial contribution
to preventing and resolving conflicts and building sustainable peace.
Young people face considerable challenges as a result of globalization,
changing socioeconomic dynamics, the use and impact of new technologies, and
the effects of climate change, among other things. It is alarming that one in four
young people in the world is affected by violence or armed conflict. An additional
challenge is that more than 1.5 billion girls, boys and young people have been
affected by school closures as a result of the pandemic, which has led to an increase
in psychological abuse and corporal punishment — a situation of grave concern that
cannot and must not be tolerated.
Sustainable peace and development, as well as global governance, must
include the active participation and meet the aspirations of young people. Young
women and men are often perceived as a threat or part of the problem, in addition
to being marginalized or excluded from both decision-making and personal- and
professional-development opportunities. This view is wrong, and we must change it
completely. Young people are the actors who will ensure that development is truly
sustainable and, for this to happen, our preeminent goal must be to empower them.
Rising youth unemployment has been a huge cause for concern. The scenario
becomes even more critical if we consider the implications of the current pandemic
for the global economy and social dynamics in the years to come.
We must forge a new paradigm for our relationship with young people in the
economic and social spheres, one that ensures their inclusion and provides them
new opportunities. As a first step, Governments need to take measures to reduce the
impact of economic contraction on young people. The Government of Mexico will
continue to make meeting the needs of young people one of its top priorities through
a range of programmes intended to guarantee the economic and social rights of
millions of young Mexicans.
Among other activities to improve employment opportunities for young
people, the Jóvenes Construyendo el Futuro programme was launched with the
aim of connecting people aged between 18 and 29 with companies, workshops,
institutions or businesses where they can develop or enhance professional capacities
and technical skills to improve their future employment prospects. It is important
to note that, with Mexico’s collaboration, this scheme has already been replicated in
other Central American countries.
Similarly, the Semilleros y Territorios de Paz initiative, developed as part of
the Juntos por la Paz strategy, focuses on promoting a culture of peace and preventing
violence by addressing conflicts through the participatory communication of young
people and respect for human rights.

86/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

The review of the peacebuilding architecture provides a further opportunity
to strengthen the participation and empowerment of youth in peacebuilding efforts,
from the local and community levels to the national and international.
Youth participation has been recognized as a key aspect for the sustainability,
inclusion and success of peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts, as reflected in the
draft resolution on the comprehensive review of special political missions Mexico
and Finland are introducing before the General Assembly.
Mexico believes that the Security Council should consider taking the following
specific measures.
First, it must strengthen the synergies between the youth and peace and
security agenda and the women and peace and security agenda, placing particular
emphasis on incorporating the needs and perspectives of young women and girls.
Gender equality is an essential prerequisite for strengthening the social fabric and
building societies that are resilient to all kinds of conflict and violence.
Secondly it should ensure the more systematic involvement of young people in
the work of the Security Council and that it hears and takes their voices into account.
Thirdly, it must promote the meaningful participation of young people,
particularly those from marginalized and traditionally excluded groups, in
international peace and security initiatives, as well as in voluntary activities,
humanitarian support and certain components of peace missions.
Fourthly, it must strengthen the interaction of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict with the rest of the United Nations system, and ensure that the
youth dimensions of the topics on the Council’s agenda are linked to the work of the
Working Group.
For Mexico, the path ahead is clear — we must promote prevention and
sustainable and inclusive development, with full youth participation. There is no
doubt that young people will always be capable of making the change our societies
need as long as they are provided with the tools they need. Without young people,
implementing strategies to achieve the 2030 Agenda Goals and thereby ensuring that
no one is left behind would simply be inconceivable. Investing in young people is our
best hope for realizing a world of peace.

20-0640087/123

S/2020/346

Annex 41
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Monaco to the United Nations
[Original: French]
Five years after the adoption of resolution 2250 (2015) by the Security Council,
the Secretary-General’s first report on youth, peace and security, dated 2 March
(S/2020/167), marks an important step in the recognition of the crucial role of youth
in conflict prevention and resolution and in peacekeeping.
The report and the initial results of the large-scale global dialogue launched
within the framework of the UN75 campaign underline the fact that young people
around the world, confronted with many challenges — demographic changes,
inequality, new technologies, forced displacement, a shrinking civic space, a
changing labour market and climate change — strive for peace, justice, inclusion,
gender equality and human rights.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has plunged the entire planet
into an economic crisis of unprecedented violence, which the International Monetary
Fund and the World Bank estimate will have a cost two to three times higher than that
of 2008. The crisis will have a significant impact on young people, who are known
to be particularly vulnerable to recessions, which could exacerbate their difficulties.
Indeed, three out of four young people work in the informal economy, and a
large proportion of them are engaged in precarious temporary and part-time work,
often in sectors that are particularly vulnerable to the COVID-19 pandemic. As States
begin to adopt support and recovery measures, it is essential that specific measures
to help young people be taken in order to avoid ensnaring them permanently in a
“poverty trap”.
Political inclusion is a central demand of youth. The many movements whose
voices were heard in 2019 sent a strong signal. Youth will not wait. Young people
have also shown a remarkable ability to create alternative spaces for a political
engagement that, if not given sufficient attention, will challenge the old formats that
we are perpetuating. It would be unwise to take the risk of fuelling and increasing a
distrust of institutions. Dialogue, cooperation and the establishment of partnerships
are our best weapons against sectarian conflict, violent extremism and terrorism.
As the United Nations and its Member States have just embarked on a decade
of action, we need a massive and full engagement on the part of youth more than ever.
Without it, we cannot hope to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals or lasting
peace. Young people need our support, and we need the young to build our future.
In the current context, which is particularly anxiety-provoking, sport and the
practice of physical activity play an important role in maintaining the physical and
mental health of individuals and in sustaining social ties. Monaco advocates, and
will continue to advocate, the importance of sport as a tool for building a culture of
peace and tolerance, thereby bringing together nations and peoples around common
values. Sport and physical activity are widely used by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees as an important vehicle for integration
and the easing of tensions in situations where war, conflict and persecution have
destroyed all semblance of normalcy.

88/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Annex 42
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Montenegro to the
United Nations, Milica Pejanović Đurišić
Montenegro thanks the Council and the Dominican Republic, as President for
the month of April, for the opportunity provided to the Member States to continue
to participate in and contribute to the activities of the Security Council during these
challenging times.
Montenegro welcomes the first report of the Secretary-General on youth,
peace and security (S/2020/167) since the adoption of resolution 2250 (2015). While
recognizing the essential role of young people in peace and security, the report
clearly indicates the remaining core challenges that can have a devastating impact
on youth development and lead to their further marginalization. The marginalization
of young people foments political distrust and hopelessness, challenges systems and
structures and contributes to national, regional and global insecurity. Therefore, we
must do more to engage young people as equal partners, not only as beneficiaries, in
our efforts to shape the future of the world. In particular, their voices and perspectives
must be heard in regard to conflict prevention and peacebuilding. We strongly
believe that by empowering new generations of peacemakers, we will prevent their
marginalization and stigmatization, further mistrust and even radicalization. In
doing so, particular attention should be given to the protection of young human
rights defenders and peacebuilders, during and after armed conflict.
The youth, peace and security agenda, along with resolutions 2250 (2015) and
2419 (2018), charts a course for young people to become active citizens in shaping
Government policies and politics in their countries. Its successful implementation
requires further support, including political will and ownership on the part of
Member States, funding for programming and institutional support for capacitybuilding and prioritization.
Montenegro supports all efforts aimed at making the specific needs of young
people heard, upholding their rights and acknowledging their diversity and the
challenges that they face. Montenegro’s National Youth Strategy for the period 20172021, along with its action plan, is focused on facilitating access by youth to the
labour market and employment; access to quality education; active participation in
decision-making processes and policy creation; quality health care; and access to
culture as both creators and consumers. Through the adoption of the Strategy and
the Law on Youth, we have established an efficient framework for the systematic
improvement of the situation of young people in Montenegro. We strongly believe
that investing in youth is the best investment for the stability and prosperity of
our society.
The Government of Montenegro has already undertaken activities aimed at
achieving the goals of the United Nations Strategy on Youth by initiating policies
and reform processes aimed at increasing their active participation in social life
and improving the quality of education by introducing new skills into national
school plans, both for acquiring knowledge and personal development as well as
to ensure their future success in the labour market. In order to improve on existing
mechanisms for supporting youth in Montenegro, the Government of Montenegro is
closely collaborating with the United Nations country team in Montenegro through
various programmes and projects. These initiatives are of great importance in terms
of enabling young people to use their full potential in the areas of decision-making
and entrepreneurship and participation in various social activities.
Bearing in mind that the process for achieving lasting peace needs to
be democratized in such a manner as to include the communities most affected,
20-0640089/123

S/2020/346

Montenegro is also very active in connecting youth from the region of the Western
Balkans, particularly through the work of the Regional Youth Cooperation Office.
We are proud of the fact that Montenegro was the first country to establish a liaison
office for this important regional initiative aimed at reconciliation through the
promotion of joint activities for young people from the Western Balkans region.
Although some progress has been made globally in supporting the active
participation of young people, we must step up our efforts to accelerate the
implementation of the youth, peace and security agenda. Young people must be
treated as a vital asset. Investment in their capacities and leadership, addressing
structural barriers and ensuring their equal participation are prerequisites for
achieving lasting peace and the Sustainable Development Goals. Therefore, we call
on all Member States and partners to listen to what young people have to say and to
engage in translating their words into action.

90/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Annex 43
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Morocco to the United Nations
My delegation would like to thank the Dominican Republic, President of the
Security Council for the month of April 2020, for having organized this open videoteleconference of the Security Council on the very important question of youth, peace
and security, as this year we are celebrating the fifth anniversary of this agenda.
We would also like to acknowledge Jordan’s commitment to this issue and its
initiative of bringing it first to the Security Council through resolution 2250 (2015),
adopted in 2015.
The United Nations has long recognized the potential of young people in
contributing to the development of the societies in which they live and their crucial
role in forging an inclusive vision of a shared future, a sine qua non for sustainable
peace. That was acknowledged in the Declaration on the Promotion among Youth of
the Ideals of Peace, Mutual Respect and Understanding between Peoples, adopted in
1965, and the International Youth Year: Participation, Development, Peace, observed
in 1985, thereby laying the foundations for a global reflection on youth issues.
A decade later, Member States adopted the World Programme of Action for
Youth to the Year 2000 and Beyond, which offers practical guidelines for national
action and international support to improve the situation of young people around
the world through 15 interlinked and mutually reinforcing youth priority areas.
The objective was to strengthen the international commitment to young people by
directing the international community’s response to the challenges faced by youth.
That international commitment was further underpinned by the adoption in
2015 by the Security Council of the landmark resolution 2250 (2015), complemented
by resolution 2419 (2018), which both recognized the positive role of young people
in implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and in advancing
peaceful, just and inclusive societies.
Today there are more than 1.8 billion young people in the world — 18 per
cent of the global population. They are the largest generation of young people the
world has ever known. Therefore, they constitute decisive agents of change and have
tremendous potential for sustainable development. Leaving them behind would have
an impact on the world’s peace and security.
As the world evolves, so do the issues that affect young people. The only
effective long-term solution to overcome the challenges that young people confront
is to build more inclusive, participatory and egalitarian societies and to maximize
and harness the potential, commitment and resilience of young people. Establishing
an ongoing dialogue with young people will enable them to strengthen their defences
against hate speech, radicalization and extremism as well as criminal activities. It
will also ensure their full integration into society.
The Kingdom of Morocco has over the years undertaken many commitments
to youth, including the following.
The Constitution devotes a special place to young people, dedicating both
articles 33 and 170 to their empowerment, calling on the public authorities to take
all measures to generalize their participation in the socioeconomic, cultural and
political development of the Kingdom. A Consultative Council of Youth and of
Associative Action was also instituted by the Constitution to this effect.
Young people have a quota in the membership of the Parliament of Morocco.

20-0640091/123

S/2020/346

Following a consultative process including all stakeholders, the Government
launched the National Integrated Youth Strategy 2015-2030.
The National Initiative for Human Development, which has launched its third
phase — 2019-2023 — aims to support the well-being of the whole population, in
particular the youth.
The establishment in Rabat of the Union of Young African Parliamentarians is
promoting exchanges and cooperation among young people from the African continent.
These actions and other initiatives clearly demonstrate the particular attention
placed by His Majesty King Mohammed VI on youth, whom he has always regarded
as the country’s true wealth, and put them at the centre of the new development model.
Today Morocco’s youth are stepping up to the plate with efforts to assist those
most affected by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, demonstrating
continued leadership and solidarity in supporting their fellow Moroccans as well as
foreign nationals, distributing food packages and sanitation kits.
Moreover, young Moroccan entrepreneurs and innovators have initiated various
contributions to the crisis response. These include making artificial ventilation
machines, automatic thermometers, automatic gates for sanitary disinfection
and sterilization, protective clothing and masks, manufacturing drones used for
air disinfection, virus detection and awareness-raising, and creating electronic
platforms for remote learning to support the Government’s efforts to promote online
education. They also fight fake news about COVID-19 through their widespread use
of social media.
To conclude, I would like to emphasize that the key to consolidating peace and
achieving social cohesion and sustainable and inclusive development is to invest in
young people.
This commits us to seek and promote new possibilities for the effective,
structured and sustainable participation of youth in all aspects of political, economic,
social and cultural life, in particular in the context of the implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
I would like to end with a quote from Graça Machel: “Preventing the conflicts
of tomorrow means changing the mindset of youth today.”

92/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Annex 44
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Nepal to the United Nations
I would like to begin by thanking the presidency of the Dominican Republic
for having convened today’s open debate to recognize the importance of young
people to peace and security. I also thank the Secretary-General and the briefers for
their updates and valuable insights.
Nepal welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on youth, peace and
security, dated 2 March (S/2020/167).
As highlighted by the Secretary-General in his report, there are about
1.85 billion young people in the world. Undoubtedly, the future of humankind
depends on them.
Youth’s marginalization and exclusion from any process foment socioeconomic
and political challenges. We cannot imagine a global future in which the youth suffer
from hunger, unemployment or other socioeconomic menaces.
Youth have the resilience and capacity to amplify development goals and
promote peace and stability. Youth suffer not only from conflict but also pay the
opportunity cost of not receiving a proper education as a result of conflict. Young
people fight on both fronts during conflicts, either as soldiers or as rebels. If they are
left behind and marginalized in post-conflict situations, the likelihood of a relapse
into conflict will be very high.
Young people aged from 16 to 40 constitute more than 40 per cent of Nepal’s
population. That is a huge demographic dividend for Nepal. Young people have
played crucial roles not only in Nepal’s socioeconomic development but also in its
political transformation. They have also played a significant role in the progressive
political changes that have occurred in the last 70 years of the history of modern
Nepal. That is one reason why Nepal has a policy of engaging youth in every sector
of national life.
In line with the relevant Security Council resolutions, the Government of Nepal
recognizes young people as agents of change in the maintenance and promotion of
peace and security. We focus on participation, partnership, prevention, protection
and disengagement, and reintegration as five pillars for action on young people’s
contribution to building and sustaining peace.
Similarly, to achieve the aspirations of the Constitution of Nepal and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Government of Nepal has laid out plans
and policies to include and ensure the political, economic, social and employment
rights of young people.
Nepal’s National Youth Policy 2015 places emphasis on the quality of
vocational education, employment, entrepreneurship, skill development, health
and social security, youth engagement and leadership development, and sports
and entertainment. We have also set up a Youth Information Centre to increase
young people’s access to information. We believe that only well-informed youth
who participate meaningfully in politics, the economy and other sectors can play a
significant role in the country’s socioeconomic progress. Nepal has also increased its
youth investment through its youth self-employment fund, aimed at creating jobs for
young people and utilizing their skills for the country’s development.
We are committed to ensuring the active and equitable participation of youth
in decision-making processes in order to promote a peaceful and inclusive society.
Our policy of inclusion seeks to ensure proportionate youth representation from
various communities at all sectors and levels of governance.
20-0640093/123

S/2020/346

In conclusion, my delegation is confident that today’s deliberations will
provide further impetus to effectively implement resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419
(2018). I also hope that this fifth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 2250
(2015) will serve as an opportunity to better integrate the youth, peace and security
agenda, facilitate the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals, help
prevent conflicts and sustain peace.

94/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Annex 45
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Norway to the United Nations
on behalf of the Nordic countries
The Nordic countries — Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and Norway —
applaud the Dominican Republic for convening this open debate on youth, peace
and security. We appreciate its efforts to keep this important issue on the Council’s
agenda and for facilitating the submission of written statements from non-Council
members. We also welcome the participation of the young civil society briefers in
this new format. The voices of civil society and youth-led organizations continue
to bring vital input into the work and considerations of the Council, even amid the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report on youth and peace and
security (S/2020/167). The report shows that we have made progress across several
pillars, in support of the meaningful participation of youth in peace and security
issues. However, we emphasize the need for continued focus and momentum on the
implementation of the youth, peace and security agenda.
Since the adoption of resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018), we see more
consistent reporting on youth-specific issues to the Council. Together with Jordan,
the Nordic countries have consistently reported on the role of youth through the
Group of Friends of Preventing Violent Extremism. We encourage countries to
report on the contribution and situation of young people in peace and security
efforts, giving special attention to marginalized groups such as young women. We
also welcome a measure mandating the Secretariat to regularly report on the youth,
peace and security agenda.
Young women and men have both the wisdom and the commitment to help
pivot societies towards sustainable peace and security, and they are a positive force
in that regard. However, systematic exclusion and many structural barriers for youth
engagement and participation remain, even within the Council. The SecretaryGeneral’s report offers interesting ideas for stimulating the broader participation of
young people in conflict resolution, mediation, peace and political processes.
In that regard, the relevant Security Council mission mandates should include
language requiring the meaningful participation of youth in peace and security
efforts, including in the mediation, monitoring and implementation of ceasefires, as
well as in peace agreement negotiations. Those mandates should also include ageand gender-sensitive conflict analysis.
The Nordic countries have a long tradition of youth engagement. We support a
range of initiatives at both the national and the international levels, including youthled initiatives that support young peacebuilders in conflict contexts. For instance,
Norway and Finland are key partners of the African Union’s flagship initiative,
Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020, which aims to promote peace in conflictaffected areas. We recognize the efforts that the African Union is taking to involve
African young women and men in peace processes, and we highlight the importance
of similar efforts made in the Middle East and Latin America. At the global level,
Sweden is a key partner in the institutionalization of the youth, peace and security
agenda within the United Nations system.
The safety of young people who speak up in their societies is a source of
major concern. The Secretary-General’s report includes important provisions on
the protection of young mediators, peacebuilders and human right defenders. We
stress the importance of respecting and protecting human rights, and we reiterate

20-0640095/123

S/2020/346

that Member States have an important role in preventing abuse committed against
these groups.
The Office of the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth plays an important role
in promoting the protection of aspiring peacebuilders and human rights defenders.
We hope that the framework for the effective protection of young peacebuilders is
one of several deliverables that the Youth 2030: The United Nations Strategy on
Youth, launched by the Office, will help bring about.
Finally, supporting the youth, peace and security agenda requires continued
commitment across other areas, such as education. The Nordic countries will remain
engaged so as to directly and indirectly empower young women and men as agents
of change for lasting peace.

96/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Annex 46
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Peru to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
We welcome the holding of this important meeting and the valuable statements
made, especially in the very difficult context created by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, despite which we continue to make progress on an important
milestone in the Security Council. This year will mark the fifth anniversary of the
introduction of the youth, peace and security agenda. We are also grateful for the
first report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/167) on this agenda item, which we are
sure will be an essential guide to advancing and deepening this important agenda.
The current generation of young women and men is the largest in history,
representing some 16 per cent of the world’s population. Nearly 90 per cent of young
people live in developing regions, where they are the largest segment of society,
and a significant proportion live in areas affected by armed conflict. They therefore
constitute a demographic dividend that we cannot ignore; rather, we must value and
know how to use them for the current and future benefit of our societies, in special
recognition of the great and valuable contributions young people can make to peace
and security.
The current context of the COVID-19 pandemic is showing us that the
resilience of young people is essential to making progress in difficult situations.
Since our elderly population and adults with underlying conditions are particularly
vulnerable and our children — though seemingly immune — are in need of care and
attention, young people are called upon to be a key pillar of our pandemic response
and to help our economies recover. We must regard young people as relevant actors in
overcoming today’s challenges. At the same time, we must address the socioeconomic
consequences that affect young people in particular and are exacerbated by the
pandemic, bearing in mind that deepening inequalities risk fuelling conflicts that
threaten peace and security.
We welcome the important progress made in the Security Council over the
past five years through the adoption of resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018) —
the latter promoted by Sweden and Peru. We also welcome presidential statement
S/PRST/2019/15, which encourages “mobilising the Youth towards Silencing the
Guns in Africa by 2020”; as well as the report of the Secretary-General on the matter
before us (S/2020/167).
Peru stresses the role that young women and men are called upon to play
in the prevention and resolution of conflicts, in justice and reconciliation, and in
peacebuilding processes. Young people are key to building the inclusive vision of
the future required to achieve and consolidate peace and to prevent new conflicts.
Unfortunately, despite their enormous potential, the 2018 study entitled “The missing
piece: independent progress study on youth, peace and security” (see S/2018/86)
indicated that, in many cases, young people are seen as a problem rather than as
partners and allies for peace, which leads to their frustration. To enjoy sustainable
peace, we must work on the inclusion of young people in the fields of politics,
economics and digital information, and in humanitarian responses.
We are convinced that this is the right approach to effectively implement
and promote this issue on the Council’s agenda. We must harness and maximize
the potential, commitment and resilience of young people in order to prevent and
address conflict. To that end, we believe that it is important to create inclusive and
safe spaces that allow young people to participate in and contribute to sustainable
20-0640097/123

S/2020/346

peacebuilding in their respective national communities. We welcome the efforts
made in that regard and encourage their continuation.
This issue is obviously linked to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. The Sustainable Development Goals commit us, among
other actions, to creating decent employment for our youth, to guaranteeing equal
opportunities through access to health and education, and to promoting peaceful
societies with inclusive institutions. After all, our efforts and decisions today will be
reflected in the world of tomorrow, in which the young people of today will become
the leaders responsible for guiding us.
Humankind today sees new challenges and difficulties arising from
globalization, violence, demographic changes, inequality, new technologies, forced
displacement, changing labour markets and climate change, all of which impact the
lives of young people. Those problems threaten to deteriorate in the future and more
seriously affect them as adults. We therefore cannot leave them out of the decisions
that may determine their fate. Perpetuating exclusion will inexorably lead to feelings
of marginalization, mistrust and despair, and with it the potential of a ruptured peace.
We are committed to promoting the human rights and fundamental freedoms
of all young people, safeguarding their diversity and fighting discrimination. That
means abandoning the stereotypes that stigmatize them as people prone to violence,
as well as recognizing and promoting their capacities for participation and leadership
in public life.
The participation of youth delegates in various United Nations forums
and processes is certainly a good practice. It serves to build bridges between
Governments, international organizations and youth organizations around agendas
that promote the maintenance of international peace and security.
Moreover, it is essential to consider the role that women, especially young
women, can play. Young people are marginalized, even more so when a gender
component is added. Gender equality and women’s empowerment are crucial if we
are to register significant advances in this and other fields, as recognized in the
2030 Agenda.
Finally, we consider it appropriate that the youth, peace and security
agenda be addressed in tandem with the children and armed conflict agenda, as
they are mutually complementary, with a view to promoting peacebuilding on a
continuum from childhood and adolescence to youth. That will lead to lasting and
sustainable peacebuilding.
In conclusion, Peru reiterates its support for and commitment to promoting
this issue as we are convinced of its importance in achieving the purposes of the
United Nations.

98/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Annex 47
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Poland to the United Nations
Poland would like to congratulate the Dominican Republic on assuming the
presidency of the Council for the month of April. We would like to thank Dominican
Republic for organizing this important open debate on youth, peace and security and
for allowing all Member States to take part, despite the challenging circumstances.
We are very grateful for the leadership of the Secretary-General and his Envoy
on Youth, Ms. Jayathma Wickramanayake. We would also like to thank the briefers
for their presentations and inspiring messages.
This year is a year of many important anniversaries for multilateral diplomacy.
It marks five years since the introduction of the youth, peace and security agenda,
and 20 years since that of the women and peace and security agenda. It also marks
10 years since the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. It
therefore represents a great opportunity to reflect on the role of youth in these
challenging times as an equal partner and an important stakeholder, and to look at
the youth, peace and security agenda as a critical component of discussions in the
Council and beyond.
We turn now to challenges for youth in the context of peace and security.
As the Secretary-General’s first report on youth, peace and security (S/2020/167)
indicates, there are 1.85 billion young women and men — from the ages of 10 to 24 —
in the world, 90 per cent of whom live in developing countries. Conflicts take a toll
on young people in various ways. Young women and men with disabilities, who are
often ostracized or marginalized within their immediate families and communities
and find themselves at an increased risk of violence and abuse, are particularly
affected. Young people today face many obstacles, ranging from exclusion from
political processes to suffering from the effects of underdevelopment, lack of access
to services and education, and high levels of unemployment.
As UNICEF reports, the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
has long-term and destructive consequences on access to education. According
to UNICEF, almost 1.6 billion children do not currently attend school, and it is
estimated that more than half of the children from poor and developing countries
will not be going back to school once they have reopened.
At the same time, all the foregoing factors constitute important drivers for
violence among youth, some of whom simply feel that they do not have options, if
they even wish to survive, as they do not believe in a happy future for themselves.
That is why education represents a principal tool in shaping the future opportunities
of young people.
The report of the Secretary-General on youth and peace and security rightly
mentions that young people around the world are striving for peace, justice, inclusion,
gender equality and human rights. Their aspirations, views and demands not only
have to be heard, but need to be listened to. It is time for youth to be a part of peace
processes, including negotiating peace agreements.
Dire conflict situations have deplorable impacts on girls. Every day, millions
of young women are exposed to gender-based violence, early and forced child
marriage, sex trafficking, sexual harassment, rape and abuse. They are in critical
need of humanitarian assistance and access to medical services. Now more than
ever, young women should be free to live without prejudice or limited chances and
with equal opportunity. Moreover, we need to remember that men are also victims
of patriarchal mindsets and toxic masculinity. We need to take up the challenge
of changing the stereotypes, norms and the roles assigned to each sex because
20-0640099/123

S/2020/346

we want to live in a world where the equality of women and men is a reality and
nobody is marginalized on the basis of sex or origin. Young people are also victims
of violence based on religion and belief; we must therefore reassure them of our
unwavering support.
The frustration of young people and the lack of trust towards authorities,
Governments and leaders are growing. Young people do not want meaningless
assurances; they want to see concrete action and they want to be a legitimate part
of peace processes. Young people are increasingly aware of their rights and the
opportunities available to them. They are able to exchange views and engage in
meaningful discussions through the Internet and social media. They no longer want
to keep quiet, and our obligation is to incorporate their voices in our national policies.
With regard to initiatives my country is taking, Poland is especially concerned
about the increase in violence against educational facilities, students and teachers.
We welcome and support initiatives aimed at putting an end to the use of schools
and universities for military purposes. The 2014 Lucens Guidelines for Protecting
Schools and Universities from Military Use during Armed Conflict is a good example
in this regard. To confirm our commitment to effective implementation of the Lucens
Guidelines, we signed the Safe Schools Declaration. We believe that initiatives such
as these constitute an important step towards protection and promotion of the rights
of the child, especially in the conflict situations.
It is particularly relevant that the Warsaw Process, which is a joint initiative by
Poland and the United States inaugurated last year to tackle security problems in the
Middle East, is also discussing humanitarian and refugee issues, with a particular
emphasis on vulnerable groups, including children and youth. The refugee crises and
forced displacements in the Middle East are among the most pressing issues to be
addressed by the international community. Protecting all young people, in particular
young refugees and internally displaced persons in such countries as Syria, Iraq and
Yemen, has to be a priority for all actors. These ongoing conflicts deprive children
and youth of one of their basic needs and rights — safety. They are being maimed,
abducted and attacked, recruited to fight, sexually abused, and denied access to
education and humanitarian aid. Such traumas deprive them of dignity and leave
permanent marks on their adult lives. Violations of their rights not only endanger
their lives, but also undermine overall stability and welfare in our societies.
Those issues were further developed during the Warsaw Process Humanitarian
Issues and Refugees Working Group meeting that took place this February in
Brasilia. The main purpose of the meeting was to foster political solutions, better
coordination and structural interventions leading to the reduction of the impact of
the humanitarian crises on children and youth in the Middle East.
Protection of vulnerable and fragile groups, with a special focus on children
and youth, remains the top priority for Polish development cooperation. Although
Poland is a relatively new donor of development assistance, including humanitarian
aid, my country has already managed to develop areas in which we can share our
knowledge and experience, for example in providing protection in situations of
conflict to persons with disabilities and other groups at risk of exclusion.
A specific example of Polish Aid’s actions is its involvement in development
activities aimed at providing psychological support for young people affected by the
conflict in Ukraine. Together with Polish Humanitarian Action, we are improving the
functioning of the social services system by expanding the capacities of social and
psychological services personnel working in the settlements along the contact line.

100/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

With regard to the role of youth in the context of peace and security, Poland
fully adheres to the view set forth in the preamble of the resolution 2250 (2015),
namely, that
“youth should actively be engaged in shaping lasting peace and contributing
to justice and reconciliation”.
The passion and commitment of young people, who, as Polish experience shows,
are deeply committed to working in all sorts of non-governmental organizations,
contribute significantly to the culture of peace on different levels and in different areas.
We wish to acknowledge the unique contributions of many young peacebuilders,
activists and volunteers in conflict prevention, in the justice system, and in building
and sustaining peace. Youth and student organizations are increasingly active in
delivering aid and humanitarian assistance to people in the most dangerous places.
We also see it in the context of the current COVID-19 pandemic — young people and
their organizations are engaged on delivering aid to those most in need. It is crucial
to engage in dialogue with young people with a view to working together to achieve
sustainable peace and development.
We must do everything in our power to ensure that young people grow up
in a world in which they will have economic opportunity, social justice, access to
political participation and a sense of security. Only with the substantial engagement
of youth will we be able to advocate more effectively to achieve sustainable peace
and security conditions, human rights and our development goals. In this context, the
adoption of resolution 2250 (2015) in 2015 and resolution 2419 (2018) in 2018 were
groundbreaking achievements, demonstrating that the younger generations are ready
to take centre stage in peace and security initiatives and become agents of change.
In conclusion, let me again express our appreciation to the Dominican Republic
for putting this important matter high on the agenda of Security Council. We hope
to see more significant progress in terms of including youth in the debate. A more
systematic approach to implementing resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018) is
urgently needed. Young people have enormous power, dedication and a strong voice,
and we must provide them with platform to be heard and taken into account.

20-06400101/123

S/2020/346

Annex 48
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Portugal to the
United Nations, Francisco Duarte Lopes
Portugal fully aligns itself with the statement made on behalf of the
European Union.
The year 2020 marks the fifth anniversary of resolution 2250 (2015) on youth
and peace and security. At the same time, the first-ever report of the SecretaryGeneral on the topic was issued last month (S/2020/167). The report recognizes some
positive trends, namely, the growing awareness of the role that young people are
playing in the peace and security agenda. The report also underlines the obstacles
and barriers that remain. This is the moment to assess the progress made, share good
practices and lessons learned, and set the path for a stronger youth and peace and
security agenda for the years to come. We therefore thank the Dominican Republic
for organizing today’s timely debate.
In order to track the progress of resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2418),
Portugal strongly supports the establishment of a regular reporting structure on
youth and peace and security backed by a global set of indicators that could serve to
measure the progress of the resolutions’ implementation. A translation of resolution
2250 (2015) into Portuguese has been disseminated in Portugal and is used to raise
awareness as part of human rights training under the auspices of the National
Youth Plan, adopted in 2018, which is an interdepartmental instrument for action
in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and all its Sustainable
Development Goals.
The Portuguese authorities have issued practical guidebooks and toolkits
that address how to tackle specific challenges that young refugees are facing. Our
aim is to help them overcome uncertainty and support them in building a long-term
perspective. At the same time, these forms of guidance are designed to reinforce the
resilience of our hosting socioeconomic structures in building trust, acceptance and
intercultural dialogue.
In the context of the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP), a
Youth Action Plan 2018-2022 was approved. High among the Plan’s priorities is postconflict reconstruction. A study on youth violence is being prepared, and the sharing
of programmes and experiences among member States to prevent marginalization,
violent radicalization and youth criminality is being incentivized.
In addition, the Ibero-American Youth Pact, formalized in 2016 at the
Conference of Ministers of Youth of the International Youth Organization for IberoAmerica, effectively contributes to the implementation of the youth and peace and
security agenda. We encourage member States of the CPLP to adopt national plans
to make progress on, inter alia, the youth and peace and security agenda through
meaningful consultations and engagement with youth-led organizations.
In order to guarantee the safety of students, Portugal is implementing the Safe
School Programme. The Programme diagnoses the areas with the highest incidence
of violent acts, and its intervention model has been designed based, inter alia, on
non-formal education methodologies. Furthermore, in the domain of education
for citizenship, Portugal has developed specific awareness-raising guidelines on
defence and security, gender equality, addiction and dependency prevention, aquatic
and maritime security, cybersecurity, environmental education and citizenship.
Last but not least, in 2019 the Portuguese Government, in cooperation with
partners from the United Nations system and the participation of the SecretaryGeneral, the President of the General Assembly at its seventy-third session and the
102/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth, among many others, organized the World
Conference of Ministers Responsible for Youth 2019 and Youth Forum, known
as Lisboa+21. The outcome of the Conference and Youth Forum was the Lisbon
Declaration on Youth Policies and Programmes, which was welcomed in the youth
resolution adopted in Geneva and in the Third Committee resolution on policies and
programmes involving youth, adopted by the General Assembly last December as
resolution 74/121.
Among the several commitments set forth in the Lisboa+21 Declaration is
the recognition of young people’s contribution to peace processes and conflict
prevention and resolution. The Declaration also expresses the concern that, among
civilians, youth is one of the groups that is most affected by armed conflict.
The women and peace and security agenda and the youth and peace and
security agenda are mutually reinforcing, especially when it comes to girls and
young women. The promotion and protection of the rights of women and girls can
be successful only if both agendas are fully implemented. In line with what is being
done on the women and peace and security agenda, we encourage the establishment
of a network of United Nations youth and peace and security advisers and focal
points to implement the youth and peace and security agenda at the country level,
including in peacekeeping and political missions.
Finally, Portugal considers that young people have a key role to play in the
coronavirus disease pandemic, for example through volunteering, youth activism
in social media, and raising awareness in the fight against hate speech. In Portugal,
many activities, including workshops and webinars on youth and youth rights,
remain ongoing.

20-06400103/123

S/2020/346

Annex 49
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Qatar to the
United Nations, Alya Ahmed Saif Al-Thani
[Original: Arabic]
It gives me great pleasure to thank the Security Council, presided over by
the Dominican Republic, for holding this open meeting under the exceptional
circumstances in which our world currently finds itself and to thank the SecretaryGeneral and his Envoy on Youth for their important briefings. I would also like
to thank Olla Al-Sakkaf, Project Coordinator for the Youth Without Borders
Organization for Development, Yemen, and Gatwal Augustine Gatkuoth, founder of
the Young Adult Empowerment Initiative in South Sudan and Uganda, for sharing
their perspectives and experiences on the ground.
The unprecedented crisis we are going through because of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic is definitely having a catastrophic effect on societies
all over the world, and young people are no exception. We therefore welcome the
report of the Secretary-General entitled Shared responsibility, global solidarity:
Responding to the socio-economic impacts of COVID-19, in which he addresses the
disease’s impact on young people and the important role they can play in responding
to it. According to the report, 1.5 billion young people, or 87 per cent of the world
student population, are currently out of schools or university. Moreover, the
COVID-19 pandemic has caused a significant spike in youth unemployment.
In the face of these major challenges, Qatar continues to do all it can to provide
education services to children and young people. It was one of the first countries
in the region to put precautionary social distancing measures in place to stem the
spread of the virus and to respond to the situation by taking steps to ensure a smooth
transition to online remote learning.
As Council members are aware, protecting and promoting the right to
education is a priority for Qatar, whether or not in times of emergency. For some
years now, it has been harnessing technology to develop education, guarantee its
continuity and ensure that it keeps pace with the demands and challenges of the
times. The transition to remote learning in Qatar has thus been rapid and smooth,
given that the necessary infrastructure, plans and resources were already in place.
The Ministry of Education and Higher Education has activated a remote learning
mechanism and dedicated electronic platforms, working to ensure that the remote
learning experience encompasses all students, including those with any type of
disability. The authorities have also made sure that students without access to laptop
computers or tablets are provided with them, thereby ensuring that no one is left
behind in the distance education process.
At the international level, Qatar has intensified its efforts to provide
development and relief aid, with a focus on education and access to technology
for learning. Aid provided by the Qatar Fund for Development, the Government’s
executive arm in various parts of the world, is in step with the challenges arising
from the difficult circumstances brought about by social distancing, lockdowns
and school closures. The country’s institutions, including the Education Above
All Foundation, have also developed cutting-edge programmes to facilitate remote
learning in the home. The Foundation has acted swiftly to assemble remote learning
resources in different languages in order to assist parents and guardians and ease the
process of adapting to remote learning.
In addition, Qatar is pursuing its work to empower young people and encourage
them to participate actively in sustainable development. At the Second Doha Forum
104/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Youth Edition, which was held in November 2019 by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
and the Qatar Foundation for Education, Science and Community Development,
in-depth discussions on issues of concern to young people took place. The Forum
provided them with an open platform from which to express their views on current
affairs, including peace and security issues, in the run-up to the Doha Forum, which
was held the following month.
We all know that combating COVID-19 requires not only international
cooperation but also a safe environment and the removal of any obstacles or
conditions that might stand in the way of a strong and effective response, as well as
active support for young people in the central role they have to play in that response.
We therefore affirm our support for the calls of the United Nations for a ceasefire
in regions affected by conflict so that we can focus on dealing with the pandemic.
In addition to the key role that they can play in peace processes, as the international
community agreed five years ago with the adoption of Security Council resolution
2250 (2015), young people have an equally important role to play in putting United
Nations calls for a ceasefire into practice.
Qatar looks forward to hosting, with the Office of the Secretary-General’s
Envoy for Youth, a high-level world conference on comprehensive youth peace
pathways. The conference will be a part of ongoing efforts and build on the
achievements of the first International Symposium on Youth Participation in Peace
Processes, which was held in Helsinki in 2019. We take this opportunity to express
appreciation to our partners, Finland and Colombia, and the Office of the SecretaryGeneral’s Envoy for Youth, for their efforts and cooperation in preparing the way
for the coming conference, which will coincide with the fifth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 2250 (2015), the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) and the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action. The focus of the conference will be on, among other matters,
the participation of young women in peace processes, through discussion circles
and the mainstreaming of gender equality considerations throughout the preparatory
stages of the event, during the event itself and in the follow-up to its outcome.
In conclusion, Qatar remains committed to pursuing its efforts to create an
environment conducive to the participation of young people in the development
process and to providing support at the national, regional and international levels in
order to enable them to contribute effectively to peacebuilding and to work actively
to address the challenges facing our world today.

20-06400105/123

S/2020/346

Annex 50
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Korea to the United Nations, Cho Hyun
I thank you, Mr. President, for your initiative in convening today’s open videoteleconference of the Security Council on the theme “Towards the fifth anniversary
of the youth, peace and security agenda: accelerating implementation of resolutions
2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018)”.
The Republic of Korea takes this opportunity to offer its deep appreciation to
Secretary-General António Guterres for his timely report (S/2020/167) and briefing
on this important subject. My delegation also thanks Ms. Jayathma Wickramanayake,
the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth; Ms. Olla Al-Sakkaf, project coordinator
at Youth Without Borders Organization for Development, Yemen; and Mr. Gatwal
Augustine Gatkuoth, founder of the Young-Adult Empowerment Initiative, South
Sudan/Uganda, for their enlightening interventions today.
The Republic of Korea welcomes the marking of the fifth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 2250 (2015), which recognized the important positive
contribution of youth to the maintenance and promotion of peace and security. As
Secretary-General Guterres’ March 2020 report rightly points out, it is critical that
the international community support young people in fulfilling their full potential
as a positive force for building peaceful and just societies. Indeed, the role of youth
in the field of peace and security is especially important in that young people often
form the majority of the population in countries affected by armed conflict. At the
same time, young people will have a durable impact on the future of their own
societies, as they hold the key to the trajectories of future generations.
In that connection, the Republic of Korea believes that the international
community must redouble its collective efforts to harness the potential of youth with
a view to maintaining and promoting peace and security. My delegation believes
that a comprehensive approach — in line with the humanitarian-development-peace
nexus — is greatly needed to achieve that driving vision, and would like to highlight
the following five points to that end.
First, we should prioritize the strengthening of a mechanism to channel the
youth voices in the field of peace and security. Building upon the progress of political
democratization in many parts of the world, we need to develop new forms of
communication, including forward-thinking online and offline forums, to integrate
more young people into decision-making processes.
Secondly, we must do our utmost to provide better access to employment and
other forms of economic opportunity. All across the globe, in both developing and
developed countries, high unemployment rates and a lack of opportunity for young
people create significant levels of marginalization, which then becomes a root cause
of social instability, and, in some instances, extremism, thus directly affecting peace
and security.
Thirdly, we need to establish a legal and institutional framework that
ensures inclusivity for all young people, regardless of their gender, race, religion,
nationality, sexual orientation, disability or affiliation of any kind. Bearing in mind
the importance of the full enjoyment of human rights for youth, we also need to take
firm action, with greater awareness, against violence and discrimination in order to
protect marginalized groups who are frequently targeted.
Fourthly, we must greatly expand the culture of peace, tolerance and
intercultural and interreligious dialogue all around the world. Global citizenship
106/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

education is key in that regard, as it provides youth with the tools to cultivate a
deeper understanding of themselves and others in our interconnected world.
Fifthly, we need to bear in mind the great significance of the latest technology,
such as information and communications technologies, and its importance in the
lives of young people. Such technologies can serve as a medium for political reform
but, simultaneously, as a recruiting tool for terrorist organizations. They can serve
as a crucial avenue for the exchange of innovative ideas and positive messages,
but also for the spread of disinformation, hatred and division. As such, we must
maximize the positive impacts of new technologies while simultaneously limiting
their negative effects.
Through such a comprehensive approach, we can enhance the constructive
role of young people and ensure that they will, in turn, serve as models for future
generations. Youth’s catalysing effect has the potential to pay exponential dividends
in the field of peace and security in the years to come.
In the Republic of Korea, the role of youth has always taken centre stage in
overcoming the major challenges each generation has experienced. Student protests
helped end military rule and usher in democracy. Young people, as innovative
entrepreneurs and earnest workers, were integral in transforming one of the poorest
countries in the world into an economic powerhouse within a single generation. They
spoke out against various forms of discrimination and social injustice. And today,
the strong voices of our dynamic youth continue to hold leaders accountable for
providing good governance.
Based on that rich experience, Korea has been actively contributing to the
strengthened role of youth in the field of peace and security. That includes our
leadership in the Peacebuilding Commission as the previous Chair and our robust
support of the recently released Peacebuilding Fund Strategy 2020-2024, which
clearly lays out the Secretary-General’s prioritization of youth empowerment projects.
The Republic of Korea has been a proud champion of youth engagement in
the field of disarmament. As I emphasized at the 74 Years of Nuclear Disarmament
and the Contribution of Youth Beyond 2020 event that my Mission co-hosted with
the Office for Disarmament Affairs, youth engagement is meaningful for securing
diversity, as well as creating new positive momentum for disarmament discussions
that have been polarized and have remained at a standstill for quite some time. Such
efforts include presenting last year’s landmark draft resolution on youth, disarmament
and non-proliferation in the First Committee for the first time in history.
The Republic of Korea is also proud to be scaling up its engagement with
various United Nations Development Programme projects, such as the YouthConnekt
initiative in Rwanda, youth volunteers supporting peace and recovery in Darfur and
strengthening women’s and youth leadership to accelerate participatory, inclusive
and sustainable local governance in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well
as with UNESCO, including youth empowerment through technical and vocational
education and training in the Gambia, to name just a few.
Youth are undoubtedly among the most vulnerable in the face of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, with its historic economic impact,
including unprecedented levels of unemployment. Moreover, COVID-19 has serious
implications for young people’s ongoing role in the field of peace and security. The
Republic of Korea has been targeting its response on the basis of transparency,
openness and accountability to its citizens and is making efforts to mitigate the
impact on the most vulnerable. As a result, Korea was able to successfully hold its
nationwide legislative elections in the shadow of COVID-19 and saw the highest voter
turnout for a general election in 28 years. At this election, the Korean Government
20-06400107/123

S/2020/346

lowered the voting age to 18, thereby expanding the participation of young people in
the political process. My delegation believes that our recent experience in that regard
can provide some hope for others, including young people, as the world collectively
responds to the unique challenges presented by the pandemic.
There are various prospects for the post-coronavirus global order, and it is
our own choice what path we elect to take. Will we choose a world that is divisive,
exclusive and closed owing to bigotry, stigmatization and demagoguery? Or will
we rise to the challenge and consider the possibility of a world that is inclusive,
cooperative, peaceful and based on solidarity, tolerance and transparency? This
is a critical moment for all peoples and nations, and the choices we make in the
construction of the post-coronavirus order will have outsized and long-lasting
ramifications on our youth and subsequent generations. Together, let us energize our
efforts in order to make the choices that will propel us forward in the right direction.
It is also important to highlight that the youth, peace and security agenda
is closely interlinked with the implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals. The Republic of Korea notes with appreciation United Nations efforts
to expand the critical role of youth in helping to achieve the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
The Republic of Korea strongly supports global efforts to strengthen the
youth, peace and security agenda and will continue to play its part, alongside the
United Nations and other Member States, to ensure that our world is more peaceful
and secure for our future generations.

108/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Annex 51
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Switzerland to the
United Nations
[Original: French and English]
The topic of today’s debate is important, and I would like to thank the
presidency for organizing the debate in such a way as to allow all Member States
to participate.
As Switzerland wrote in its two letters to the presidency of the Security
Council on behalf of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group,
Switzerland welcomes the latest adjustments to the Council’s working methods to
ensure that they remain up to the standards of transparency and inclusiveness during
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis.
In line with resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018), Switzerland considers it
essential to increase the participation and contribution of young women and men in
the area of peace and security. Allow me to highlight three points that are particularly
important in this context.
First, young people constitute a large portion of the population in countries
affected by armed conflict. Many young people are currently seeing their situation
worsen owing to the threat of COVID-19. Their specific needs must be taken into
account. Switzerland has set up a rapid reaction mechanism to support the fight against
the pandemic and its impact on human security. Those efforts include civil society
activities to raise Syrians’ awareness of the effects of COVID-19 and to strengthen
trust-building mechanisms in communities, especially among Syrian youth.
Secondly, young women and men are drivers of change. Their potential for
action must be strengthened at all stages of peacebuilding. Switzerland welcomes the
Peacebuilding Fund’s Gender and Youth Promotion Initiative, which has boosted the
empowerment of young people in recent years. The youth, peace and security and the
women and peace and security agendas are mutually reinforcing, thereby enhancing
the effectiveness of the implementation of the Council’s mandate. Switzerland
urges the Council to strengthen the role of young people across its agenda items,
specifically by inviting more young briefers. The Council should also recognize the
indispensable role of civil society in peace and security. The increased involvement
of youth in sustaining peace is also a request resulting from the consultations
during the review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture held in Geneva
in February.
Thirdly, creating economic conditions conducive to youth employment
is an important lever for lasting peace. Switzerland supports a joint job-creation
programme of the International Labour Organization and the Peacebuilding
Support Office in fragile and conflict-affected situations. The project is part of the
wider United Nations effort to make more systematic use of such peacebuilding
programmes. The inclusion of young people in the labour market helps to improve
their prospects. In Myanmar, for example, Switzerland provides local stakeholders
with expertise from its hotel industry by developing skills in the tourism sector.
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, Swiss vocational training programmes have helped to
reduce the high unemployment rate among young people.
The inclusion of young people is an important precondition for conflict
resolution, sustainable peace and conflict prevention. The resolutions adopted by
the Security Council, in particular resolution 2250 (2015), adopted five years ago,

20-06400109/123

S/2020/346

set out areas for action and steps to follow. Strengthening youth engagement in peace
and security means acting now for the future.

110/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Annex 52
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Slovenia to the United Nations
Let me start by thanking the Dominican Republic for organizing this
timely debate.
Slovenia aligns itself with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union, and wishes to add some remarks in its national capacity.
This year, when we are marking many important milestones, including the
fifth anniversary of the youth, peace and security agenda, we need to reaffirm the
important role that young people have in shaping a better world for everyone, but
especially for themselves, as they are humankind’s future generation. It is imperative
that they have a place in shaping it.
Young people have already demonstrated that they can be drivers of positive
change and key actors in the search for sustainable solutions to the many challenges
that the world is facing today. They must have a voice, and we need to listen and
empower it. Their participation in post-conflict peacebuilding processes and
sustaining international peace and security is an important part of that.
One of our contributions is to provide a unique platform for young leaders,
entrepreneurs, influencers, thinkers and social activists to share their visions,
exchange ideas and connect with peers from different parts of the world. Since
2011, the Young Bled Strategic Forum has been bringing together young leaders
aged between 18 and 35 years from all over the world to engage in lively discussion
and to develop innovative solutions to some of the most pressing global issues. The
platform is part of the Bled Strategic Forum, an annual international foreign policy
conference. This year, we look forward to also welcoming the Secretary-General’s
Envoy on Youth, Ms. Jayathma Wickramanayake.
We are happy to see young women stepping up and taking the lead in addressing
not only many global challenges, such as environmental degradation and climate
change, but also particular challenges at their local level. Their important role needs
to be recognized and supported. The gender perspective must be an integral part of
the youth, peace and security agenda.
For many years now, the Slovenian Ministry of Foreign Affairs has been
supporting the engagement of the United Nations Youth Delegate Programme in
the work of the United Nations. Slovenian youth delegates regularly participate in
the sessions of the Third Committee and the Economic and Social Council Youth
Forum. Last year, our youth delegate actively participated in the Youth Climate
Summit and was a member of the official delegation, led by our Prime Minister, at
the Climate Action Summit. The Prime Minister and the youth delegate signed the
Kwon-Gesh Youth Pledge within the framework of the youth engagement and public
mobilization coalition for the meaningful involvement of young people in climate
policy planning.
Young people can be full participants in shaping our world only with the
full protection and assurance of the full enjoyment of their human rights, including
the freedom of expression and movement, the freedom of peaceful assembly and
economic and social rights, and the right to quality education, which are essential
for empowering young people. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is
the most important document that the international community has as a signpost
for the future. The young are an essential key player in its implementation. Let us
not forget that one of its goals — education — is most pertinent to precisely the
young generation.
20-06400111/123

S/2020/346

When it comes to issues of peace and security and the peaceful settlement of
disputes, mediation is an effective tool for saving lives and sparing human suffering.
It is a cost-effective tool for prevention and for post-conflict peacebuilding and
reconstruction. However, only an inclusive mediation process can be efficient and
effective, and we believe that the active participation of young people in that regard
is essential. In 2017, Slovenia launched a pilot project of school and peer mediation
against peer violence in Bosnia and Herzegovina. By building up mediation
capacities among teachers and students, schools become promoters of reconciliation,
tolerance, human rights and diversity. The project, which has been well received
within the local communities, has thus had a positive impact on raising tolerance and
peaceful conflict resolution. In fact, mediation techniques could, or should, be part
of a comprehensive education.
Today, as we deal with this unprecedented coronavirus disease crisis, the need
to engage all our human potential that the different generations can bring to the table
is more evident than ever. Only by working together in an inclusive manner will we
overcome this global threat and come out stronger and with better prospects for the
future. As I mentioned at the beginning, this future belongs to the young.

112/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Annex 53
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the
United Nations, Feridun H. Sinirlioğlu
I would like to express our thanks to you, Mr. President, for bringing this
cross-cutting issue to the attention of the Security Council. The recognition of the
role of young people in both peace and conflict settings is a significant step towards
building sustainable peace, combating extremism and achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals.
The role of young people in the maintenance of peace and security has long
been neglected. Today young people between the ages of 10 and 24 years constitute
almost one third of the world’s population. One in four of these young people are
affected by, or living in, regions fraught with conflict and violence.
Young people around the world strive for peace and justice, as well as economic
and social development. Their voices should be heard and their needs and demands
should be addressed. Their capacities must be further improved. Investing in young
people is an investment in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and in our
global pledge to leave no one behind.
As we mark the fifth anniversary of the milestone resolution 2250 (2015) this
year, we need to step up our efforts to accelerate its implementation and to amplify
the voices of young people at all levels by taking into account the crucial nexus
between long-lasting peace and sustainable development.
In line with that understanding, Turkey’s youth policy encompasses a
wide range of areas, including education, vocational training, employment,
entrepreneurship and civic participation. Article 58 of the Turkish Constitution is
devoted explicitly to youth and the rights of young people. The Ministry of Youth
and Sports plays a central role in planning, implementing and monitoring youthrelated policies and strategies. It develops mechanisms for the participation of young
people in all spheres of social life.
The coronavirus disease crisis has revealed, among other things, the
importance of the role of young people and the value of intergenerational solidarity.
Young people in Turkey are actively contributing to the success of the fight against
the ongoing pandemic as active agents of their communities.
Young people shoulder an immense burden in humanitarian crises. The
World Humanitarian Summit, held in Istanbul in May 2016, played a catalytic role
in putting in place mechanisms to guarantee that young people are prioritized in
the humanitarian system. It noted the urgency of upholding the rights of young
people in humanitarian settings, including the right to access secondary education
as well as health services and information. The Global Compact for Young People
in Humanitarian Action, launched at the Summit, has been key in guiding the longterm commitment for youth in emergency situations.
As the largest refugee-hosting country in the world, Turkey has taken
significant actions to prioritize young people and children in its refugee policy. To
cite a few examples, we have been working closely with the relevant United Nations
agencies to address the social and health-service needs of young asylum-seekers. So
far, we have granted more than 20,000 scholarships to those who are under temporary
protection in Turkey.
Together with United Nations agencies, we have established more than 40 safe
spaces for women and girls across the country. Such cooperation has been expanded

20-06400113/123

S/2020/346

to a number of social service centres with a view to reaching over 1 million people in
order to provide psychological support, legal advice and language lessons.
As stressed in the Secretary-General’s first report on youth, peace and security
(S/2020/167), the engagement of refugee young people in global discussions, such as
the global compact on refugees, has enabled the recognition of the significance of
youth participation in humanitarian settings and helped to galvanize the commitment
of Member States to improving their support for young refugees. We look forward to
further steps being taken in that direction by the international community.
Resolution 2419 (2018) rightly focuses on the need to increase the role of young
people in decision-making processes concerning security, conflict resolution and
peace, including peace agreements. It is encouraging to see that some Governments,
United Nations entities and non-governmental organizations have stepped up efforts
to accelerate the implementation of the resolution. Yet more efforts and investments
should be made at the level of the United Nations in order to meaningfully incorporate
young people in decision-making processes and address the underlying social,
economic and political factors that may lead to radicalization and violent extremism.
In many regions around the world, we have come to see that the full and active
participation of women and young people in peace processes is imperative. We need
to improve the role of women and young people in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts, peacebuilding, post-conflict reconstruction and reconciliation.
We also need to establish policies to ensure the incorporation of views and
interests of young people into the design and implementation of development
strategies and to make better use of the analysis of age-disaggregated data so as to
improve the possibilities for young people to contribute to socioeconomic life.
With that understanding, Turkey spearheaded efforts and worked with all
stakeholders to address youth unemployment during its presidency of the Group of
20 (G-20) in 2015. We built a consensus among the G-20 members to commit to a
reduction in the youth unemployment rate by 15 per cent by 2025. Turkey’s efforts
were successful in securing a specific target for youth unemployment for the first
time in the history of the G-20, with an accountability mechanism to be monitored
by the International Labour Organization and the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development.
The launch of the Secretary-General’s Youth 2030: The United Nations
Strategy on Youth is also the result of a growing acknowledgement of the need to
advance our youth policies and focus our attention on the concrete needs of young
people. At the same time, more remains to be done to deliver a coordinated United
Nations response to realize their rights and build their capacities as agents of change.
Turkey remains ready to contribute to the efforts of the Secretary-General to advance
the youth agenda of the United Nations.
As we celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, it is time
to realize our promise to young people by establishing a United Nations youth centre,
through which we can all contribute to the implementation of resolutions 2250 (2015)
and 2419 (2018) and where young people can amplify their voices at the global level.

114/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Annex 54
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the
United Nations, Sergiy Kyslytsya
We appreciate the initiative to hold this open debate on the issue of youth,
peace and security, including the role of young people in the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) outbreak response.
This year we mark the fifth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 2250
(2015), on youth, peace and security, as well as celebrating the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations. The appropriate observance of these milestones
is now even more important than before due to the global pandemic. We consider
that a united and targeted response to the coronavirus disease would be incomplete
without the inclusion of representatives of young people in this process.
The first report of the Secretary-General on youth, peace and security
(S/2020/167) provides an analysis of the five pillars: participation, protection,
prevention, disengagement and reintegration, and partnerships. We took note of that
analysis and support the report’s findings on the growing recognition of the role of
young people in peace and security, as well as on the remaining core challenges for
young people, including the violation of their human rights. In that regard, we see a
further need to reinforce our actions to respond to the aspirations of young people
for peace, justice and human rights.
We would like to affirm that the Ukrainian Government is carefully studying
the recommendations contained in this report and will consider them in the process
of the further adjustment of its national youth policy. Ukraine is committed to
strengthening the potential of young people, creating equal opportunities and
guaranteeing equal rights.
Returning to the Secretary-General’s report, we note that there has been
tangible progress in the implementation of the youth, peace and security agenda with
the crucial involvement of key actors in this process, in particular representatives of
civil society organizations and young people themselves.
At the same time, it is too early to celebrate our success. Unfortunately, the
most serious challenges for young people continue to impede positive changes, even
in the five pillars mentioned by the Secretary-General. All regions of the world
deserve a more peaceful and sustainable environment for young people that enables
them to realize their potential, creativity and aspirations for a more prosperous future.
While witnessing some positive elements of the implementation of the agenda
at the national level, we should not forget that the scale of problems and actions in
response to different regions and States are incomparable.
Africa’s young people have the potential to be the driving force behind
collective prosperity yet to be revealed. Africa has the world’s youngest population,
and it is growing rapidly, projected to account for over 40 per cent of the world’s
young people within three generations. Over recent decades, we have seen advances
in terms of policy commitments to youth development in Africa at the national
and regional levels alike. Africa’s Agenda 2063 underscores the importance of
promoting the rights of young people and meeting their needs, in all their diversity.
At the same time, too many young people remain jobless and struggle to access
public resources and quality social services. They remain excluded from policy
formulation. Engaging young people is central to the successful implementation of
the transformative agenda in Africa.
In Asia, the largest generation of young people in history should ensure the
region’s dramatic socioeconomic growth is sustained and even improved. At the
20-06400115/123

S/2020/346

same time, youth in Asia still face particular issues of engagement in education,
employment and training.
Ukraine understands the need to create and adopt an inclusive and integrated
education policy that equitably supports and develops the diverse categories
of young people in Africa and Asia. Given our well-developed higher education
system, Ukraine provides broad opportunities for foreign students to receive quality
education and become acquainted with European culture. During the 2019-2020
educational year, more than 63,000 foreign students, mostly from Asian and African
countries, are receiving education in my country.
It is also worth noting that, in many countries affected by conflict or occupation,
young people face permanent threats and danger. This situation is unacceptable,
and the States concerned should end violations, ensure protection and ensure that
perpetrators are held accountable.
This call is especially relevant given the gravity of problems and challenges
exposed by the current global pandemic. In this regard, we would like to call for
continued efforts to fight the COVID-19 threat, while ensuring the best possible
balance between the introduction of urgent exceptional measures to counter the
threat and respect for fundamental human rights and freedoms, with a focus on
attention to vulnerable populations, including youth.
Youth have traditionally played an instrumental role in Ukraine’s political
and public life. Back in October 1990, Ukrainian students conducted non-violent
public protests, which later forced the Soviet authorities to address the concerns
of the Ukrainian youth, cemented the foundations of our emerging civil society
and accelerated the disintegration of the Soviet Union. It was young people who
initiated the peaceful demonstrations in Kyiv in November 2013, protesting against
the decision of the political leadership to put on hold Ukraine’s further integration
with the European Union. After almost three months of the stand-off, a new
Ukraine emerged.
Following the Russian military aggression against my country in 2014 and
the resulting temporary occupation of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, as well
as certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, young people were among
the first to face this threat and protect their motherland. Tens of thousands actively
volunteered to provide support to our armed forces in the fight to protect the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine. Youth and student organizations also became
active in delivering aid and humanitarian assistance to the people affected by the
ensuing hostilities.
Six years have passed, but a multitude of threats and challenges for youth in
Ukraine continue to grow in the temporarily occupied territories. The occupying
authorities engaged in a massive campaign of human-rights violations, including
against young representatives, activists and human-rights defenders. They seek to
erase Ukrainian national and cultural identity and the identity of children and young
people as citizens of Ukraine.
Another flagrant violation of international humanitarian law — which
prohibits Russia, as the occupying Power, from forcing protected persons to serve
in its armed or auxiliary forces — is the plan to send almost 3,300 people from the
territory of the Crimean Peninsula for so-called “military service”. Most cynically,
most of them are expected to serve outside the Crimean peninsula, primarily in the
Southern Military District, whose military units and command are directly involved
in carrying out armed aggression against Ukraine in Donbas.
Unfortunately, the spread of COVID-19 has become an additional concern
for the life and health of the population in the temporarily occupied territories.
116/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

Therefore, we recall the obligation of the Russian Federation as an occupying Power
under international humanitarian law to take all the necessary measures to protect
the life and health of the population of those territories, to ensure and maintain in the
occupied territories satisfactory health care and hygiene conditions, and to take the
prophylactic and preventive measures necessary to combat the spread of contagious
diseases and epidemics.
Taking into account that the report I mentioned did not cover the negative
impact of COVID-19 on youth in the long run in the same way that it considered
the situations of women and children, we would be grateful for the preparation by
the Secretary-General of a targeted policy brief with urgent measures to minimize
the impact of this pandemic on youth. In our view, such a document should devote
special attention to youth affected by conflict and occupation amid the worsening
epidemiological situation as COVID-19 and its consequences spread.
In conclusion, I would like to highlight that, by protecting youth and their
rights, we are investing in our future, development and progress. The environment in
which they live today, and the possibilities we create for them to realize their potential
and put to use their energy and creativity, will define their role in ensuring peace and
security tomorrow. In this regard, I call for the full and effective implementation of
the youth and peace and security agenda.

20-06400117/123

S/2020/346

Annex 55
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the United Arab Emirates
to the United Nations
I thank you, Sir, for convening this open debate on youth and peace and security.
The United Arab Emirates attaches particular importance to the constructive role
that young people play in the development of our youthful and fledgling country,
and we are therefore pleased to participate in today’s meeting. Today, as we all face
a global health crisis, it is more important than ever that we champion young people
as active agents at the nexus between global health and security.
This year marks the fifth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 2250
(2015), on youth and peace and security, and we thank the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan for its leadership in championing that initiative. It was a ground-breaking
resolution, which recognized the important and positive role that young people play
in the maintenance and promotion of international peace and security.
Since the adoption of resolution 2250 (2015), the world has seen the many
ways in which young people are creatively seeking to prevent violence and build
peace across the globe, in devastated and conflict-affected societies as well as in
those enjoying relative peace. Their work heralds the tremendous potential of peace
and security dividends for all.
Young people across the globe have articulated the view that peace and
security are more than just the absence of violence, and, as such, these are matters
of universal concern. They have stressed the importance of ending violence and
addressing its symptoms as well as engaging with its underlying causes, including
corruption, inequality and social injustice.
Turning to the world’s struggle to face the current pandemic, the role of youth
has never been more vital. In the United Arab Emirates, youth are volunteering
to support our country’s efforts to navigate this global crisis through emergencyresponse trainings and safety workshops. Young people also took part in the national
sterilization programme to disinfect the main cities in order to prevent the spread
of the virus. The United Arab Emirates continues to believe in the transformative
leadership of youth at the national, regional and international levels to address major
global challenges.
At the national level, the United Arab Emirates’ leadership has taken concrete
steps towards the meaningful inclusion of youth in decision-making processes. Since
the appointment in 2016 of a Minister of State for Youth Affairs, several mechanisms
and initiatives have been institutionalized, such as the establishment of youth
councils and the adoption of a national youth strategy developed and championed by
young Emiratis. These steps underpin an open policy of engagement, which is the
cornerstone of nurturing a peaceful and thriving society.
At the regional level, the United Arab Emirates continues to support youth
in the Arab world. In a region shaped by pervasive security concerns, stereotypes
associating young people with violence remain widespread and contagious. To
counter such narratives, the United Arab Emirates promotes a model of moderation,
tolerance and acceptance. In this model, we believe that youth are not part of the
problem, but rather partners in the quest for more peaceful and prosperous societies.
In December 2019 in Abu Dhabi, the United Arab Emirates, together with the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and Hedayah, hosted a regional conference
on the theme “Empowering Youth and Promoting Tolerance: Practical Approaches
to Preventing and Countering Violent Extremism Conducive to Terrorism”. The
conference brought together 300 participants, providing an opportunity to discuss
118/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

initiatives and action plans to strengthen resilience against radicalization leading
to terrorism, with a focus on youth empowerment and tolerance at the national and
regional levels. This type of partnership is important if we are to benefit from and
support young people’s contributions to peace and to realize the potential of the
world’s 1.8 billion young people.
Youth-led peace and security efforts are noticeably innovative and resourceful,
making use of art, sport and media. From interpersonal engagements to spontaneous,
autonomous and leaderless social movements mobilized online, the diversity of youth
initiatives in this sphere is significant. Building thereupon, the United Arab Emirates
hosts initiatives such as the Arab Youth Centre, which provides opportunities for
young Arab pioneers in different fields to mobilize their peers and take part in the
sustainable development of their communities.
At the international level, the United Arab Emirates launched the Youth
Delegates Programme in 2016, which involves Emirati youth in the official United
Arab Emirates delegations participating in General Assembly meetings, committees
and relevant international forums. The programme includes their participation in
negotiations, side events and high-level meetings. In a similar vein, the United Arab
Emirates encourages the Security Council to invite more young leaders to brief it
on a regular basis to reflect on individual experiences while pursuing peace and
security in their societies.
Finally, the United Arab Emirates reaffirms its commitment to the important
role youth can play in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and as a key aspect
of the sustainability, inclusiveness and success of peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts. We also take this opportunity to encourage Member States and relevant
United Nations organs and entities to consider ways to increase the meaningful and
inclusive participation of youth in peacebuilding efforts in the furtherance of the
youth and peace and security agenda.

20-06400119/123

S/2020/346

Annex 56
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Uruguay to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
Uruguay thanks the Dominican Republic for convening this timely debate,
which provides us an oppor tunity to reflect on the progress made on the youth,
peace and security agenda, identify relevant challenges and obstacles and share
experiences and good practices in its implementation.
Today the world is suffering an unprecedented global health crisis caused by
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which is disrupting lives across the
planet. As humankind faces trying and uncertain times, young people are among
the most active groups engaged in mounting a comprehensive response to the crisis:
many work on the front lines as health personnel or humanitarian activists; some
are leaders, providing aid or distributing food and basic health supplies in their
communities; others are leveraging social networks and their advanced technologies
skills to share accurate information and raise awareness among the population, or
further developing applications for virtual platforms to facilitate communication
during this period of isolation and social distancing. Many others are working in
innovation and research, helping to develop new technologies, diagnostic tests and
treatments to fight the disease.
In carrying out these tasks, young people are showing not only their dedication
and creativity but also their strong moral values, such as empathy, solidarity and
compassion, as well as their strong commitment to global causes. This goes to show
that simplistic and negative stereotypes portraying young people solely as victims or
perpetrators of violence must be done away with; we must once and for all recognize
the immense potential of young people as active agents of change in building
peaceful environments, thereby contributing to the maintenance of international
peace and security.
Resolution 2250 (2015), adopted five years ago this month, represents a
historic milestone in the recognition of the essential role of youth in preventing and
resolving conflicts and in sustaining peace. Resolution 2419 (2018) called for the
inclusive participation of young people in such efforts, including in the negotiation
and implementation of peace agreements. Uruguay would like to highlight four
aspects crucial, in our view, for making progress on the implementation of the
youth, peace and security agenda, and for helping young people make a meaningful
contributions to peace and security.
First, there is a need to create an enabling environment in which young
people are respected and where they can fully develop their talents and abilities.
Equal access to quality and inclusive education, as well as opportunities for decent
work, as advocated by the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, are essential
factors for building the favourable environment that young people need. Education is
probably the most transformative resource human beings have, and an essential tool
for empowering young people.
The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the need to use new digital
technologies. Digital transformations are already under way as we adapt to our new
circumstances. Digital literacy should be part of educational programmes, as should
health education, including preparation for tackling global health crises.
Nonetheless, education must do more than transmit knowledge and
information. Young people should also be taught values, such as respect, tolerance
120/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

and solidarity, and the ability to participate constructively in political and social life.
Education should also impart to them the skills to become effective agents of change
and to undertake initiatives aimed at building a more peaceful and prosperous world.
Employment is a further priority, as it helps maintain the stability and security
of communities and contributes to social integration and inclusion. According to the
Secretary-General’s recent plan, Shared responsibility, global solidarity: responding
to the socioeconomic impacts of COVID-19, young people are among those most
affected by the socioeconomic impacts of the pandemic. Unless we can ensure
economic security, which helps guard against young people resorting to crime and
enables them to be productive members of society, young people run the risk of
ending up dangerously marginalized.
Uruguay is of the view that young people’s participation in political life and
decision-making processes should encompass all issues in which young people have
a stake, such as education, employment and health, including sexual and reproductive
health rights. Therefore, Uruguay has developed legislative frameworks and public
policies in line with resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018) to strengthen and
protect young people and promote their participation as key actors in the national
development process. Furthermore, the Youth Action Plan 2015-2025 was devised in
close consultation with young people from all over the country. The Plan is a road
map that systematizes and coordinates the main youth-oriented actions and policies.
It addresses areas such as gender, young people with disabilities, young lesbian,
gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons, youth living in rural areas and the
information and knowledge society.
The National Youth Institute is the Government body in charge of implementing
programmes and actions designed to increase the involvement of youth in public
affairs. Some of the programmes developed by the Uruguayan Government are:
Jóvenes en Red, which provides assistance to young women and men in situations
of socioeconomic vulnerability who are unemployed or disconnected from the
formal education system; Acompañamiento al Egreso en Comunidad, which assists
young people released from prison in entering the labour market and reintegrating
education; and Jóvenes a Programar, carried out jointly with the Uruguayan Chamber
of Technology and the major companies in that sector, which provides training and
employment in the area of information technologies. The programme also includes
employment services so that graduates can quickly join the labour market.
We are aware that we should do more. Therefore, the Government is planning to
implement a strategy aimed at encouraging youth volunteering through the creation
of a network of young people who are already young leaders in their respective
communities. The hope is that their example will inspire and mobilize their peers,
thereby facilitating attitudinal changes in youth and promoting the exercise of
positive leadership.
Secondly, to advance the agenda and facilitate the work of young peacebuilders,
it is important to build bridges of trust and communication between them and
Governments and to foster intergenerational exchanges. Youth mobilization and peace
efforts are more likely to be successful if young people are given an opportunity to
work with local and national authorities. That would help ensure that Governments
take into account the views of youth in policymaking and peacebuilding. Dialogue
and cooperation among youth and older people and community elders could bring
together the new and innovative ideas of young people and the experience of older
generations, thereby producing sound creative initiatives to solve complex issues
related to peace and security. To that end, a fundamental factor is required —
Governments and older generations should show young people their support and
confidence and acknowledge young people’s capacity for action and initiative.
20-06400121/123

S/2020/346

Thirdly, a measure that should be taken as a matter of urgency is to increase
the protection of young peacebuilders and human rights defenders, who are
increasingly the victims of threats and attacks, so they can continue doing their
job, free from intimidation and reprisals. They also have to adjust their work to the
current health situation; accordingly, efforts should be made to provide them with
personal protective equipment and training on how to improve their work during
these turbulent times in which they also have to manage the impact of the pandemic.
Fourthly, Uruguay would like to highlight the synergies between the women
and peace and security and the youth, peace and security agendas. Resolutions 2250
(2015) and 2419 (2018), on youth, peace and security, build on resolution 1325 (2000)
and subsequent resolutions related to women and peace and security. Both agendas
are complementary and mutually reinforcing. Breaking down the silos between them
will help to advance their implementation and improve the participation of women
and youth in peace and security issues. There are striking similarities between the
two agendas. At their core lies the fundamental principle that women and youth
should be engaged as partners in building sustainable peace. Women, like youth, are
underrepresented at all levels of decision-making. They are also generally excluded
from negotiation and peace processes, as their opinions are frequently ignored. Both
women and youth are viewed as victims or perpetrators of violence rather than as
agents of change. Significant efforts have been made to implement the women and
peace and security agenda for almost 20 years. Lessons learned from that experience
can be used to advance the implementation of the youth, peace and security agenda.
Despite barriers to the full participation of women, tangible progress has
been made since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), 20 years ago. A set of
new resolutions has been adopted, countless studies, research and analyses have
been conducted, strong partnerships have been forged with civil society and other
stakeholders, and a wide range of networks and coalitions, such as the Women and
Peace and Security Focal Points Network and networks of women mediators, have
been established across several regions of the world. Although the journey has
been slow, the participation of women in peacekeeping operations has increased
significantly. The participation of women in peace processes and the inclusion of
references relevant to women in peace agreements have also increased, although to a
lower extent. In Latin America, the Colombian peace process and the historic peace
agreement there are an example in that regard. National action plans are among the
most successful mechanisms to accelerate the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Similar plans to implement resolution 2250 (2015) would be valuable tools in
advancing the youth agenda as well.
Another aspect related to the synergies between these agendas that deserves
attention is the role of young women as forgers of peace. They are part of both the
women and peace and security, and the youth, peace and security agendas. Given that
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2250 (2015) complement each other, it is obvious that
including young women in conflict prevention and resolution is highly beneficial.
The concurrence of their dual identity as women and young people gives them unique
skills, abilities and perspectives to make critical contributions to ensuring inclusive
and lasting peace.
In conclusion, the COVID-19 crisis gives us an opportunity to reflect. No one
knows exactly what will come afterward. The youth, peace and security agenda will
probably change and adapt to the new reality. However, one thing is certain: youth
will continue to play a pivotal role. Ultimately, they will be the ones to build that new
reality. It is time to build peace. To that end, we need more than ever the creativity,
enthusiasm and innovative energy of the new generations in order to respond in an

122/123

20-06400

S/2020/346

effective manner and build the foundations for the safe and peaceful world that we
all need.

20-06400123/123
