S/PV.8219

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8219th meeting

Friday, 30 March 2018, 7.40 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Van Oosterom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Netherlands)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Lie Cheng
Mr. Dah
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Woldegerima
Mr. Michon
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Radomski
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mr. Allen
Mr. Miller

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-09119 (E)
*1809119*

S/PV.8219

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 7.40 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: I propose that the Security Council
invite the Permanent Observer of the observer State
Palestine to the United Nations to participate in this
meeting, in accordance with the provisional rules of
procedure and the previous practice in that regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Tayé-Brook
Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs and Acting Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I refer to note S/2017/507 and encourage members
and non-members of the Council to limit their
statements to five minutes or less, and the briefer to the
agreed time limit.
I now give the floor to Mr. Zerihoun.
Mr. Zerihoun: As Council members know, today’s
March of Return near the Gaza fence has, unfortunately,
resulted in violence. Based on the information at our
disposal, around 30,000 people participated in and
around a march at various locations in Gaza. Soon after
the demonstration started, the situation deteriorated
in several locations. Late afternoon, local time, the
Palestinian Health Ministry in Gaza confirmed that
at least 15 Palestinians had been killed and more
than 1,000 had been injured, including by tear gas
suffocation. Several of the casualties were reportedly
the result of live ammunition used by the Israeli security
forces during the march, but also following armed
clashes between Palestinian and Israeli security forces,
including the shelling of a Hamas observation point.
Reports indicate that most of the demonstrators
stayed well away from the border fence and did not
engage in violence. However, there are also reports
that some protesters engaged in stone throwing
and violent behaviour — some reportedly carrying
weapons. According to Israeli security forces reports,
2/12

30/03/2018

militants tried to get through the fence in an attempt
to plant explosives. Palestinians reportedly also sent a
nine-year-old girl across the fence, but Israeli troops
were able to send her safely back. Hamas leaders
reportedly were also present at some of the gatherings.
Prior to the march, Israel had increased its forces
around the border, deploying snipers, special units
and drones, and sent out warnings that it would act to
prevent any breach of the border fence or violation of
Israel’s sovereignty.
Violence also broke out in the West Bank, with an
estimated 900 Palestinians demonstrating, mostly in
central West Bank cities, such as Ramallah and Hebron.
According to the Palestine Red Crescent Society, 27
Palestinians were wounded during clashes near Nablus.
In his Security Council briefing earlier this week
(see S/PV.8214), Special Coordinator Mladenov noted
the developing Palestinian plans for today’s march,
and called on all to exercise restraint and to take the
necessary steps to avoid violent escalation. In statements
to the media, he reiterated those calls and emphasized
the need to ensure that civilians, particularly children,
should not be put in harm’s way. The Office of the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General
to the Palestine Liberation Organization and the
Palestinian Authority (UNSCO) has also engaged with
the Israel Defense Forces and Palestinian factions,
particularly in Gaza, to reinforce the same messages.
In order to ensure the safety and security of United
Nations personnel, the Department of Safety and
Security issued repeated security advisories to all staff.
Throughout the day, UNSCO has been in contact with
both Palestinian and Israeli security forces and will
continue to do so as more demonstrations are expected
throughout the next six weeks. There is fear that the
situation might deteriorate in the coming days. We will
continue to underline that it is imperative that civilians,
in particular children, not be targeted and that all actors
refrain from putting children at risk at any time. Israel
must uphold its responsibilities under international
human rights and humanitarian law. Lethal force
should be used only as a last resort, with any resulting
fatalities properly investigated by the authorities. We
therefore also continue to urge Israeli security forces to
exercise maximum restraint to avoid casualties.
The developments in Gaza today are another
painful reminder of the consequences of a missing
18-09119

30/03/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

peace between Israel and Palestine and the need to step
up our efforts in support of a peaceful resolution of
the conflict. As the Secretary-General and the Special
Coordinator have repeatedly reminded the Security
Council, the United Nations strongly urges Palestinians,
Israelis and the international community to take
concrete measures to reverse the current course of the
conflict and advance the goal of a just and sustainable
peace based on the two-State solution.
The President:
his briefing.

I

thank

Mr.

Zerihoun

for

I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having swiftly responded and convened this important
meeting. We would also like to thank Mr. Zerihoun,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for
his briefing today.
Four days ago in the Security Council (see
S/PV.8214), we heard a briefing by Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov on the status of the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016), at which he talked about the
demonstration that took place today in Gaza. As is usual
during the occasions when the defenceless Palestinian
people take to the streets to peacefully reaffirm their
right to an independent State, we have seen the policy
of Israeli arrogance and oppression in action. Today,
tens of thousands of brotherly Palestinian people have
taken to the streets in Gaza. They have participated
in a peaceful demonstration as they do every year on
30 March to commemorate Land Day, express their
attachment to their land and their national identity, and
underscore their legitimate and inalienable political
rights, guaranteed by international treaties, laws
and norms.
The Israeli occupation has continued for more
than 50 years now. Israel’s illegal and illegitimate
expansionist activities continue in Palestinian occupied
territory, including east Jerusalem. They are flagrant
violations of relevant Security Council resolutions,
particularly resolution 2334 (2016).
The State of Kuwait condemns in the strongest
terms the Israeli actions today, which have left at
least 15 Palestinians dead and more than 1,400
injured. Let us be clear. What happened today was
a peaceful demonstration pertaining to the right of

S/PV. 8219

defenceless people. This right was responded to with
the direct targeting of civilians, in flagrant violation
of international human rights law. The perpetrators of
today’s crime must be brought to justice.
The Palestinian people cannot be an exception
to international commitments and international law,
including the commitment to protecting civilians from
atrocities and grave violations. Israel, the occupying
Power, must honour its commitments, in line with the
1949 Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons. We strongly support international
protection for the Palestinian people in the occupied
territory, and addressing the practices and policies of
the repressive Israeli occupation authority.
It is very important not to separate what happened
today from the overall context. The Gaza Strip is
still under blockade and has been so for more than
10 years now. Some of those who participated in the
demonstration today are refugees who have been
negatively impacted by the decrease in contributions
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East. What happened
today is the result of more than 50 years of occupation.
Numerous international reports have reiterated the
degree to which living conditions have deteriorated
in Gaza. When no response is made to such practices,
policies and continued attacks against the defenceless
Palestinian people and their legitimate rights, this will
be the usual result, and we are definitely going to see
more of such distressing incidents. Consequently, and as
a first step, we are going to distribute a press statement
to the Member States for review and adoption by the
Security Council. In fact, as Mr. Zerihoun said, these
incidents are a painful reminder of the need to achieve
a lasting peace in the Middle East as soon as possible.
In conclusion, the State of Kuwait emphasizes the
importance of forcing Israel, the occupying Power, to
respect and implement the relevant Security Council
resolutions. We reiterate that any just and comprehensive
peace must be a strategic one, and that in order to
achieve it, the entire Israeli occupation of Palestinian
and Arab territories must end and the Palestinian people
be permitted to exercise their inalienable rights. Those
rights include the right to establish an independent and
full sovereign State, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
along the borders of 4 June 1967, based on resolutions
of international legitimacy and those of the United
Nations, the principle of land for peace, the road map
and the Arab Peace Initiative.

18-091193/12

S/PV.8219

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mr. Miller (United States of America): We note
that the representative of Israel is unable to attend
today’s meeting, owing to the fact that it is taking
place during the celebration of Passover. It is extremely
unfortunate that Israel is not able to participate in the
discussion of this very important matter. It is also
vital that the Council take a balanced approach to all
matters that come before it, and we should have found
an arrangement enabling all the parties to participate
this evening.
Turning to the issue of Gaza, we are deeply
saddened by the loss of life there today. We urge those
involved to take steps to lower tensions and reduce the
risk of new clashes. Bad actors who use protests as a
cover for inciting violence endanger innocent lives. The
international community, including the United States,
is focused on taking concrete near-term steps that will
improve the humanitarian and economic conditions
in Gaza and the lives of the Palestinians living there.
We are also hard at work on a plan for peace that will
provide a future for both Israel and the Palestinians.
Violence furthers neither of those goals.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Zerihoun for his briefing. We in the Russian
Federation are deeply concerned about the tragic events
in the Gaza Strip. We are alarmed about the reports of
an increase in the number of victims and casualties
resulting from the Israeli army’s efforts to restrain
Palestinian protest actions, which began on 30 March
as part of the so-called March of Return in a campaign
lasting several days. We call on the Palestinian and
Israeli sides to show restraint and to refrain from actions
that could result in the deaths of innocent civilians.
What is on the agenda is the urgent need to mobilize
diplomatic mediation efforts aimed at de-escalating the
situation around the Gaza Strip.
We should all understand that it is impossible
to resolve the situation by putting out the fires that
periodically flare up in the Palestinian territories. The
relapses are inevitable and what is needed is a strategy
for a settlement. The tragic events going on now make
the task of achieving inter-Palestinian reconciliation
as soon as possible even more urgent. In cooperation
with our regional partners, especially Egypt, we are
determined to continue our efforts to unite Palestinians
around the political platform of the Palestine Liberation
Organization, which we see as essential both for the
economic revival of the Gaza Strip and for a practical
4/12

30/03/2018

way to realize the aspirations of the Palestinian people
to establish their own independent State, coexisting in
peace and security with Israel within internationally
recognized borders.
The path to that goal is through convening direct
negotiations between Palestinians and Israelis on
all final-status issues, including Jerusalem. Any
settlement should be based on the generally recognized
international legal framework, including the relevant
Security Council resolutions and the Arab Peace
Initiative. We affirm our readiness to provide a Russian
platform for a meeting between Palestinian and Israeli
leaders. The tragic history of the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict has shown once again that the longer the
political process is postponed, the more often unilateral
steps are taken that make relaunching it even harder.
The Israeli settlement activities in the Palestinian
territories, which are contrary to international law,
along with provocative rhetoric and violence, are not
conducive in any way to creating the conditions for
starting direct talks.
It is crucial that we continue to ensure that the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) can do its work
effectively. We welcome the outcome of the conference
held in Rome on 15 March in support of UNRWA, whose
budget Russia contributes to regularly. Right now what
is especially needed is a well-coordinated effort, every
day, on the part of the entire international community.
It is important to take action together and at the regional
level. In that regard, we note the forthcoming summit
of the League of Arab States in Riyadh in April. We
hope that its agenda will be genuinely unifying and
constructive, designed to overcome the obstacles to
political and socioeconomic restoration in the Middle
East and North Africa and to develop confidence- and
security-building measures for the entire region.
For its part, Russia will continue its efforts to find
a way out of the impasse in the long-standing ArabIsraeli conflict and to help to stabilize the situation in
the region as a whole. In that regard, the proposal of
Russia’s Minister for Foreign Affairs Lavrov to conduct a
comprehensive Security Council review of the situation
in the Middle East, with the aim of identifying areas for
joint efforts to stabilize the situation in the region and
settle its many crises, old and new, is very relevant.
Mr. Dah (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Acting Under-Secretary-General for
18-09119

30/03/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Political Affairs for his briefing on the events happening
in Gaza. Needless to say, we are seriously concerned
about the gravity of the situation that has led to the loss
of lives there. My delegation condemns these acts and
urges the parties involved to avoid any escalation of
the violence. We want to affirm our principled position
on this issue, which is that only through dialogue and
political compromise can we find a peaceful solution to
the conflict in the region. Once again, we will continue
to follow the evolving situation closely and we will
definitely comment on it again in the next few days.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to start
by agreeing with my colleague from the United States
that it is a shame that our Israeli colleagues are unable to
participate owing to the start of Passover this evening.
The United Kingdom is appalled by the deaths
and injuries suffered during today’s events on Gaza’s
borders. There must be an immediate end to the violence.
We call for calm, restraint and respect for international
law. All the parties must engage constructively in order
to bring an end to the violence.
We have long been concerned about the situation in
Gaza and have been warning of the risks of an upsurge
in violence. That is not an issue that can simply be
managed over the long term. We need an urgent and
durable agreement that addresses the underlying causes
of the conflict and transforms the situation in Gaza.
An agreement should ensure that Hamas and other
terrorist groups permanently end rocket fire and attacks
against Israel, that the Palestinian Authority resumes
control of Gaza and restores effective and accountable
governance, and that Israel lifts its restrictions in order
to ease the suffering of ordinary Palestinians.
We remain committed to supporting vulnerable
Gazans, including through the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, and we urge all parties to prioritize progress
towards reaching a durable solution that alleviates the
suffering of the Gazan people, in line with resolution
1860 (2009).
Every Israeli and Palestinian has the right to live
in peace and security. We acknowledge both the right
of Palestinians to freedom of assembly and protest,
as well as the right of Israelis to security. What is
needed now is a renewed commitment for negotiations
towards a two-State solution. To have the best chance
of success, peace must take place in an atmosphere free
from violence. It is time for all parties to work together

S/PV. 8219

in the spirit of compromise and understanding to make
progress towards that two-State solution. The ongoing
violence today simply underlines that a just and lasting
resolution that ends the occupation and delivers peace
for Palestinians and Israelis is long overdue.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): We are appalled
by the regrettable loss of life and the large number of
wounded today, including children, who all seem to
be Palestinian. There must now be an immediate and
proper investigation by the authorities. It appears that
the Israeli security forces have used live ammunition,
which has exacerbated the gravity of the situation. The
use of force must always be proportional and lethal
force should be used only as a last resort. Israel must
uphold its responsibilities under international human
rights law and respect the right to peaceful protest. We
also note with concern the air strikes carried out by
Israel in Gaza.
The situation should not be a surprise to the Council.
Special Coordinator Mladenov warned us only a few
days ago about the risks of escalating violence in and
around Gaza. The situation is extremely worrisome.
Our focus must now be on avoiding further violent
escalation on the ground. All parties and, in particular,
Israeli security forces must exercise maximum restraint.
As we know from previous briefings in the
Chamber, the humanitarian situation in Gaza is terrible.
Gaza is on the verge of collapse. A sustainable solution
must urgently be sought, including an end to the Israeli
closure policy. Gaza is an integral part of the State of
Palestine and cannot be separated from the broader
political context, including the much needed peace
efforts leading to a two-State solution.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): We deplore the fact that almost at the end
of your presidency, Sir, and following the receptions
held on Wednesday and Thursday, we must now call
upon you to exercise the role of president in the light
of today’s incident. Given the urgency of the situation,
we thank Kuwait for its initiative and the President for
convening today’s emergency meeting in response to
the grave events in Israel and Palestine.
Equatorial Guinea is paying close attention to the
developments surrounding the Great March of Return
organized by Palestinian civil society and political
organizations, which has resulted in the death of 15
Palestinians and left several injured on the Gaza strip.

18-091195/12

S/PV.8219

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We deplore the loss of human lives and extend our
deepest sympathy to the families affected.
In the statement made by the delegation of Equatorial
Guinea on the Palestinian question (see S/PV.8214), we
invited the parties to refrain from committing acts that
could lead to violence. We reiterate that same request
today. There must be an immediate and permanent
end to the violence, and each party must comply with
international law, pursuant to the relevant United
Nations resolutions. In that regard, we condemn the
attempt to assassinate the Palestinian Prime Minister.
The solution to the Palestinian question will be
found only through dialogue and politics. It is for
that reason that we call on the parties to resolve their
differences at the negotiating table regardless of how
difficult it might be. It is likely that both parties will
have to make concessions and that not all of their
aspirations and demands will be met — that is dialogue.
Negotiations must take place within the framework of
the relevant Security Council resolutions and the Arab
Peace Initiative. The two-State solution, according
to which Palestinians and Israelis shall live in peace
and security, is the only fair solution. Intra-Palestinian
dialogue must continue. Palestinians must be able to
resolve their differences. We would ask the international
community to pursue its efforts to foster dialogue
among the parties and to refrain from actions that could
be counterproductive to peaceful coexistence among
Palestinians and Israelis.
The situation has become very worrisome, given
that the number of people who died as a result of the
demonstrations has exceeded the number of victims
since the end of the war in Gaza in 2014. Since then,
there has been a period of relative calm. In that regard,
we support the idea put forward by Kuwait for the
Security Council to issue a communiqué calling on
Israelis and Palestinians to put an immediate end to
the violence that could escalate and cause the already
critical and delicate situation to deteriorate.
Mr. Michon (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Kuwait for requesting the
holding of today’s emergency meeting and the Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs for his briefing.
Given his worrisome description of the situation, I
would like to make three comments.
First, we are very concerned about today’s
developments, which have exacerbated an already
tense situation in the Gaza Strip. The response of the
6/12

30/03/2018

Israeli security forces to last-minute protests has left a
number of dead and hundreds with bullet wounds. The
threshold for violence has been crossed. As we wait for
light to be shed on the incident, I should like to remind
the Council about two very important issues: first,
respect for international humanitarian law, in particular
the importance of protecting civilians, and, secondly,
respect for the right of Palestinians to hold peaceful
demonstrations. Measures taken by Israel to protect
itself — a concern we all share — must take those
issues into account. We call on Israel to demonstrate
discretion, restraint and proportional use of force. We
urge protesters to refrain from violence.
There is a very real risk of an escalation of
violence, which we mentioned at Wednesday’s open
debate (see S/PV.8218). Another conflict could erupt
in Gaza. There are calls for frequent protests to be
held until 15 May. Conditions are therefore conducive
to an upsurge in violence. There is a humanitarian
crisis in Gaza, which will only deteriorate due to the
financial difficulties of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
The intra-Palestinian reconciliation process has been
at a standstill since the assassination attempt against
the Palestinian Prime Minister on 13 February, which
we firmly condemn. At the same time, the security
situation has deteriorated with the use of improvised
explosive devices, which have targeted Israeli soldiers
along the Israel-Gaza security barrier in recent weeks,
and offensive tunnels to prepare for attacks launched
from the Gaza Strip. We condemn all such actions.
All indicators are still red, and, in the absence of a
political perspective that offers hope to the populations,
the situation is very worrying. In that context, it is
important that we support the return of the Palestinian
Authority to Gaza so that it can fully exercise its
prerogatives in the Gaza Strip, including in the area
of security. That process must also be accompanied by
a lifting of the blockade, along with credible security
guarantees for Israel.
Finally, we must not dissociate the situation in Gaza
from the Palestinian question as a whole. Palestinian
unity is an essential element of a just and lasting
peace based on the perspective of the two States. It is
essential that we call for an early resumption of serious
negotiations with a view to implementing the twoState solution.
18-09119

30/03/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In conclusion, we believe it is essential for the
Council to remain actively seized of the matter and, as
requested by Kuwait, to express its support for protecting
civilians and avoiding any disproportionate response.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): My delegation is
grateful to the Kuwaiti delegation for calling for
today’s meeting on the situation unfolding in Gaza. We
also express our appreciation to Assistant SecretaryGeneral Tayé-Brook Zerihoun for his comprehensive
and objective update.
We are very concerned about the increasing death
toll caused by the escalation of violence on the border
of the Gaza Strip and Israel. My delegation wishes to
convey its condolences to the Palestinian people for the
tragic death of civilians during what was supposed to be
a peaceful demonstration. We consider this occurrence
to be an irreparable and senseless loss of life.
Kazakhstan also fully supports the right of the
Palestinian people to self-expression and peaceful
demonstrations. It is very important that Israeli soldiers
correctly calibrate the volume of force used against
peaceful demonstrators. We join the position of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, which we, along
with Kuwait and Côte d’Ivoire, represent in the Security
Council, with condemnation of the use of weapons
against them. We believe this turn of events could be
a dangerous development in the situation in the Middle
East region as a whole. In that regard, Kazakhstan
calls on both sides to the conflict to exercise restraint.
We also consider it necessary to conduct a thorough
investigation into the incident, identify the perpetrators
and hold them accountable for what happened.
Kazakhstan considers it important to continue
efforts aimed at consolidating Palestinian ranks in the
Palestine Liberation Organization political platform as
a necessary condition for the practical realization of the
legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people to create
their own independent State. We note that the parties
must find a solution for the difficult humanitarian
situation in Gaza.
The current situation requires coming up with
confidence-building measures for an entire region,
including in the economic field, with strong support
from the international community. In that regard,
Kazakhstan endorses the concern expressed earlier
by the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process on the funding of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the

S/PV. 8219

Near East this year (see S/PV.8214). A significant
reduction of its regular budget has already increased
the anxieties of 5.3 million Palestinian refugees who
have already suffered an extremely protracted refugee
crisis. Kazakhstan also expresses great concern over
the expansion of settlements, which are illegal under
international law and in the view of the Middle East
Quartet, and which are further escalating the tense
situation around the status of Jerusalem, resulting in
protests among populations.
Lastly, we call upon the leaders of Israel and
Palestine to take concrete steps to preserve the
possibility of peaceful coexistence and the two-State
solution and strengthen the prospects for peace. As we
always say in the Security Council, this effort should
be based on the inalienable rights of Palestinians to
statehood and of Israel to security. But we would now
also like to underline Palestine’s inalienable right to
security. It is necessary to begin negotiations in the
very near future on each outstanding problem, aimed
at reaching agreement on pending issues and giving
them a so-called final status. Only innovative policy,
with a security-development nexus, a revamped
regional approach and a more transparent, efficient
and accountable United Nations delivering as one on
the ground, will help the parties to escape the kind of
tragedy that has occurred today.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the
information provided by Assistant Secretary-General
Tayé-Brook Zerihoun. We are also grateful to the
Permanent Mission of Kuwait for requesting this
important meeting, and to the presidency for convening
it in such a timely manner.
Today we woke up to the alarming news that, as a
result of violent repression by Israeli security forces, 15
people had been killed and more than 1,200 wounded.
All of them were innocent civilians participating in the
Great March of Return. The Plurinational State of Bolivia
strongly condemns Israel’s disproportionate violent
military action against the Palestinian population and
calls on the Government of Israel to refrain from the
use of violence and respect international humanitarian
law, including the protection of civilians.
The exacerbation in, and trends of, violence in Gaza
are the result of 70 years of unresolved and persistent
conflict, including 50 years of illegal occupation of
Palestinian territories by the occupying Power, Israel,

18-091197/12

S/PV.8219

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and the inhumane blockade of the Gaza Strip, which
has led to a catastrophic humanitarian situation. As
long as this situation persists, a just and lasting peace
for both peoples will be less and less likely.
During the past 50 years, Israeli policies of
dispossession and occupation have filled the Palestinian
people with suffering. In January 2018 alone, the
Israeli authorities demolished or seized 32 Palestinianowned structures in the West Bank, and last week we
were informed of the Israeli Government’s decision
to build 1,500 new settlements in Area C. We call on
the Government of Israel to cease the expropriation
of Palestinian land and halt the expansion of the
settlements in the occupied Palestinian territories, in
accordance with resolution 2334 (2016).
We are also convinced that the announcement by
some States to change the location of their embassies
to the city of Jerusalem will only increase tensions in
the region and lead to an escalation of violence of great
proportions. As a pacifist country, Bolivia sees the path
of dialogue and negotiation with clear expressions of
political will from both sides for achieving a two-State
solution to be the only alternative that can guarantee
a just and lasting peace in the conflict between Israel
and Palestine.
We therefore reaffirm our full commitment to
multilateralism and international law and reiterate
our support for all international efforts leading to a
peaceful solution, such as the Quartet road map, the
Madrid principles and the Arab Peace Initiative, inter
alia, which will guarantee a just and lasting peace
and allow both peoples to live within recognized
and secure borders. We also reiterate that the only
long-term solution is the two-State solution, which
finally consolidates a free, sovereign and independent
Palestinian State within the pre-1967 internationally
recognized borders and with East Jerusalem as its
capital, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions.
Mr. Woldegerima (Ethiopia): I will be very
brief. We thank you, Mr. President, for responding to
the request for the convening of today’s meeting. We
express our gratitude to Assistant Secretary-General
and Acting Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs Tayé-Brook Zerihoun for his briefing on the
latest in the situation on the ground. What happened in
Gaza is undoubtedly tragic. We would like to raise two
or three matters at this time.
8/12

30/03/2018

The first and most important issue is the fact that,
unless there is a return to the peace process and real
progress is made towards resolving the underlying
crisis, this kind of tragedy is bound to happen again and
again. We discussed this point earlier this week, and
we agree with what Acting Under-Secretary-General
Zerihoun said with regard to finding a sustainable
and lasting solution. In fact, the possibility of a
further deterioration of the situation cannot be ruled
out, as some have already said, and that has always
concerned us.
Secondly, we express our sorrow over the loss of
life and the wounding of many. Undoubtedly, it is a
sad day.
Thirdly, we believe that what is most important
now is for all parties to exercise self-restraint and for
the Security Council to follow the matter very closely.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the holding of this emergency meeting
and for the briefing by Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun.
Peru is following with deep concern the situation
in Gaza. We deplore and mourn the death of at least
15 Palestinians, and we note that hundreds of others
have been injured. We point out that the violence
continues to increase in the form of both parties’ violent
rhetoric, and, effectively, Hamas might be interested in
provoking an escalation. Nonetheless, we note that the
unsustainable status quo puts off the need to address the
root causes of the conflict, and that the humanitarian
situation in Gaza continues to deteriorate.
We recognize the right of Palestinians to demonstrate
peacefully based on their freedom of speech and
assembly. We also condemn any attack or attempt to
carry out a terrorist attack, and we acknowledge the right
of Israel to legitimately defend itself in accordance with
the principles of proportionality, caution and legality.
In that regard, we condemn the disproportionate use
of force under international law and international
humanitarian law. Moreover, we note that the situation
was not unforeseeable. Several days ago when we meet
with Mr. Mladenov (see S/PV.8214), we expressed our
concern about the risk of an escalation and underscored
the need to protect civilians. Accordingly, we reiterate
the need for the United Nations and those countries
with influence in the region to take urgent measures
so as to prevent further violence and protect civilians.
18-09119

30/03/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Lastly, we call all parties to act with restraint,
avoid further escalation and facilitate an environment
of reduced tensions that will enable achieving the twoState solution for the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Mr. Lie Cheng (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs and Acting
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for
his emergency-meeting briefing. We thank Kuwait
for proposing the holding of this meeting, and the
presidency of the Netherlands for quickly organizing it.
We note that the situation in Gaza is very tense,
and we are following it very closely. We are concerned
about the fact that many people have been killed or
injured. We call for implementing all the relevant
United Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334
(2016), halting all settlement activities in the occupied
territories and taking all measures to prevent violence
against civilians. All parties should remain calm and
exercise restraint, meet one another halfway and create
the necessary environment for resuming talks. Parties
with major influence on countries in the Middle East
should also play a constructive role in that regard.
The question of Palestine is the foundational
issue underlying achieving peace in the Middle East.
We call for the unity of the Security Council and the
international community and for continued efforts
to advance the political settlement of the question of
Palestine. The two-State solution is the correct way to
resolve the issue. We must adhere to the relevant United
Nations resolutions, the principle of land for peace and
the Arab Peace Initiative, based upon which we must
step up efforts to push for the resumption of talks.
China firmly supports and promotes the
peace process in the Middle East and supports the
establishment of an independent and sovereign
Palestinian State by the Palestinian people based on the
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. China
will continue to actively promote President Xi Jinping’s
four-point proposal for settling the Palestinian question
and will continue to play a constructive role in the
Middle East peace process.
Mr. Radomski (Poland): Let me first thank
Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-General
for Political Affairs and Acting Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs.

S/PV. 8219

Along with the delegations of the United States
and the United Kingdom, I would like also to note
the fact that the representative of Israel unfortunately
could not participate in this meeting because of the
Passover holiday.
We are following the latest developments in the
Gaza Strip with great concern. Unfortunately, recent
events have only confirmed how tense the security
situation in Israel and the occupied Palestinian territory
is. We strongly condemn the current escalation of
violence. We also emphasize that any use of force should
be proportional. We call for respect of international
humanitarian law and the protection of civilians.
Poland condemns all acts of terrorism and
incitement to violence. They constitute a significant
obstacle to the de-escalation of tensions. We called on
both parties to condemn all acts of terror. At the same
time, we encourage the parties to the conflict to take
actions aimed at de-escalating tensions and calming the
situation on the ground.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands.
Let me start with expressing our regret that the
representative of Israel cannot participate in this debate
because of Passover — an important religious holiday
in Israel.
I will address three points: first, the increasing
tensions around Gaza; secondly, the short-term steps
needed to stop the crisis; and, thirdly, the need for longterm stability.
Concerning my first point, we are deeply alarmed
by the rising tensions around Gaza. Reports of 15
deaths and hundreds of injured are highly disturbing
and regrettable.
With regard to my second point, concerning shortterm steps to stop the crisis, we call on all sides to
exercise restraint and prevent further escalation and
loss of lives. We call on the de facto authorities in Gaza
to maintain the peaceful character of the protests and
prevent them from becoming violent. We call on Israel
to ensure that its responses at all times are proportionate
and necessary. The use of live ammunition as a crowdcontrol effort should be used only as a measure of last
resort. We call on Israel to thoroughly investigate all
incidents in which the use of crowd-control measures
has led to casualties. The incidents of the past week

18-091199/12

S/PV.8219

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

whereby armed individuals from Gaza have entered
Israel show that Israel’s security concerns are real.
We condemn those attacks and repeat that there is no
excuse for terrorism. We call on all parties to refrain
from any action that would worsen the situation by
way of incitement or provocation. We also call on all
parties to respect international humanitarian law and
protect civilians.
With regard to my third point, concerning longterm stability, the situation in Gaza has been a matter of
concern for a long time. In recent months, the Council
has debated the situation in Gaza several times. We
recall that, in order to achieve a sustainable solution,
a comprehensive approach is required. A political
process, humanitarian aid, economic development and
infrastructure development go hand in hand. We need
the Palestinian Authority as the legitimate Government
to return to Gaza. We call on the Palestinian Authority
and all other Palestinian parties to continue their efforts
to overcome their differences and to genuinely proceed
with reconciliation.
All those measures, together with the two-State
solution as a political horizon, are needed to ensure that
we will not be having the same debate once again next
month, next year or in five years.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the Permanent Observer of the
Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Allow me at the outset to
thank Kuwait for requesting this emergency meeting,
and you, Sir, for accommodating that request in a very
speedy manner.
I also want to thank the Assistant Secretary-General
for Political Affairs for his briefing at the beginning of
this meeting.
Before I deliver my statement, I would like to say a
few words in Arabic, mainly addressed to our people in
the occupied Palestinian territories.
(spoke in Arabic)
At the outset, I wish to commend our steadfast
and valiant people all across the occupied territory
of the State of Palestine, including our people in the
Gaza Strip, Jerusalem and the occupied West Bank, as
well as our people living inside the Green Line and in
the diaspora, as they commemorate Land Day and the
10/12

30/03/2018

March of Return. We bow respectfully to our heroic
martyrs and wounded, and we stress their leading role
always.
We condemn in the strongest terms today’s heinous
massacre and we call for an end to it. We demand that
those who are responsible be brought to justice and
call for international protection for civilians in the
occupied territory. The Security Council must uphold
its responsibility and take a stance in condemning the
massacre in order to put an end to it and protect our
civilians. If that effort is blocked and the Council is
unable to assume its responsibilities, those responsible
must also bear the responsibility for covering up and
protecting the Israeli criminals instead of stopping
them.
(spoke in English)
We come before the Security Council today with a
sense of repugnance and urgency in light of Israel’s latest
campaign of military aggression and attacks against the
defenceless Palestinian civilian population, in grave
breach of international law, including international
humanitarian law and the relevant provisions regarding
the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Today, at least 17 Palestinian civilians have been
killed and more than 1,400 injured — many of them
seriously — in the besieged Gaza Strip. Tomorrow has
been declared by our Government as a national day of
mourning in Palestine. The majority of those killed were
taking part in a peaceful, non-violent demonstration — a
peaceful, non-violent demonstration — to mark the fortysecond anniversary of Land Day, commemorating
events in which six Palestinians were killed in protest
against Israel’s illegal expropriation of thousands of
dunums of Palestinian land in 1976, and to reiterate the
right of return for Palestine refugees. In this regard, I
recall that 70 per cent of Gaza’s 2 million Palestinians
are registered refugees whose right of return has been
systematically been denied by Israel.
The names of some of the Palestinians tragically
killed are Mohammed Najjar, age 25; Mahmoud
Muammar, age 38; Mohammed Abu Omar, age 22;
Ahmed Oudeh, age 19; Jihad Freneh, age 33; Mahmoud
Saadi Rahmi, age 33; Abdelfattah Abdelnabi, age 22;
and Ibrahim Abu Shaar, age 20; as well as Iyad Abdelal,
Abdelqader Al-Hawajiri, Sari Abu Odeh, Hamdan Abu
Amsheh, Jihad Abu Jamous, Bader Al-Sabbagh and
Naji Abu Hjai, whose ages remain unknown. Moreover,
earlier on Friday Omar Waheed Abu Samour, a farmer
18-09119

30/03/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

from the Gaza Strip, was also killed by Israeli artillery
fire while standing on his land near Khan Younis,
just hours ahead of the peaceful and non-violent
demonstrations.
There is nothing more repulsive than a massacre
of unarmed, defenceless people, including women and
children. Yet this is exactly what Israel, the occupying
Power, has done and continues to do year after year
ever since its inception. Those peaceful demonstrators
posed no threat whatsoever to Israel or to its heavily
armed soldiers. I repeat — those peaceful demonstrators
posed no threat whatsoever to Israel or to its heavily
armed soldiers. Yet, Israel’s trigger-happy soldiers used
live ammunition, tear gas and rubber bullets to shoot
indiscriminately at those non-violent protestors, who
were demonstrating inside the Gaza Strip near the site
of the well-fortified barrier that separates them from
Israel.
How can that be condoned? People who were
demonstrating peacefully, as was their right to do under
all elements of international law, including international
human rights law, cannot be equated in any way with
the belligerence, attacks and massacre committed by
the Israeli armed forces. To those who would call for
a balanced perspective, I say that there is no balance
in this case. It was a case of armed forces unleashing
massive power against unarmed civilian protestors
demonstrating peacefully, leading to the massacre and
the large number of casualties.
Today’s protests were meant to kick off six weeks
of peaceful protests leading up to the commemoration
of Al-Nakba on 15 May. This year’s commemoration
of Al-Nakba will solemnly observe the passage of 70
years since more than 800,000 Palestinians — 70 per
cent of our people at that time — were forcibly uprooted
and expelled from their homes and lands or fled in fear
for their lives after brutal massacres were carried out
in over 400 Palestinian towns and villages by Zionist
terrorist groups in Mandate Palestine, in a clear act of
ethnic cleansing.
As is usual practice for Israel, today’s vicious
attacks by Israel against disarmed and unprotected
Palestinian civilians were premeditated and deliberate.
Israeli officials have been preparing the ground for
these attacks with inciting, provocative and violent
rhetoric. Such incitement even led to statements being
made by human rights organizations, such as Amnesty
International, which issued a warning yesterday calling

S/PV. 8219

on the Israeli occupying forces to “refrain from using
excessive force” following reports that it had deployed
more than 100 snipers — as despicted in the Israeli
media — with orders “to shoot anyone who breaches
the wall between Israel and Gaza”. In addition to
the snipers, the occupying forces also sent armoured
vehicles, sniffer and attack dogs, as well as hundreds of
other occupying forces equipped with all sorts of lethal
ammunition to use as they pleased and without regard
to Palestinian lives in the Gaza Strip. We should not
forget that the 2 million Palestinian civilians in Gaza
already suffer immeasurably from Israel’s 10-year
blockade, which has led to a dire socioeconomic and
humanitarian crisis.
It is more than clear, in words and deeds, that
the latest the incitements of Israeli officials and the
barbaric violence of its occupying forces against the
rights and lives of the Palestinian people have little to
do with Israel’s so-called security and everything to
do with maintaining its strangulating control over the
lives of every Palestinian man, women and child living
under its brutal occupation. It should be stated that
the occupying Power’s ongoing violent silencing of all
Palestinian non-violent actions against its systematic
dehumanization of the Palestinian people and the denial
of their inalienable rights will never succeed. The
people will continue to fight for their rights, including
their rights to be free from occupation and to live in
peace and security and with dignity.
Tragically, as we witness the events of today, in
which tens of thousands of Palestinians are peacefully
marching throughout the occupied State of Palestine,
including East Jerusalem, as well as among the
Palestinian population living in Israel and in the
diaspora, these events remind us that Al-Nakba did not
end in 1948 and continues to this day. In this connection,
it is beyond tragic that millions of Palestinians continue
to live either in exile as refugees, denied the inalienable
right to return to their homes, or under Israel’s halfcentury belligerent military occupation of the State
of Palestine, including East Jerusalem, where they
are forced to endure the constant violation of their
fundamental human rights, including Israel’s ongoing
theft of Palestinian land for illegal settlements, its
destruction of Palestinian homes and agricultural
land, the revocation of residency rights, deportations,
recurring brutal military assaults that have resulted in
mass civilian casualties — such as those that took place
in Gaza in 2008-2009, 2012 and 2014 — and the denial

18-0911911/12

S/PV.8219

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of the internationally recognized legal right of return of
millions of stateless Palestinian refugees.
We call on the Council to act swiftly to uphold its
Charter duties and the integrity and authority of its
resolutions in light of the violations of and provocations
against the rights and legitimate national aspirations of
the Palestinian people. The international community
must condemn unequivocally and in the strongest terms
Israel’s criminal and illegal actions in the occupied
Palestinian territory, especially in the Gaza Strip. Israel
must be held fully accountable for all of its crimes,
including the most recent killings today of innocent
Palestinian civilians, in accordance with international
law and the principles of justice.
We welcome the requests made by many Council
members for investigations of the Israeli occupation
forces with respect to the massacre that has taken
place today in the Gaza Strip. With the high number
of deaths today, we call once more on the international
community, particularly the Security Council, to act
now to provide protection to the Palestinian people
in order to avert more bloodshed and to save innocent
Palestinian lives, and to defuse this volatile situation,
which clearly constitutes a threat to international peace
and security. The international community must uphold
its responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security and to bring an immediate end to the
occupying Power’s military aggression.

12/12

30/03/2018

As we have stated in the past, the Palestinian
people cannot remain the exception to international
commitments to and obligations under international
law, including the obligation to protect civilians from
atrocities and grave breaches, especially under foreign
military occupation.
The President: As this may be the last meeting
of the Council for the month of March, let me express
the sincere appreciation and thanks of the delegation
of the Kingdom of the Netherlands to the members of
the Council, especially my colleagues the Permanent
Representatives and their respective staff, and to the
secretariat of the Council for all the support they have
given to us.
It has been a busy month, and one in which we rallied
to consensus on several important issues within our
purview. We could not have done it alone or without the
hard work, support and positive contributions of every
delegation and the representatives of the Secretariat,
as well as all the relevant conference service officers,
interpreters and security staff.
As we end our presidency, I know I speak on behalf
of the Council in wishing the delegation of Peru good
luck in the coming month. Peru may rest assured that
we will do our utmost in supporting it in fulfilling its
grave responsibilities in the presidency of the Security
Council in April.
The meeting rose at 8.50 p.m.

18-09119
