S/PRST/2012/19

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 August 2012
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6827th meeting of the Security Council, held on 31 August 2012, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Reports of the
Secretary-General on the Sudan”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the progress made by the governments
of Sudan and South Sudan in negotiations under the auspices of the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel (AUHIP) to fulfill their obligations
under the African Union’s Roadmap and Security Council Resolution 2046.
The Security Council expresses its gratitude to AUHIP Chairman Mbeki and
UN Special Envoy Menkerios for their August 9 briefings and for their tireless
efforts to broker agreements between the two parties.
“The Security Council affirms its strong commitment to the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of both Sudan and South Sudan. It recalls the
importance of the principles of good neighbourliness, non-interference and
regional cooperation.
“The Security Council welcomes significant reduction in violence and
tension between the two countries.
“The Security Council commends the AU, including the AUHIP, the
Peace and Security Council, and the AU Commission, for its constructive
leadership in this process as further demonstrated by the AUPSC Communiqué
of August 3, and underscores its continued support for those mediation efforts.
In this respect the Council supports the convening by the AUHIP, supported by
the IGAD Chairperson, of a round of interactions with the parties, including a
summit meeting of the two presidents, to enable them to reach the necessary
agreements on all outstanding issues.
“The Security Council welcomes the fact that Sudan and South Sudan
have reached an agreement on oil and related financial arrangements that
should help alleviate the sharply deteriorating economic conditions affecting
each of them. The Council encourages the parties to swiftly finalize the details
and the signing of the agreement and move forward with transparent
implementation of the agreement, in order for production and transportation to
resume as soon as possible.

12-47853 (E) 310812

*1247853*

S/PRST/2012/19

“The Security Council notes the decision by Sudan and South Sudan to
constitute a joint delegation to approach various countries and institutions to
request financial assistance to address the urgent needs of both countries.
“The Security Council notes with interest the agreement by the parties to
establish a Panel of Experts to provide an authoritative, non-binding opinion
on the status of the border, and hopes that this process will facilitate a speedy
outcome in accordance with the AU Roadmap and Resolution 2046.
“The Security Council welcomes the memoranda of understanding
reached separately by the Government of Sudan and the SPLM-N with the UN,
AU, and League of Arab States to enable the urgent delivery of humanitarian
assistance to affected civilian populations in South Kordofan and Blue Nile
states in accordance with the tripartite plan proposed by the UN, AU and
League of Arab States. It calls on the Government of Sudan and SPLM North
to fully and faithfully implement its terms to expedite the unhindered delivery
of this assistance as rapidly as possible, in accordance with applicable
international law, including applicable international humanitarian law and the
accepted principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence in
the provision of humanitarian assistance. The Security Council stresses the
urgency of immediately delivering humanitarian relief supplies to the affected
civilian populations, so as to avoid any further suffering or loss of life.
“The Security Council recalls the August 2 deadline imposed in
Resolution 2046 and regrets that the parties have not yet been able to finalize
agreements on a number of critical issues, particularly: the establishment of
the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone (SDBZ); the activation of the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM) and of the Ad Hoc
Committee; resolution of the status of the disputed and claimed border areas
and the demarcation of the border; the status of nationals of one country
resident in the other; and the temporary security and administrative
arrangements for Abyei agreed by the parties on June 20, 2011, as well as
agreeing on the final status of Abyei.
“The Security Council strongly urges the Government of Sudan to accept
the AU administrative and security map of November 2011 without further
delay in order to enable the full activation of the SDBZ and the JBVMM as
required by the Council, and reiterates that the center line of the SDBZ in no
way prejudices the current or future legal status of the border, ongoing
negotiations on the disputed and claimed areas, and demarcation of the border.
The Security Council commends the Government of South Sudan for its
formal acceptance of the AU map but calls on it to withdraw any forces located
to the north of the SDBZ center line.
“The Security Council expresses serious concern at the July 20 security
incident, condemns all violations of Resolution 2046, in particular aerial
bombardments, harboring of or support to rebel groups, and cross-border
military movements, and demands an immediate halt to such actions.
“The Security Council acknowledges that the majority of security forces
have been withdrawn from Abyei Area by the governments of Sudan and South
Sudan, and reiterates its call on the Government of Sudan to redeploy the
Sudanese Oil Police from Abyei without preconditions. The Security Council

2

12-47853

S/PRST/2012/19

further calls on the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee (AJOC) to speedily
finalize the establishment of the Abyei Police Service, to enable it to take over
policing functions throughout the Abyei Area, including the protection of the
oil infrastructure. It also underlines the urgent need for the establishment of an
Abyei Area Administration, Council and Police Service, in accordance with the
June 20, 2011 agreement, and calls on the parties to reach agreement on these
without further delay and to refrain from unilateral actions in this regard.
“The Security Council recalls its decision in Resolution 2046 that the
Government of Sudan and the SPLM-North extend full cooperation to the
AUHIP and the Chair of IGAD to reach a negotiated settlement on the basis of
the June 28, 2011 Framework Agreement.
“The Security Council recalls its Resolution 2046 and the African Union
Roadmap and demands that Sudan, South Sudan and the SPLM-N urgently and
in good faith finalize and fully implement agreements on all relevant issues as
specified in Resolution 2046, and in this regard the Council reiterates its
intention to take appropriate additional measures under Article 41 of the
Charter as necessary.
“The Security Council recalls its Resolution 2046 and reiterates its
request to the Secretary-General, in consultation with the AUHIP, the Chair of
IGAD, and the Chairman of the AU Commission, to report to the Council by
September 2 on the status of negotiations. The Security Council also looks
forward to reviewing the AU’s determinations as indicated in paragraph 18 of
the AUPSC Communiqué of August 3 and requests in this regard the Secretary
General to report to the Council thereafter on the status of negotiations,
including detailed proposals on all outstanding issues.
“The Security Council expresses its sadness at the untimely passing of
Ethiopian Prime Minister Meles Zenawi. The Council acknowledges and pays
tribute to his tireless efforts as chair of IGAD in supporting and contributing to
the efforts of the AUHIP in realizing its mandate on Sudan and South Sudan.
The Council recalls in particular the readiness of Prime Minister Zenawi to
deploy 4200 Ethiopian troops to Abyei in the UN Interim Security Force for
Abyei.”

12-47853

3
