S/PV.7851

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7851st meeting

Friday, 23 December 2016, 10.45 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. González de Linares Palou . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Spain)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Martins
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Bessho
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Taula
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Coleman
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation in Liberia
Special report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (S/2016/968)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-46228 (E)
*1646228*

S/PV.7851

The situation in Liberia

The meeting was called to order at 10.45 a.m.

of time as the devastating civil wars that inflicted
immeasurable suffering on the country’s people, ravaged
the country’s infrastructure and left a generation mired
in poverty.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Liberia
Special report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (S/2016/968)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Liberia to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2016/1096, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United States of America.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/968, which contains the special
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Liberia.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, China, Egypt, Japan, Malaysia, New
Zealand, Senegal, Spain, Ukraine, United States
of America, Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of)
Against:
None
Abstaining:
France, Russian Federation and United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland
The President (spoke in Spanish): The draft
resolution received 12 votes in favour, none against and
3 abstentions. The draft resolution has been adopted as
resolution 2333 (2016).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the vote.
Ms. Coleman (United States of America): Liberia
will soon mark 14 years of peace — the same period
2/6

23/12/2016

And yet, since that time so much that was destroyed
has been rebuilt with the support of the United States,
the United Nations and others in the international
community, including roads, power generation,
electricity grids, schools, hospitals and the social fabric
of communities torn apart by war. As Liberia has made
this progress, it has taken on more responsibility for
functions that were once carried out by the United
Nations. On 30 June, Liberia assumed full responsibility
for its own security from the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL).
We commend the brave men and women who have
served as United Nations peacekeepers and police, as
well as the countries from which they come, which
played a critically important role in restoring a climate
of security that enabled Liberia to emerge from conflict
and rebuild. But despite more than a dozen years of
peace, Liberia’s recovery is unfinished, its institutions
are fragile, and corruption and impunity remain all too
common. The deadly Ebola outbreak that began in 2014
paralysed the country, taking the lives of nearly 5,000
Liberians and undercutting some of the progress the
country had made.
In 2017, Liberians will elect a new leader to succeed
President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf. As the country’s first
peaceful and democratic transition of power from
one living President to another in seven decades,
the election holds the promise of elevating Liberia
alongside other models of post-conflict transition in
the region that contrast undemocratic trends elsewhere
on the continent, where leaders have refused to hold
elections, rigged their outcomes or rejected the results
when they have lost. We are committed to working
with the Liberian Government to ensure a peaceful and
secure environment in which the people can participate
in free, fair and peaceful elections in October 2017 and
through the stable transition to a new Government in
January 2018.
This mandate recognizes that the Government of
Liberia has risen to the challenge of ensuring security
throughout the country since the 30 June transition, and
further reduces the size of UNMIL, cutting the military
presence by two-thirds and the police presence by half.
We expect a further reduction in the civilian presence as
16-46228

23/12/2016

The situation in Liberia

well. But it also ensures a continued UNMIL presence
to support the Liberian security services through this
historic election in order to consolidate the hard-earned
security gains that Liberia has made.
In March 2018, UNMIL will close, but Liberia’s
ongoing reconciliation and reconstruction efforts
will continue, as will its work to strengthen good
governance and transparency, improve accountability
and meet the basic needs of the Liberian people. That
is why peacebuilding efforts must start long before
the peacekeeping mission ends. Indeed, such efforts
should be well under way already, and they must
accelerate immediately.
To that end, resolution 2333 (2016) directs the
Secretary-General to prepare a report on a peacebuilding
strategy for Liberia that would guide the transition of
UNMIL’s civilian tasks not only to the Government
of Liberia but also to the appropriate United Nations,
multilateral and bilateral partners that can bolster the
Government’s efforts. Liberia’s continuing peace,
stability and prosperity and all that the Liberian people,
Government and the international community have
invested in the country depend on getting the transition
right. We all have a stake in ensuring that it succeeds.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation abstained in the
voting on resolution 2333 (2016), extending the mandate
of the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL). We
believe that it is unacceptable to extend the mandate
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
in circumstances where Blue Helmets are anticipating
exclusively peacebuilding tasks.
We were surprised by the text in the document
concerning the scope of the military and police
components of the Mission, which, as we know, will
be engaged in promoting elections, reform the security
and justice sectors, and broadcast United Nations radio.
We do not understand why those purely peaceful tasks
require the presence of 700 armed peacekeepers and 5
military helicopters in the country.
We have always been sympathetic to the positions
of Governments hosting United Nations peacekeeping
missions, but that does not mean that in formulating
its decisions, the Council Security should not take into
account all factors determining the situation in that
country. At the same time, we should not forget that
the Secretary-General, in his latest report on Liberia
(S/2016/968) clearly states that the security situation

S/PV.7851

remains stable and that the country has not experienced
any military threat for several years.
We note the position of the Liberian Government,
calling for an extension of the Mission’s mandate in
its current form for one year. However, we are also
forced to note that this would appear to conceal the
usual dependency mentaility and attempts to assign
the United Nations tasks that Monrovia should long
since have been able to assume itself. We do not share
the conclusions of the Secretary-General’s report that
the justification for maintaining the presence of the
peacekeeping operation in Liberia is a test of the ability
of national institutions to maintain stability. In other
words, United Nations personnel will be in Liberia just
to be on the safe side if the situation should deteriorate
in the run-up to the 2017 elections. In so doing, we will
divert troops and resources that the United Nations
sorely needs in other hot spots.
In that regard, we sincerely regret that the penholders
refused to reflect in the draft version an alternative to
the mass presence of peacekeepers, whereby the rapid
reaction force of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali could have
been proactively deployed in the election period. In
that connection, we have to reiterate our concerns
that working methods of resolution sponsors, which
ignored this and other sensible proposals of a number
of delegations. We cannot agree with the explanation
that the positions of delegations diverged significantly
and that there was no possibility to bring them closer
together. Such a situation calls for further efforts to
develop a compromise, especially as the time left the
end of the UNMIL mandate allowed us to do so.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
abstained in the voting on resolution 2333 (2016).
We commend the outstanding progress achieved
by Liberia since the signing of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement in 2003. For the past six months,
the Liberian authorities have been fully responsible
for maintaining security on their own terrority. In that
regard, I hail the leadership and vision demonstrated
by President Ellen John Sirleaf. Following a long
period of peacekeeping, Liberia has entered the
peacebuilding phase. That is why the Security Council
today recognized that the situation in Liberia no longer
constitutes a threat to international peace and security.
We congratulate the Liberian authorities and people yet
again on that success.

16-462283/6

S/PV.7851

The situation in Liberia

Yet while the Security Council recognizes that the
situation in Liberia no longer threatens international
peace and security, it has, sadly, not learned its lesson.
In substance, the resolution poses two major problems.
The first is that it maintains Liberia’s culture of
dependency on the Blue Helmets. By extending the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL) for 15 months, the Security Council
paradoxically maintains the presence of a military
peacekeeping force in that country just as it recognizes
that there is no further threat to peace and security
there. The Security Council thereby risks preserving a
culture of dependency and preventing the development
of Liberian national capacities.
France has always stressed that the Security
Council should take account of the prospects of the
third presidential elections in Liberia since the signing
of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, to be held
in October 2017. We recall that it is precisely for that
reason that, in June, the Security Council authorized in
resolution 2295 (2016) the quick reaction force — which
is currently stationed in Côte D’Ivoire and will soon
be deployed to Mali — to be deployed temporarily to
Liberia if required. The early deployment of the quick
reaction force ahead of the autumn elections, as it did
successfully in the Central African Republic early this
year, would have been a solution well adapted to the
needs and circumstances. But that proposal was not
heeded. This year, the Council noted with satisfaction
the success of the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire, whose imminent scheduled withdrawal it
approved. Liberia is another success story for United
Nations peacekeeping, which we believe the Security
Council should have recognized.
The second problem with the resolution is that
wastes valuable peacekeeping resources. For the past six
months, the police and military contingents of UNMIL
have had no tasks to carry out. By artificially maintaining
more than 700 military and police personnel, as well
as numerous United Nations helicopters, in Liberia for
the next 15 months, the Security Council will deprive
the United Nations of valuable resources to respond
to serious crises elsewhere, particularly in Africa.
The Security Council is keeping five United Nations
helicopters even as the Blue Helmets in Mali, who are
deployed in the most deadly peacekeeping operation
in the world, are crying out for resources to protect
themselves and undertake medical evacuations.
4/6

23/12/2016

With regard to working methods, we can only regret
the absence of genuine negotiations among Council
members. Our proposals, as well as those submitted
by many of our partners, were barely into account.
We consistently offered solutions that would have
allowed us to strike a compromise among the various
positions. With other States, we introduced solutions
that were quite different from our initial positions. In
particular, we were open with respect to the timetable
and modalities for the UNMIL drawdown, but our
proposals were never taken into serious account.
We hope that we shall all find lessons to learn
from this episode, and that in the future we are able to
strengthen the Council’s unity on this key topic.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom abstained in the voting on the final mandate
renewal for the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL) because we do not agree that the mandate
put forward for adoption represents the best approach
to closing the Mission or for continuing to operate in
Liberia over the next 15 months.
The United Kingdom is clear that there is a role
for a continued United Nations presence in Liberia,
with a focus on peace consolidation and paving the way
for an orderly, timely exit. Six months ago, we saw the
successful transfer of responsibility for security from
UNMIL to the Government of Liberia. That was an
important and successful step taken by the Government
of Liberia, and it was a step towards the departure of
the United Nations peacekeeping mission.
UNMIL has been a success, and a success for
United Nations peacekeeping. It demonstrates the
real difference that United Nations peacekeepers can
make to civilians on the ground. But we must use
our peacekeeping resources wisely, where they are
really needed. The UNMIL success means that we
should not draw out its lifespan unnecessarily. There is
no active conflict in Liberia and we do not expect armed
groups to reform, so it is not appropriate to include the
protection of civilians by UNMIL in the mandate.
We welcome the inclusion of the human rights
promotion and protection mandate, with special
attention to continuing violations and abuses committed
against children and women. There is also more work
to be done to strengthen the Government of Liberia’s
efforts to combat sexual and gender-based crimes, and
it is important that this work be handed over smoothly
16-46228

23/12/2016

The situation in Liberia

to the United Nations country team as UNMIL
winds down.
The focus now needs to be on peace consolidation
and preparation for the departure of UNMIL. We call
on UNMIL to use all available resources in its final
15 months to ensure a smooth and orderly close down.
In that regard, we are disappointed that $81.6 million
of assessed contributions in the special account for
UNMIL remain unpaid. That must be addressed in the
month ahead.
Mr. Martins (Angola): Angola voted in favour of
resolution 2333 (2016), renewing the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) for more
than 12 months, based mainly on our overall evaluation
of the very positive role of UNMIL, especially in
coming electoral period, and on the concrete request
of the Government of Liberia, in solidarity with and
understanding of the challenges can be faced during the
electoral period and the need for stability. That is why
we voted in favour of the resolution.
Angola regrets that the resolution was not adopted
unanimously by all Council members, as that would
have shown a more resolute and united position of the
Council, especially for a mission that can be considered
a success story of the Council. I hope that we will
continue to engage with UNMIL and the Government,
especially in this period of peace consolidation, which
is a very critical phase. We do not want to see a return
to a situation that has been positively corrected by the
Mission while in Liberia.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): In
recent years, the overall security situation in Liberia has
remained stable. Economic development has resumed
and the Liberian Government, under the leadership of
President Johnson-Sirleaf, has made positive efforts in
maintaining stability and economic development. China
appreciates the efforts made in that regard and calls on
the international community to continue to provide
assistance to Liberia. China has always believed that
United Nations peacekeeping operations should make
adjustments in the light of the actual conditions and
developments on the ground until their final exit. In the
process, the will of the affected country must be fully
respected and consultations with regional countries and
regional and subregional organizations strengthened.
Over the years, the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL) has played a significant role in
maintaining peace and stability in Liberia. China

S/PV.7851

supports the continued presence of UNMIL in Liberia
in an appropriate form. It continues to support Liberia in
stabilizing its situation and to assist it in strengthening
its capacity-building for the military, police and
security sectors so as to ensure the smooth process of
general elections and preserve the hard-earned peace
dividends. Given those considerations, China voted
in favour of resolution 2333 (2016). China will work
with the international community and continue to play
a positive and constructive role in promoting peace,
stability and development in Liberia.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay voted in favour of resolution 2333 (2016),
extending the mandate of the United Nations Mission
in Liberia (UNMIL), as we feel it fitting and sensible
to proceed to a reduction of the military and police
component, striking a balance between the situation on
the ground and the request of the country concerned,
Liberia. Besides the reduction of military and police
forces, we have retained a component that will monitor
human rights in the country, which we welcome.
Nonetheless, Uruguay again notes the lack of
commitment and constructive spirit in the evolution of
negotiations on the text. During the briefing and the
consultations that took place on 12 December, major
differences emerged in the positions of members with
respect to the future of the United Nations presence
in Liberia after December. In that respect, Uruguay
believes that the best way to overcome differences
is through negotiations and constructive dialogue
in the search for shared positions acceptable to all
Council members.
As we stated when we renewed the mandate for
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan a few days
ago (see S/PV.7840), the Security Council must show
that it is able to adopt resolutions that achieve the
broadest possible support among its members. The role
of penholder is crucial in such negotiating situations,
and it is desirable that penholders demonstrate more
flexibility and be more receptive to proposals from
other Council members.
The international community is addressing a large
number of crises, and the Council has already revealed
differences and weaknesses in its actions in many. As
there are shared positions on the fundamental approach
to addressing the crisis in Liberia, we believe it is
unnecessary to add such divisions to the matter at hand.
We trust that procedures will improve in 2017.

16-462285/6

S/PV.7851

The situation in Liberia

Mr. Taula (New Zealand): New Zealand voted in
favour of resolution 2333 (2016). This is a critical period
for Liberia. The Council’s consideration of the future
United Nations presence in the country was important,
given the considerable gains that Liberia has achieved
in recent years, including taking over full responsibility
for security from the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL) earlier this year. Today’s resolution rightfy
commends the successful completion of that process.
After 13 years of UNMIL support in the country,
it was right for the Council to consider the next steps
for the United Nations engagement in the country and
to carefully consider the best interests of Liberia itself.
New Zealand saw considerable merit in arguments
made in favour of the United Nations providing support
to Liberia through 2017, including the elections period,
but to bring to an end the current peacekeeping mission.
The current resolution extends the mandate of the
Mission for a final period until 30 March 2018.
New Zealand considers it important that the
Security Council convey two key messages. First, the
United Nations should continue to support Liberia in
a strong partnership as it enters the next phase in its
history. Secondly, UNMIL will rightly withdraw in
early 2018, given that the Liberians have demonstrated
that a United Nations peacekeeping mission in the
country will no longer be warranted in the light of the
significant progress made.
We would echo the concerns expressed about the
process followed in negotiating the resolution. We feel
that more could have been done to bridge the diverging
views within the Council in order to reach consensus
and thereby send a united message to Liberia.
Finally, we again commend Liberia for the progress
made in the country. We wish it continued success in
the important period ahead.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
an explanation of vote in my national capacity.
Liberia is a success story on the Council’s agenda.
It started as an extremely complex situation and,
thanks to the joint efforts of all Liberian society and
the leadership of President Johnson-Sirleaf, we are
entering an electoral year with very good prospects for
stability and a peaceful transition of power.

6/6

23/12/2016

The international community has made significant
efforts to support the peacebuilding process, and the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) is the
embodiment of such efforts. Resolution 2333 (2016)
extends the final United Nations presence in the country
to affirm and end a process that is firmly headed towards
success, although there are some aspects that still
require attention, such as the appropriate maintenance
of the human rights component.
We voted in favour of resolution 2333 (2016)
because we are convinced that peace missions are not
designed to go on indefinitely and in the understanding
that this renewal of the UNMIL mandate is and must be
the final one.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Liberia.
Mr. Sulunteh (Liberia): When last we were
honoured with the opportunity to intervene in the
Council (see S/PV.7824), we put before those present
the concerns of our Government and people. Today
we will not bore the members of the Council with a
repetition of those concerns. What we want to do today
is to thank everyone — those that voted in favour of
resolution 2333 (2016) as well as those that abstained.
We note all of the concerns that have been
expressed here, but we also recognize that the action
we have taken today on behalf of Liberia will go a
long way towards consolidating the gains we have
already made. For us, that signals that the Security
Council continues to demonstrate a willingness not just
to punish wrongdoing, but to reward success and the
actions of countries emerging from conflict that are
determined to do the right thing by themselves and with
the international community.
Thus, on behalf of a grateful nation and a grateful
Government, we look forward to the continued
engagement of this Council and to working with the
United Nations Mission in Liberia over the course of
the coming year and to bringing that mission to an end,
as we promised, in one year.
The meeting rose at 11.15 a.m.

16-46228
