Resolutions odopted on the reporta of the Fourth Commillee

3286 (XXIX). Question of Gibraltar

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Gibraltar,
Having e.xamined the relevant chapter of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, T
Having heard the relevant statements made in the
Fourth Committee, 8
1. Regrets that the negotiations referred to in paragraph 2 below have not yet been effectively started;
2. Urges the Governments of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern lreland and of Spa•n
to begin without delay the negotiations envisaged under
the terms of the consensus adopted by the General
Assembly on 14 December 1973;9
3. Requests the two Governments to inform the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
and the General Assembly at its thirtieth session of the
outcome of their negotiations.
2318th plenary meeting
13 December 1974
3287 (XXIX). Question of the Seychelles

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Seychelles,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 10
Having heard the statement of the administering
Power, 11
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration, as well as other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to
the Territory,
Noting the expres.sed desire of the Government of
the Seychelles that the Territory should attain independence as soon as possible and the continued readiness of the administering Power to grant independence
to the people of the Seychelles in accordance with their
wishes,
Further noting that a constitutional conference with
the full participation of both política! parties in the
Territory is to be held shortly in order to determine
the modalities whereby the Seychelles are to proceed
to independence,
1 /bid.,
8 /bid.,

chap. XIII.
Twenty-ninth Session, Fourth Committee, 2117th
and 2124th meetings.
9 Jbid., Twenty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 30 (A/9030),
p. 111.
10 /bid., Twenty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/9623/
Rev.1), chaps. 111 and X.
11 /bid., Twenty-ninth Session, Fourth Committee, 2116th
meetinf

99

Bearing in mind the statement made by the Chief
Minister of the Government of the Seychelles to the
effect that every eflort will be made to work as closely
as possible with the opposition towards the task of
national unification, 12
Mindful also of the position of the Government of
the Seyche!lt:s with regard to the territorial integrity
of the Seychelles,
1. Approves the chapters of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
relating to the Seychelles;
2. Notes with satisfaction the expressed wish of the
people of the Seychelles to achieve independence in
accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoplcs, contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
3. Requests the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern lreland to take all
the necessary steps to facilitate the Territory's accession to independence as soon as possible in accordance
with the expressed wish of the people of the Territory;
4. Requests the Government of the United Kingdom to continue to keep the United Nations fully
apprised of developments relating to the Seychelles;
5. Stresses the responsibility of the United Nations
to render all possible assistance to the people of the
Seychelles in their efforts to achieve independence and,
to that end, invites the specialized agencies and the
institutions associated with the United Nations to work
out concrete programmes of assistance to the Seychelles;
6. Requests the Special Committee to continue its
examination of the question, including the dispatch, as
appropriate and in consultation with the administering
Power, of a United Nations visiting mission to the
Territory in connexion with the processes leading to
the Territory's accession to independence, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirtieth
session.
2318th plenary meeting
13 December 1974

3288 (XXIX). Question of the Gilbert
and Ellice Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Gilbert and
Ellice Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of lndependence to Colonial CountriP.s and
Peoples, 13
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 D1.',·~'.11,ber
1960, containing the Declaration on the Gra111i:1g of
lndependence to Colonial Countries :,•,d Peoplei;, :rnd
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October J97~J. l'nT'taining the programme of action for the fuil imniementation of the Declaration,
'
12See A/AC.109/PV.974.
13 Official Records of the

General Assembly, Twenty-ni,.th
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/9623/Rcv.l ), chaps. 111 and
XXI.

100

General Anembly-Twenty-ninth Ses■ion

Recalling a/so its resolution 3156 (XXVIII) of
14 Decemtier 1973, by which it, inter alia, requcsted
the Special Committee to continue to give full consideration to the question of the Gilbert and Ellice
Islands, including in particular the dispatch of a
visiting mission to the Territory,
Having heard the statements of the administering
Power relating to developments in the Territory, ª
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Visiting Mission dispatched to the Territory in August
and September 1974,15 at the invitation of the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern lreland, the administering Power, and having
heard the statement of the Chairman of the Visiting
Mission, 141
Bearing in mind the observations of the Visiting
Mission relating to the results of the referendum, 11
Welcoming the positive decision of the administering
Power to participate in the relevant work of the Spedal
Committee and to permit United Nations visiting
missions access to the Territories under its administration and expressing the hope that the close cooperation thus established will be further strengthened
so as to accelerate the process of decolonization towards
the full and speedy implementation of the Declaration
with respect to those Territories,
1. Approves the chapters of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
relating to the Gilbert and Ellice Islands;
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Gilbert and Ellice Islands to self-determination and
independence in accordance with the Dedaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Government of
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
lreland and to the Government of the Gilbert and
Ellice Islands for the co-operation and assistance extended to the Visiting Mission;
4. Requests the administering Power to take all
neces~ary measures to expedite the process of decol·
c-nization in the Territory in accordance · with the
relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and of the Declaration;
~- Requests the administering Power to continue to
enlrst the assistance of the specialized agencies and the
organizations within the United Nations system in the
development and strengthening of the economy of the
Territory;
6. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
give fu)! consideration to this question in the light of
t~e fin~ings of the Visiting Mission, including the possrble dispatch of a further visiting mission in consulta4
' See A/ AC. 109 · ~•V.987 and O{!iciaf Records o/ the General
A ,sc'..-,J,/y, f'we1•,;·-11inth Session, Fourth Committee, 2116th

tion with the administering Power, and to report to the
General Assembly at its thirtieth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
2318th plenary meeting
13 December 1974
3289 (XXIX). Question of Bermuda, British Virgin lslands, Cayman lslands, Montserrat,
Turks and Caicos Islands and United States
Virgin Islands

The General Asrembly,
Having considered the question of Bermuda, British
Virgin lslands, Cayman Islands, Montserrat, Turks and
Caicos Islands and United States Virgin Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 18
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, as
well as ali other resolutions relating to the Territories
listed above, in particular resolution 3157 (XXVIII)
of 14 December 1973,
Taking into account the statements of the administering Powers relating to the Territories listed above, and
noting in particular the expressed readiness of the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern lreland to grant independence to the peoples
of those Territories under its administration, in accordance with their wishes, 19
Noting with deep concern the slow progrcss in the
full implementation of the Declaration with respect to
the above-mentioned Territories, notwithstanding the
encouraging but limited political and constitutional dcvelopment which has recently taken place in sorne of
the Territories,
Noting with satisfaction the continued active participation of the United States of America in the relevant
work of the Special Committee, but deploring the ,negative attitude of that country's Governmcnt with respect to receiving a United Nations visiting mission in
the Territory concerned,
Welcoming the positive decision of the United Kingdom to participatc in the relevant work of the Special
Committee and to permit United Nations visiting missions access to the Territories under its administration,
as appropriate,
Concerned that the economies of the Territories referred to above are based mainly on fluctuating activities
such as tourism, land sales and tax haven arrangements,
Bearing in mind the constructive results achieved as
a consequence of previous visiting missions to colonial
Territories, including those dispatched by the Special
Committee in 1974 to the Cocos (Kecling) Islands,
the Gilbert and Ellice Islands and Niuc, 20 and reiterating its conviction that the dispatch of visiting missions

mt"•~(IHi,.

J., O/J.rra/ Records of the General A.rumbly, Twenly-ninth
Session, Supplemcnt No. 23 (A/9623/Rev. l ), chap. XXI,
:\'l!ll"'l l.
¡,; lhiJ, Tworty-ninth Session, Fourth Committee, 2116th
meeting.
17
/bid., Twenty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/9623/
Rev.t ), chap. XXI, annex I, para. 303.

XXIII-XXV.
rnsee A/AC.109/SC.3/SR.198-200 and 202 and O{Jicial
Records o/ thc Geneml A.1:semh/y, Twenty-11intl1 St•.<.1iorr, Fourtli
Commitlee, 2116th meeting.
10 See Official Records o/ tire Gerre,a/ A.uemb/y, Twentynintlr Sessiorr, S11ppleme11t No. 23 (Al962J/Rev.l ), chap. XX,
annex, chap. XXI, annex 1, and chap. XXII, annex l.
18 fhid .. chap~. IIJ and
