UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

COUNCIL

RECORDS

@#t&y

JUN 1 I 1992
yEA&/~@J~&.Tj,DN

THIRTY-EIGHTH

2486th.

MEETING:

NEW

w

25 OCTOBER

1983

I

YORK

CONTENTS
Page
Provisional

agenda

Adoption

of the agenda

The situation

....................................

(S/Agenda/2486)

in Namibia:

...............................................
-

(a)

Letter dated 17 October 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Senegal to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16048);

(b)

Letter dated 18 October 1983 from the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16051);

(c)

Further report of the Secretary-General
concerning the implementation
of Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
Namibia(W15943)
.................................................

WPV.2486

1

-i’

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations doc,usnent+s pre composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such‘, a k$nb’oitkhcates
a reference to a United Nations
document.’
I’-; ’
’ ”
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OfficialRecords of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

i

2486th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 25 October 1983,, at 3.15 p.m.
President: Mr. Abdullah SALAH

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 248 1st meeting, I
invite the President of the United Nations Council for Namibia and the other members of the delegation of the
Council to take places at the Security Council table.

(Jordan).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

, At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lusaka (President
of the United Nations Council for Namibia) and the other
members of the delegation took places at the Council table.

Provisional agenda (WAgendaI2486)
1. Adoption

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 248 1st meeting, I
invite Mr. Mueshihange to take a place at the Council
table.

of the agenda

2. The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 17 October 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Senegal to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16048);
(b) Letter dated 18 October 1983 from the Pernianent Representative of India to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16051);
(c) Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of Namibia (S/15943)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mueshihange took a
place at the Council table.
4. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): In
accordance with decisions taken at the 2481st and 2485th
meetings, I invite the representatives of Algeria, Angola,
Botswana, Canada, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Ethiopia, the
German Democratic Republic, the Federal Republic of
Germany, India, Kenya, Kuwait, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mexico, Mozambique, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Tunisia, the United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela, Yugoslavia and Zambia to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

The meeting was calied to order at 4.50 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sahnoun (AZgeria$
Mr. de Figueiredo (Angola), Mr. LegwaiIa (Botswana), Mr.
Pelletier (Canada), Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba), Mr. Kuhnviec
(Czechoslovakia), Mr. Wolde (Ethiopia), Mr. Ott (German
Democratic Republic), Mr. van Well (Federal Republic of
Germany), Mr. Krishnan (India), Mr. Wabuge (Kenya), Mr.
Abulhassan (Kuwait), Mr. Treiki (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)).
Mr. Mtioz Ledo (Mexico), Mr. DOS Santos (Mozambique),
Mr. Fafowora (Nigeria), Mr. Koroma (Sierra Leone) Mr.
von Schimding (South Africa), Mr. Fonseka (Sn. Lanka),
Mr. Slim (Tunisia), Mr. Rupia (United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. Martini Urdaneta (Venezuela), Mr. Goiob (Yugo&via) and Mr. Kunda (Zambia) took the places reservedfor
them at the side of the Council chamber.

The agenda was adopted.
Tbe situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 17 October 1983 from tbe Permanent
Representative of -Senegal to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16048);
(b) .Letter dated 18 October 1983 from tbe Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations addressed
to tbe President of tbe Security Council (S/16051);
(c) Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the
implementation of Security Council resolutions 435
(1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question ‘of
Namibia (S/15943)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretaiion from Arabic): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2481st meeting, I
invite the representative of Senegal to take a place at the
Council table.

5. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): I
should like to inform the members of the Council that I
have received letters from the representatives of Argentina,
Bulgaria and the Syrian Arab Republic, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kamara (Senegal)
took a place at the Council table.
1

invite those representatives to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules
of procedure.

10. International consensusand unanimity have been
expressednot only in support of Namibia’s independence,
but also with regard to the path leading to that noble goal,
as outlined in resolution 435 (1978). And resolution 435
(1978) has long been accepted by the entire international
community, including the Pretoria regime itself, as the
basisfor, and the only fair and realistic meansof, achieving a peaceful settlement of the Namibian question.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Muriiz (Argentina),
Mr. Tsvetkov (Bulgaria) and Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian Arab
Republic) took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

11. And yet, despite all that international consensus
behind them, the people of Namibia are still living under a
colonial regime, which ruthlessly oppressesand exploits
them. Resolution 435 (1978) and the plan it embodiesnot
only remain unimplemented, but are also being seriously
undermined by the apartheid regime’s intransigence and
prevarication. In defying international consensuson the
Namibian question, the illegal Pretoria regime is very
much encouraged by the attitudes of somemembersof the
Western contact group who, to say the least, have so far
displayed an amazing lack of political will and moral courage on this issue. Indeed, the attitudes and utterances of
some members of the Western contact group, at some
stage, were even calculated to throw into doubt the very
role and position of the United Nations asthe body legally
responsible for Namibia, and the Council as the body
primarily responsiblefor ensuring the implementation of
the United Nations plan. Instead of pressuring, or even
encouraging, South Africa to co-operate with the United
Nations efforts to implement resolution 435 (1978) those
memberswere trying, wittingly or otherwise, to usurp the
role of the United Nations by seeking solutions to the
Namibian question that were outside the United Nations
plan.

.
6. Mr. MASHINGAIDZE
(Zimbabwe):
Sir. I have
already congratulated you on’ your assnmption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. For now, however, allow me to say how pleased and satisfied my delegation is to see you, a very worthy and distinguished
representative of your great country, guiding the deliberations of the Council, especially at this time when the Council is considering the situation in Namibia. Your long
diplomatic experience and skill, both of which you have
very amply demonstrated in the manner in which you conducted preliminary consultations leading to the holding of
the current meetings of the Council, inspire us with confidence about the outcome of these deliberations.
7. Through you, Mr. President, I should also like to pay
a special and very warm tribute to our colleague, the representative of Guyana, Mr. Noel Sinclair, for the most exemplary manner in which he discharged his duties as
President of the Council during the month of September.
8. On the afternoon of 20 October, at the 2481stmeeting,
the Council was particularly honoured to listen to a truly
great statementby the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ethiopia, Mr. Wolde. The Council is indeed in his debt for that
major contribution and, while 1 pay a tribute to him, I also
wish to call upon all my colleagues to ponder very
seriously what the Minister said. I should also like to
remind my colleaguesthat asthe Ethiopian Minister spoke
in his capacity as representative of the Chairman of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), his statement was
therefore the embodiment of the collective sentimentof the
entirety of free Africa, as expressedat the nineteenth session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government
of the OAU in June at Addis Ababa. The sameapplies to
the statement made to the Council on the sameday by the
representative of the Chairman of the Movement of NonAligned Countries, Mr. Krishnan of India. Mr. Krishnan
spoke with the unanimous voice of the entire membership
of that international movement. The Political Declaration
adopted at the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New
Delhi in March this year is an eloquent testimony to that
consensus.[See S/15675 and Corr.1 and 2, annex, sect. I.]

12. It was those insidious machinations, contrived to
undermine United Nations responsibility over Namibia,
which prompted the convening of the Council in May this
year [2439th to 2444th and 2446th to 2451st meetings]. Fortunately, as memberswill recall, with a remarkably unanimous voice and to its credit, the Council, at its 2449th
meeting, adopted resolution 532 (1983) which, inter alia,
reaffirmed the legal responsibility of the United Nations
over Namibia and the primary responsibility of the Council for ensuring the implementation of the Namibian independence plan, as enshrined in resolution 435 (1978).
Resolution 532 (1983) also condemned the Pretoria
regime’s continued illegal occupation of Namibia in flagrant defince of international demandsfor the liberation
of that dountry, and called upon it to co-operate forthwith
and fully with the Secretary-General in order to expedite
the implementation of the United Nations plan. The resolution also mandated the Secretary-General to consult
with ‘the parties to the cease-fire proposed under the
United Nations plan, and to report the results of his consultations not later than 31 August 1983.

9. Indeed, the General Assembly and severalof its bodies
have all adopted resolutions, declarations and statements
in support of Namibia’s independence and sovereignty.
The Council, too, has been expressingthat sameconsensus, especially since 1976, through its resolutions, several
of which have been adopted unanimously.

I3. The current series of meetings of the Council has
been convened because the Secretary-General has discharged his mandate and has, to that effect, submitted the
report’ that is before the Council [S/Z5943]. My delegation
wishesto. put on record its deep appreciation for the diligent manner in which the Secretary-General has fulfilled
his mandate under resolution 532 (1983).
2

on linking the independence of Namibia to irrelevant and
extraneous issues as incompatible with resolution 435
(1978), other decisions of the Council and the Genera1
Assembly resolutions on Namibia. Or will some members
of the Council raise their hands to be counted together
with racist South Africa in supporting linkage, thus confuming the claim made by the South African representative at the 248lst meeting that his Government’s position
is “acknowledged and has support within the international
community”?

14. The Secretary-General’s consultations confirmed the
following positions, which had already been partly known:
first, that the questions relevant to the United Nations plan
for the decolonization of Namibia had long since been
clarified, to the satisfaction of all concerned, including the
Pretoria regime; secondly, that the South West Africa Pee
pie’s Organization (SWAPO) is still as ready as it has been
since 198 1 to sign a cease-fire agreement with South Africa
and to co-operate in any way with the Secretary-Genera1 in
his efforts to launch the United Nations plan, as contained
in resolution 435 (1978), without any amendments or prevarication; thirdly, that all issues regarding the composition and emplacement of the United Nations Transition
Assistance Group (UNTAG)
have been resolved; and
fourthly and finally, that the South African regime has yet
to communicate to the Secretary-General its choice of the
electoral system to be used in electing a Constituent
Assembly for Namibia, as provided for under the United
Nations plan.

18. Secondly, this series of meetings has been convened
in order to ensure that, at its conclusion, nothing should
continue to obstruct or delay the launching of the United
Nations plan. Should the Pretoria occupation regime,
however, continue its prevarication and noncooperation,
we strongly recommend that the Council meet without
delay to consider appropriate measures under Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations. Surely, the Council
cannot accept, or even tolerate, the cheek and arrogance of
the illegal regime, which seeks to shift the responsibility for
the delaying of Namibia’s independence to Angola, a
country which, as we all know, has never known secure
borders and peace during the eight years of its independence because of that regime’s continuous acts of aggression. Who here does not know that the sovereign
Government of Angola was compelled by those’ very
unprovoked acts of aggression to ask the Government of
Cuba to assist it in defending its borders in 1975-three
years before resolution 435 (1978) was adopted? Who here
does not know that, without the assistance of friendly
countries such as Cuba, Angola’s territorial integrity
would be in serious danger from Pretoria’s terrorism and
thuggery?

15. Yet, despite all these efforts by the Secretary-Genera1
and even in the wake of his visit to South Africa, in itself
an act of great courage, no progress has been achieved
towards implementing resolution 435 (1978). The reason
for this lack of progress is, as the Secretary-Genera1 said in
his report, that “the position of South Africa regarding the
issue of the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola as a
pre-condition for the implementation
of resolution 435
(1978) still makes it impossible to launch the United
Nations plan.” [Zbid., para. 25.1
16. This latest strategem of the apartheidr~gime, whether
expressed in the euphemism of “linkage*’ or in that of
“parallelism”, is too transparent to deceive anyone but the’
most gullible. It is, in our opinion, completely incompatible with the letter and spirit of resolution 435 (1978) and
the United Nations plan. Linkage, or whatever else they
call it, has also been described elsewhere and by various
speakers here as utterly ridiculous, illogical, irrelevant, illegal, immoral and unfair. It is not surprising, therefore, that
it has been roundly denounced and totally rejected, first by
the Heads of State or Government of front-line States
early in 1982 and at their subsequent meetings and then by
the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session, by the
Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries, held at New Delhi in March 1983,
by the International Conference in Support of the Struggle
of the Namibian People for Independence held in Paris last
April and, in June, by the nineteenth session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of OAU, held at
Addis Ababa.

19. South Africa must be told in no uncertain terms that
the issue of the Cuban troops in Angola, which has been
dragged into the question of Namibia’s decolonization,
cannot be considered by the Council, or for that matter by
any organ of the United Nations, as it is interference in a
matter concerning two sovereign Members of the United
Nations and therefore a serious violation of the bedrock
principles of the Charter. Those who incline towards the
South African view often cite the need to address the concerns of all the peoples of the region as a justification for
their position. One of these concerns, and by far the most
important one, we are told, is security. In practice, however, the major concern is South Africa’s security-and
not anyone else’s security. We are left wondering aloud as
to who is threatening South Africa’s security in the region.
For is it not South Africa itself which is threatening the
security of its neighbours-by
its own policy of internal
oppression of the masses and terrorism, sabotage and
naked military aggression against its neighbours in the
region? South African forces have been occupying a large
part of Angolan territory for over two years now, and yet
those who are concerned about our countries’ security do
not seem to be doing anything to restrain the regime from
pursuing its policies.

17. If the Council’s series of meetings in May was,convened to reassert, once and for all, United Nations responsibility over Namibia-and
of course resolution 532 (1983)
did just that-the current series of meetings has been convened to protect resolution 435 (1978) and the United
Nations plan from the newly-contrived strategem of linkage. The question before us, therefore, is whether the
Council will rise to this occasion and support the draft
resolution, the text of which has been circulating among the
members. The thrust of the proposed draft resolution is its
condemnation and utter rejection of Pretoria’s insistence

20. Finally, we wish to emphasize that resolution 435
(1978) was never conceived or designed as an answer or
3

solution to ail the problems of the southern African
region. Nor was it ever the thought to address the geopolitical concerns of any Power or group of Powers. It was
designed only to bring about a peaceful solution to the
Namibian question. And let us keep it that way, in the
interest of progress towards the achievement of that goal.

fact, we have never before been so close to finality on the
modalities of implementing resolution 435 (1978): [Ibid,
para. 24.1
29. The Federal Republic of Germany warmly commends the Secretary-General, his Special Representative
and the Secretariat as a whole for their untiring efforts to
maintain the momentum of the peace efforts. Not only did
the Secretary-General’s visit to the region bring about the
necessary formal conditions under the United Nations
plan for the early commencement of the independence process; he also helped personally in fostering the essential
atmosphere of trust and confidence among the parties
concerned.

21. The PRESIDENT
(inter~retazion frmn Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of the Federal Republic
of Germany. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
22. Mr. van WELL (Federal Republic of Germany): Mr.
President, let me first of all express my gratitude to you
and to the other members of the Council for allowing my
delegation to participate in this debate. This gives me the
opportunity to underline our confidence in your wisdom,
experience and skill and our deep satisfaction at the excellent relations between our two countries.

30. In spite of those efforts and achievements, the
Secretary-General has had to state in his report that “the
issue of the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola as a
pre-condition for the implementation
of resolution 435
(1978) still makes it impossible to launch the United
Nations plan.” [Ibid., para. 25.1

23. We express our appreciation for the dedication with
which the President of the Council for last month, the
representative of Guyana, discharged his high responsibilities.

31. We too view this situation with grave concem.‘We
believe that the right of the Namibian people to selfdetermination and independence must be recognized and
should be implemented irrespective of any other problem.
During the last Council debate, my delegation emphasized
that this issue does not fall within the scope of the mission
the contact group undertook in 1977. However, we are still
confronted with the fact that the problem exists and will
have to be taken into account by all who realistically aim
at the implementation of resolution 435 (1978), whether we
like it or not.

24. The Federal Republic of Germany participated, as a
member of the Security Council at the time, in the elaboration of resolution 435 (1978) and later in the efforts to start
its implementation.
We have tried our best to remove
obstacles to implementation and to foster the confidence
between the parties immediately concerned that is necessary for implementation.
25. When the Council held its last debate on this issue, in
May of this year [2439th to 2444th and 2446th to 245Ist
meetings], there was a general awareness that some major
problems remained in the way of implementation of resolution 435 (1978). On 31 May 1983, the Council adopted
its resolution 532 (1983) by which it decided, inter a/k, to
mandate the Secretary-General to undertake consultations
with the parties to the proposed cease-fire with a view to
securing the speedy implementation
of resolution 435
(1978).

32. As the Secretary-General has pointed out in his
report, this difficulty can only be dealt with in its own
context by those directly concerned acting within their sovereign rights and, above ail, by a determined effort by all
concerned to reduce the tensions and contentious issues
and to put an end to conflict in the area as a whole. Any
solution of this issue will have to take into account the
legitimate security interests of all the parties concerned.
33. Too much time has already elapsed. While we understand and share the frustration our African friends feel in
view of the situation, we appeal to them not to forget and
not to abandon what we have achieved together so far. I
wish on this occasion to stress that it was only through
close cooperation among all parties concerned, especially
the front-line States, Nigeria, SWAP0 and the contact
group, which took place in a spirit of confidence and perseverance, that it proved possible to settle all questions
under the.United Nations plan. It is that spirit which must
now generate the momentum necessary to overcome the
final stumbling-block to implementation of resolution 435
(1978).

26. In carrying out his mandate, the Secretary-General
visited southern Africa in August. The Federal Republic of
Germany welcomed his trip as a serious effort to generate
the confidence necessary for the early conclusion of negotiations leading to the independence of Namibia.
27. Upon his return, the Secretary-General submitted his
report to the Council [S/15943J My Government considers this comprehensive report an important contribution
towards a speedy solution of the Namibia problem. The
objectivity of the Secretary-General’s report has rightly
been stressed by the speakers in this debate.

34. In the light of the report of the Secretary-General to
the Council, we urge South Africa to make an early determination of the electoral system and then send a corresponding communication to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in accordance with the United
Nations plan. It is our firm view that this issue must not

28. As a result of the intensive consultations undertaken
by the Secretary-General with the parties, as envisaged in
resolution 532 (1983), all outstanding issues under the
United Nations plan were solved. Accordingly, in the conclusion of his report the Secretary-General stated that: “in
_
4

cause any delay in the implementation of resolution 435
(1978). SWAP0 has indicated its readiness to accept either
of the two electoral systems under discussion.

42. Last May, my delegation, drawing upon the lessons
of the past, predicted in the Council that our decision *
would indeed be futile. We pointed out that resolution 435
(1978) had not even begun to be implemented for four
reasons. First, the so-called acceptance of that resolution
by South Africa was in reality merely a ruse to gain time so
that it could continue its racist domination of Namibia.
Secondly, there was South Africa’s intransigence, demonstrated by its shameless assassination of brave freedom
fighters and its cowardly acts of aggression against neighbouring States. The third reason was the bad faith of certain members of the contact group who, through their
attitude, were encouraging the racist regime to persist in its
illegal occupation of Namibia. Finally, the fourth reason
was the introduction of extraneous factors relating to the
presence of Cuban troops in Angola.

35. If all parties to the negotiations continue their endeavours in the spirit of realism and determination that has
prevailed so far, we will reach our common goal, which is
t,
the independence of Namibia.
36. Mr. AMEGA (Togo) (interpretation ftom French): I
should like at the outset to address to you, Mr. President,
my delegation’s warmest congratulations on the outstanding manner in which you have been presiding over the
work of the Council since you assumed the presidency.
Your ability and your qualities as a wise and informed
diplomat as well as your broad-ranging experience in international relations are indeed certain guarantees of the successful outcome of the Council’s current debate on the
question of Namibia.

43. Thus, for those reasons-or rather, on those very
specious pretexts-we arrived at the present impasse, and
once again the Council has shown itself unable to shoulder
its primary responsibilities in a domain where, because of
its legitimate rights and particularly because of its authority, it could have proved itself master of the situation.
Indeed, resolution 435 (1978), which embodies the settlement plan for Namibia, does not contain-and
for that
matter, could not have contained-any
reference to the
presence of foreign troops in Angola, for that presence
stems from a sovereign request by an independent and
sovereign Government. The members of the Council are
thus fully justified in describing that factor as extraneous,
which they did implicitly on 31 May, when, in adopting
resolution 532 (1983), they condemned South Africa’s continued illegal occupation of Namibia and called upon it to
make a firm commitment as to its readiness to comply
with Council resolution 435 (1978), it being understood
that for that resolution’s implementation all that remained
to be settled was the choice of electoral system and a few
problems relating to the composition of UNTAG.

37. I should also like to address to your predecessor, Mr.
Noel Sinclair of Guyana, the congratulations and thanks
of my delegation for the excellent work he did last month
as President of the Council. Once again he placed at the
service of the Council his well-known qualities.
38. I should also like to take this opportunity to thank
most warmly the Secretary-General for his tireless efforts
to promote Namibia’s accession to independence within
the framework of Council resolution 435 (1978). My dele-:
gation is particularly .grateful to the Secretary-General for
the very full report he has submitted to us pursuant to
Council resolution 532 (1983).
39. This is the second time this year that the Council has
been seized of the question of Namibia at the joint request
of the countries of the Non-Aligned Movement and the
African Group. This new request for our evaluation and
action reflects very clearly the great concern of the nonaligned countries and the bitter frustration of the Africans,
particularly of the valiant people of Namibia who are
faced with South Africa’s arrogance, coupled with the
delaying’ tactics and, indeed, the cuipable impotence of
certain countries in the Western contact group.

44. Nevertheless, after having tricked the SecretaryGeneral into going to South Africa, the racist Government
of that country revealed its true colours and once again
voiced its earlier demands for a preliminary withdrawal of
Cuban troops from Angola. Indeed, such a Government
cannot enjoy our trust. Now that its back is to the wall,
that Government will resort to any means-trickery
as
well as perfidy-to gain time and to postpone the legitimate hopes of the people of Namibia to realize their longawaited patriotic dream. In so doing, South Africa does
not seem to realize that time is working against it and in
favour of those gallant freedom fighters who are fighting
tooth and nail, breasts bared to the elements, heads held
high and filled with an eradicable national dream, like the
soldiers of year II of the French Revolution described by
the poet Victor Hugo.
‘*

40., It was in order to help us get out of this impasse
artificially created by South Africa and its friends that, on
31 May of this year, the Council unanimously adopted
resolution 532 (1983). That resolution reaffumed all the
provisions of earlier relevant resolutions on the matter;
condemned South Africa’s continued illegal occupation of
Namibia and called upon South Africa to make a firm
commitment as to its readiness to comply with,Security
Council resolution 435 (1978) and to co-operate forthwith
and fully with the Secretary-General in order to expedite
the implementation of resolution 435 (1978) for the early
independence of Namibia.

45. Here my delegation wishes to condemn the delaying
tactics and pretexts invented by the racist South African
Government to evade the obligation incumbent upon it
under the Charter to implement resolution 435 (1978) and
to strongly reaffirm our opposition to the prior condition
introduced by that Government with regard to Namibia’s

41. To an experienced observer, that new resolution of
the Council was doomed to failure from the moment of its
adoption because South Africa, through its representative,
responded to the reproaches and appeals addressed to it
during the debate with sarcasm, insult and threats.
5

accession to independence within the context of that resoiuuon. South- Africa rs obvrously being encouraged by
some of its friends, who lend a willing ear to its empty
rantings. Those friends are, however, seriously mistaken in
mortgaging the future for immediate interests, forgetting
that those interests would, in fact, be better protected in an
independent and sovereign Namibia, master of its own
vast wealth. Thus my delegation strongly rejects this
strange linkage, because it is both fallacious and an
attempt to intimidate. Angola has every right to conclude
international agreements within the context of its own
security and it is, in fact, precisely because that security is
being threatened that the Cuban troops are still in Angola.
Their withdrawal, which some desire, would indeed be
greatly facilitated by South Africa’s military withdrawal
from Namibia and southern Angola. This position was
clearly stated by Mr. Paul0 Jorge, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Angola, when, on 24 May last, he spoke in this
very chamber. He quoted a joint Angolan-Cuban statement, saying:
“When the Angolan and Cuban Governments so agree,
the withdrawal of the Cuban forces stationed in Angolan territory will be carried out by sovereign decision of
the Government of the People’s Republic of Angola,
once there is no further possibility of aggression or
armed invasion” [2441st meeting, para. 211.

obligations deriving from Article 2, paragraph 2, of the
Charter. The Council must also unambiguously declare as
unfounded and reject this parallelism drawn between the
withdrawal of Cuban troops and Namibia’s accession to
independence.
50. With reference to Article 2, paragraph 2, of the Charter, I recall that, in his report of last year, the SecretaryGeneral rightly deplored the fact that: “There is a tendency
in the United Nations for Governments to act as though
the passage of a resolution absolved them from further
responsibility for the subject in question.“’
5 1; South Africa’s behaviour on the question of Namibia
is clear evidence of this laxity: Therefore, having long since
declared South Africa’s occupation of Namibia illegal, the
Council, in order to protect its dignity and authority, can
no longer hesitate to invoke Chapter VII of the Charter in
the event that South Africa refuses to make known its
choice of electoral system promptly, thus preventing the
Council once again from adopting the resolution authorizing the implementation of the United Nations plan for the
independence of Namibia.
52. In conclusion, I wish first of all to reaffirm my country’s position as expressed during the general debate at the
thirty-eighth session of the General Assembly by Mr.
Akakpo-Ahianyo,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Togo, who said that, since the adoption of
resolution 435 (1978)

46. Five years have passed since the adoption of resolution 435 (1978), during which anguished expectation has
led to frustration and despair, which in turn have led to
hatred and violence, followed by repression and stubbomness. Those are the only real results of the failure of the
Geneva pre-implementation
meeting of January 1981 and
of South Africa’s destruction of the consensus that had
been patiently achieved on settlement proposals in conformity with resolution 435 (1978) when that country
dramatically introduced into the negotiations the strange
question of parallelism, which had never been raised or
envisaged during earlier talks.

“South Africa has continued to defy the Organization.
Worse still, [powerful] Member States of the Organization which unconditionally voted for Security Council
resolution 435 (1978) too often today show an accommodating attitude towards South Africa and its claim to
link Namibian independence to the breaking of intemational agreements made by neighbouring sovereign
States. Togo believes that Namibia’s independence is a
problem of decolonization, which falls within the
framework and the objectives of the United Nations,
and that this problem must be separated from South
Africa’s interference in the internal affairs of Angola
and the other frontiline States.“*

47. We would have been on the verge of an agreement
had South Africa not decided to scuttle the United Nations
settlement plan. The bad faith of that State and its violation of its obligations under the Charter obliged the Council, at its meetings last May, to make the demands
contained in resolution 532 (1983) and to give the
Secretary-General a new mandate “with a view to securing
the speedy implementation of Security Council resolution
435 (1978)“.
48. As we see from the report of the Secretary-General,
despite the efforts made with regard to the parties, and
especially to South Africa, the latter country remains stubborn and has given not even the slightest hint of any intention to .implement the United Nations settlement plan.

53.. Secondlv. I wish to make a nersonal comment on the
denial to the Namibian people oi their inalienable right tolive in freedom and independent in their own land, and
on the horrible circle of violence brought about by that
situation. With the adoption of resolution 435 (1978), hope
was born in the hearts of the suffering people of Namibia,
but as years go by that hope is fading and yielding to a
deep feeling of frustration; on the brows of these valiant
freedom fighters, that frustration has inscribed the words,
“Abandon all hope”, an inscription similar to that on the
lintel of the gateway of Dante’s Inferno.

49. Under these circumstances, all that is left for the
Council-whose
decision has yet again been trampled
under foot by South Africa-is to rebuke, even condemn,
that country for its repeated refusal to implement resolution 435 (1978), whose clear terms include no reference
whatsoever to “linkage”, and for its persistent violation of

54. But I still believe that, whatever the price, the Namibian people, led by their legitimate representative,
SWAPO, will continue to hymn the glorious epics of the
liberation struggle of their heroic sons and daughters. The
tragic example of their many martyrs will live forever.
6

date and to commend him for his admirable report, which
illustrates with clarity the progress already achieved
towards the implementation of resolution 435 (1978) and
identities the obstruction that has been placed on Namibia’s path to independence.

They stood up to apartheid, making the supreme sacrifice,
for they were not born to resign themselves to the inhuman
conditions imposed on their people. That is why they
fought the good tight; they could not accept so unworthy
and
a life.
. repugnant
- 55. Mr. SHAH NAWAZ (Pakistan): Your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for the month of October,
Sir, has been a matter for very special pleasure and satisfaction to me personally and to the other members of the
Pakistan delegation. During the past year I have had the
privilege as a member of the Council of working.in close
association with you on many important issues which have
come before the Council, which has given me the opportunity of becoming acquainted with your special qualities as
a statesman, a distinguished diplomat and an experienced
and skilful negotiator. These qualities, combined with your
warm and friendly personality, constitute insurance that
the important work of the Council will be guided during
your presidency with competence, consideration and success. It is equally a matter of great satisfaction to us that
you represent a country with which Pakistan enjoys the
closest brotherly relations and for whose leaders and
people Pakistan has the most profound respect and
admiration.

61. The Secretary-General’s report has established that
the two outstanding issues, namely, the choice of electoral
system and certain problems relating to UNTAG and its
composition, have been resolved. The full measure of progress on these issues is evident from the observation of the
Secretary-General that: “In fact we have never before been
so close to finality on the modalities of implementing resolution 435 (1978):’ [Bid., para. 24.1
62. With that positive assessment, one would have hoped
that the next logical step would be the realization of the
Namibian independence plan embodied in resolution 435
(1978). This hope is, however, belied by the. SecretaryGeneral’s forthright comment that “‘the position of South
Africa regarding the issue of the withdrawal of Cuban
troops from Angola as a pre-condition for the implementation of resolution 435 (1978) still makes it impossible to
launch the United Nations plan.” [Bid.., para. 25.1
63. As stated in his report, the Secretary-General has
taken care to remind the South African authorities at every
stage during his recent discussions in New York and in
Pretoria that the United Nations cannot accept the spurious linkage of the withdrawal of Cuban troops from
Angola as a precondition for the implementation of the
United Nations plan for Namibia’s independence. In doing
so, the Secretary-General has indeed reafftrmed the consistent position of the General Assembly, the Non-Aligned
Movement and the International Conference in Support of
the Struggle of the Namibian People.for Independence,
held in Paris last April.

56. I also wish to place on record our deep admiration
for Mr. Noel Sinclair of Guyana for his skilful and effective leadership of the Council last month.
57. The speakers who have preceded me have covered
with great diligence and authority all aspects of the question of Namibia. Yet the importance of the issue is such
that many home truths about it will bear repetition as long
as the issue remains unresolved on account of the intransigence of Pretoria, which does not want to part with its
ill-gotten gains from the continuing colonization of Namibia. The success with which Pretoria has so far delayed
the attainment of independence by Namibia has emboldened it to persist in this course, which it has done with
impunity.

64. Throughout its leadership of the liberation struggle
of the people of Namibia, SWAP0 has acted with an
admirable sense of responsibility and restraint. In his statement before the Council on 20 October [248Zst meeting]
Peter Mueshihange, Secretary for Foreign Relations of
SWAPO, reaffhmed the political will and determination of
SWAP0 to move forward with the implementation
of
resolution 435 (1978) and reiterated its readiness to sign a
cease-fire agreement and to cooperate with the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Representative in the judicious
implementation of the United Nations plan for Namibia’s
independence.

58. It is nearly 17 years now since the General Assembly,
in its resolution 2145 (XXI), terminated South Africa’s
Mandate over Namibia. A significant step towards the
resolution of the Namibian question came when the International Court of Justice in 1971 ruled against Pretoria’s
occupation of the Territory.3 This was followed by Council
resolution 435 (1978), providing the blueprint for the independence of Namibia, which remains unimplemented to
this date.

65. South Africa’s insistence on linking Namibia’s independence with the withdrawal of Cuban troops from
Angola is unwarranted and clearly aimed at thwarting the
implementation
of the United Nations plan. That this
demand is no more than a pretext is evident from South
Africa’s attitude and deeds following the adoption of resolution 435 (1978). Having ostensibly agreed to the United
Nations plan, presumably under pressure from its authors,
the five members of the Western contact group, South
Africa lost no time in reneging on its commitment to the
implementation of the plan by questioning the impartiality
of the United Nations. Since this objection could not be

59. The current session of the Council to discuss the
question of Namibia is a sequel to its meetings last May,
when resolution 532 (1983) mandated the SecretaryGeneral to undertake consultations with the parties concerned with a view to securing the speedy implementation
of resolution 435 (1978). The outcome of the SecretaryGeneral’s contacts with the parties concerned, during his
visit to the region last August, is contained in his report
[s/159#a.
60. I take this opportunity to pay a tribute to the dedication with which the Secretary-General carried out his man7

\

sustained, particularly
after the United Nations and
SWAP0 indicated their readiness to accommodate every
legitimate concern of South Africa over the modalities of
elections and their supervision in Namibia, the Pretoria
authorities raised the entirely extraneous issue of the
Cuban troops, which had not even remotely figured at the
time of the adoption of resolution 435 (1978).
66. If the United Nations were to accept that demand, it
would concede to powerful States the impermissible right
to deny freedom to small nations on the basis of arbitrarily
defined security interests.
67. South Africa’s aggressive behaviour in the region
does not encourage for a moment the expectation that it
would allow the implementation of resolution 435 (1978)
unless it were compelled to do so. It regularly engages in
brutal attacks against all its neighbours in an attempt to
harass them and force them to withdraw their support for
the Namibian people and the people of South Africa
against its colonialism and its inhuman policies of apartheid. Mozambique has been the latest victim of South African military adventurism. The scant respect with which
Pretoria treats international law and the decisions of the
United Nations became evident when its representative,
referring to the attack on Mozambique, made the defiant
statement that it would repeat such attacks whenever it
deemed these to be necessary. This was a blatant assertion
of a doctrine of aggression in a forum on which the nations
of the world have bestowed a solemn mandate for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

71. Mr. EL-FATTAL (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation from Arabic): The delegation of the Syrian Arab
Republic had the opportunity of taking part in the Council’s discussionson Namibia last May. Those discussions,
which were conducted at a high level, led to the adoption
of resolution 532 (1983) the purpose of which was to give
South Africa a new time-limit so that it might come to its
sensesand implement without reservations the commitments entered into by it and its allies to achieve the independenceof Namibia through the United Nations plan as
set forth in resolution 435 (1978). Once again the Council,
quite rightly, entrusted the Secretary-General with the task
of consulting the parties concerned, with the object of
ensuring the prompt attainment of independenceby Namibia. The Secretary-General hascarried out his mandate
with integrity, patience and exactitude and has submitted
his report to the Council [S/259&].
72. It is clear from that report that SWAP0 is keeping its
commitments and abiding by the word of honour given.
Despite the concessionsmade by SWAPO, with the aim of
halting the massacres,the racist regime of South Africa is
more intransigent than ever-making the keeping of its
commitments dependent on stipulations that are not connected directly or indirectly with the provisions of Council
resolution 435. (1978), which reflect international
legitimacy.
73. This linkage or parallelism, which has been rejected
by most States and by the Secretary-General, is designed
only to perpetuate the occupation and colonisation of Namibia, the plunder of its resourcesand the humiliation of
its inhabitants. It is intended as defiance of the international community and in particular of the Council.

68. South Africa has arrogated to itself the right to strike
against its neighbours at will and to hold Namibia hostage
to its whims, depriving its people of independence on a
pretext contrived on the basis of the military machine that
it has been able to build with the help of resources available from its Western allies and friends. Five of these allies
and friends are the members of the Western contact group
which had initially worked out the United Nations independence plan for Namibia. Accordingly, they bear a
heavy moral and political responsibility to compel South
Africa to implement the plan.

74. Furthermore, South Africa’s purpose in resorting to
this linkage, which has been fervently embraced by
Washington, is to keep Namibia in its present situation as
a colony, to serve the strategic interests of international
imperialism, under the guidance of the United States.
75. The repeated acts of aggression against Angola,
Mozambique, Lesotho and Zambia prove that Pretoria
and its allies are trying to imposetheir complete hegemony
on southern Africa, in order to prevent the peoplesof the
region achieving peaceand stability, which are two essential conditions for their social and economic progress.

69. The United Nations must fulfil its obligation to the
people of Namibia, who have borne with great patience
their sufferings under colonial subjugation and the inhuman apartheid system. It is clear that developments have
now reached a stage when the Council should prescribea
time-frame for the implementation of the Namibian independence plan. If South Africa persistswith its obstructionist policy, the Council should not hesitateto useall the
powers invested in it by the Charter of the United Nations,
including the imposition of comprehensive sanctions, to
secureSouth Africa’s compliance with its decisionsand to
bring the nearly one-hundred-year-long dark chapter of
colonialism in Namibia to a close.

76. The excuseof the parallelism or linkage is a threat to
peace and security ‘in Angola, and is designedto prevent
the independenceof Namibia. What is more, this parallelism or linkage may be regarded-indeed, is regarded-as
interference in Angola’s sovereignty. It is a sort of blackmail, particularly as we all knew in advance that South
Africa’s eommitments with regard to the implementation
of Council resolution 435 (1978) were simply a manoeuvre
to gain time so that the racist Pretoria Government might
build up an armed force able to commit aggressionagainst
any neighbouring African State, with the support of the
strategic alliance with the American Administration. The
latest information shows that Pretoria’s military capacity,
either on its own or with its allies, has doubled since the
Council adopted resolution 435 (1978).

70. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic, whom I invite to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
8

77. The matter of linkage or parallelism is simply a
machination to distract the world’s attention from what is
really going on in South Africa. The heroic resistance operations of the peoples of South Africa against the apartheid
regime have increased. Because of the internal blow dealt
to it by the heroic resistance of the people of South Africa,
the regime has begun to feel its own fragility and has begun
to vacillate. Today there can be no doubt that there is a
crack in the racist Pretoria regime and in its barbaric institutions, represented by the apartheid system.

Council, but rather to defend racism and tyranny. The
United States is the enemy of peace in southern Africa.
Unfortunately, the United States is proud of that position
and supports it economically, politically and militarily. I
should like to cite what the representative of the United
Republic of Tanzania, one of the front-line States, said
when he spoke before the Council:
“There can be no doubt that those who seek to pervert logic, falsify the truth and trample on the right-s of
peoples for ideological expediency, do not want peace
in southern Africa. Those who go to great lengths to
manufacture for South Africa excuses with which to
justify aggression, even more than the apartheidauthorities themselves, cannot claim to be agents of stability in
the region. Rather, their actions seek to perpetuate
instability and violence.‘* [2482nd meeting, para. 38.1

78. The racist Pretoria regime tries to export its internal
crisis by the armed aggressions that previous speakers have
enumerated. It is absolutely logical for South Africa; it has
always tried to export its crises. We are accustomed to this
kind of crisis export, as we are accustomed to .it in the
Middle East. The export of internal crises is a headlong
flight; whereas it might seem to involve running towards
something, it really means running backwards. There are
no gains here. South Africa will not triumph in any battle
nor will it be able to keep its racist structure or the institutions that are destined to protect it. It is unthinkable that
the minority regime of exploitation will be able to stand in
the way of millions struggling for their future in the war
being waged by the people of South Africa and the peoples
of Namibia and of the other countries surrounding South
Africa, peoples whose freedom, independence and security
are continually under threat.

83. I should like to conclude by recalling the statement,
in 1971, by the representative of SWAPO, which he
repeated in the Council on 23 May this year:
“I wish to declare, in the name of the people of Namibia, that unless this august body acts decisively to
secure the withdrawal of South Africa from the international Territory of Namibia, we shall have no alternative but to continue the armed struggle with greater
intensity. We do not love bloodshed, but when we are
dealing with a Government like that of South Africa,
which believes in violence and bloodshed, we must be
prepared to meet it on its own terms. Our struggle may
be long and protracted; our struggle may be bloody and
costly in terms of human life; it is a price we are prepared to pay for our independence.” 12439th meeting,

79. Basing ourselves on a geopolitical analysis and on a
review of the history of southern Africa and of other
regions of the world, we can see that the racist Pretoria
regime, like any other racist regime, has to choose between
a peaceful solution to the question of Namibia and the
total destruction of its own structures and the ensuing toll.
We are sure that the oppressors view the future only in
terms of the benefits and profits they. plunder-at
the
expense of millions of the oppressed; however, the number
of times that the oppressed have been able to overcome
their weakness and destroy their oppressors are incalculable indeed.

para. I53.1

Statement by the representative of Nicaragua
84. Mr. TINOCO FONSECA (Nicaragua) (interpretation from Spanish): In view of the lateness of the hour, and
since members of the Council are aware of the letter that
Nicaragua submitted this morning requesting an urgent
meeting of the Council [S/Z6067J, I wish to announce that
we are now proceeding to submit a new letter, in which we
request an immediate meeting of the Security Council in
view of the serious situation now prevailing in Grenada,
We believe it of the utmost urgency for the Council to
meet-if possible, this evening-in order to consider the
serious situation now prevailing in Grenada as a result of
an invasion. Therefore, we formally request an immediate
meeting of the Council.

80. For a peaceful solution to be found to the question of
Namibia, this august body has only to invoke the sanctions
provided for in Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations. The sooner that is done, the less will be the
human suffering, in particular that of the people of Namibia, whose future is the subject of the present debate.
81. We hope that action of the Council will no longer be
confined to condemnation or to allowing further time for
the implementation of its resolutions. We call for the imposition of comprehensive, mandatory sanctions-today, not
.tomorrow-for the reasons already given. The imposition
of such sanctions would not affect in any way the strengthening of the ability of SWAP0 to continue its national
struggle in every field and by every means.

85. I .should like to take this occasion to alert the
members of the Council to the possibility of our meeting
this evening and also to request the President to use his
good offices and, with his customary wisdom, to guide our
procedure towards that end during our consultations.

82. Furthermore, we know in advance that the United
States, which has adopted a policy of delaying tactics and
perfidy but which offers wonderful slogans, such as “constructive engagement”, uses high-sounding words, not to
defend freedom and not to defend independence in the

86. Mr. KARRAN (Guyana): The delegation of Guyana
would like to associate itself with the request just made by
the representative of Nicaragua. As a Latin American
country and as a member of the Caribbean community,
Guyana is very concerned about the events taking place in
9

91. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from A,rpbic): I
should like to inform members of the Council that in the
letter addressed to me by the representative of Nicaragua
there was a ‘request for an urgent meeting of the Councilnot an immediate meeting. It is my intention to raise this
matter during the formal consultations that are now to be
held. All members will be able to state their positions during those consultations. I should also like to say that I have
received several requests in connection with this matter.

Grenada and is of the view that the issue is sufficiently
urgent to engage the immediate attention of the Council.
The situation is critical and has serious implications for
international peace and security. Grenada is a sovereign,
independent country and there appear to be serious violations of its territorial integrity and independence.
87. In the circumstances, my delegation &I1 support the
request made by the representative of Nicaragua and ask
that immediate consideration be given to this matter.

Mr. TINOCO
PONSECA (Nicaragua) (interpretation from Spanish): I apologize for speaking again, but I

92.
88. Mr. MASHINGAIDZE
(Zimbabwe):
I had not
intended .to speak on this issue now because I thought it
would be unnecessary to do so. On an earlier occasion and
outside this chamber, I communicated to the President the
concern of my delegation and indeed the concern of those
whom we represent concerning the very critical and
immensely disturbing situation in Grenada. We had even
thought that at some stage this afernoon the Council
would consider that situation. However,
we shall be
guided by your wisdom, Mr. President, in considering the
question of the situation in Grenada as soon as possible,
and preferably immediately.

should like to explain the following: As you have said, Mr.
President, this morning we submitted a letter calling for an
urgent meeting of the Council. But we have now submitted
another letter asking for an immediate meeting in connection with the serious situation in Grenada [S/26072]. We
merely wished to confirm this, in order to emphasize the
importance of this matter.
93. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): I
thank the representative of Nicaragua for that clarification. I have just received the letter to which he has referred.
It will be before us in the formal consultations that are to
take place forthwith.

89. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (inrerpretation from Russian): In a statement in the
Council some months ago, the Soviet delegation drew
attention to the fact that preparations were under way by
the United States to commit its 82nd act of aggression
against Latin American .countries. That act of aggression
has now taken place.

The meeting rose at 6.10 p.m.

NOTES
’ Official Records of the General Assembly,
Thirty-seventh
Session.
Supplement
No. I, 9. 3.
2 Ibid., Thirty-eighth
Session, Plenary Meetings,
8th meeting,para.
140.
’ Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of South
Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding
Security Council
Resolution
276 (1970). Advisory
Opinion, I.C.J. Reports 1971, p. 16.

90. In the circumstances, the Soviet delegation supports
the request by the delegation of Nicaragua for an urgent
and immediate meeting of the Council in connection with
the act of armed aggression by the United States against
Grenada.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

00300

90-60205-April

1992-2.050
