UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/2
10 January 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3328th meeting of the Security Council, held on 10 January 1994, in
connection with the Council's consideration of the item "The question concerning
Haiti", the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council reiterates its deep concern for the plight of
the Haitian people under the ongoing crisis and reaffirms its determination
to minimize the impact of this crisis on the most vulnerable groups in
Haiti.
"In this context, the Security Council welcomes the imminent arrival
in Haiti of a shipment of fuel approved by the Security Council Committee
established by resolution 841 (1993).
"The Security Council also welcomes the role being played by the Pan
American Health Organization (PAHO) in the management, delivery and
distribution of fuel for humanitarian purposes.
"The Security Council attaches great importance to humanitarian
assistance in Haiti, including the unimpeded delivery and distribution of
fuel used for humanitarian purposes. It will hold responsible any
authorities and individuals in Haiti who might in any way interfere with
the delivery and distribution of humanitarian assistance under the overall
responsibility of PAHO or who fail in their responsibility to ensure that
this delivery and distribution benefits the intended recipients: those in
need of humanitarian assistance. The Security Council will also hold
responsible any authorities or individuals in Haiti who endanger the
personal security and safety of all personnel involved in such assistance.
"The Security Council reaffirms once again its determination to ensure
the return to constitutional legality in Haiti, on the basis of the
implementation of its relevant resolutions. In this context, it shares the
understanding of the "Friends of the Secretary-General on the question of
Haiti" (S/26881) that the process as defined by the Governors Island

94-01316 (E)

100194

/...

S/PRST/1994/2
English
Page 2

Agreement, which provides, inter alia, for the return of
President Aristide, constitutes the only viable framework for Haiti to
emerge from the crisis and to lead to the establishment of a State under
the rule of law."

-----
