XL RF.sOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPOBT OF THE FOURTH COMMITTEE
9(1). NON-SELF-GoVERNING PEOPLES

Nations administer!ng territori~ held under mandate took the initiative in making declarations
in regard to these territories.
Therefore
with respect to Chapter XI of the Charter, the
General Assembly:
l. Draws attention to the fact that the obligations accepted under Chapter XI of the
Charter by ali Members of the United Nations
are in no way contingent upon the conclwion
of trusteeship agreements or upon the bringing
into being of the Trusteeship Council and are,
therefore, already in full force.
2. Requests the Secretary-General to include
in his annual report on the work of the Organization, as provided for in Article 98 of the Charter, a staternent sumrnarizing such infonnation as
may have been transmitted to him by Members
of the United Nations under Article 73(e) of the
Charter relating to economic, social and educational conditions in the territories for which they
are responsible other than those to which Chapters XII and XIII apply.
with respect to Chapters XII and XIII of the
Charter, the General Assembly:
3. Welcomes the declarations, made by certain States administering territories now held
under mandate, of an intention to negotiate trusteeship agreements in respect of sorne of those
territories and, in respect of Transjordan, to
establish its independence.
4. Invites the States administering territories
now held under mandate to undertake practica!
steps, in concert with the other States directly
concerned, for the implernentation of Article 79
of the Charter (which provides for the conclusion of agreements on the tenns of trusteeship
for each territory to be placed under the trusteeship system), in order to submit these agreements
for approval, preferably not later than during
the second part of the first session of the General
Assembly.

The United Nations, meeting in its first General
Assembly, is keenly aware of the problems and
political aspirations of the peoples who have not
yet attained a ful! measure of self-government and
who are not directly represented here.
Chapters XI, XII and XIII of the Charter
recognize the problerns of the non-self-governing
peoples as of vital concern to the peace and general welfare of the world community.
By Chapter XI, ali the Members of the United
Nations which have or assume responsibilities for
the administration of territories whose peoples
have not yet attained a full measure of sdf-govemment recognize the principie that the interests of
the inhabitants of these territories are paramount.
They accept, as a sacred trust, the obligation to
promote to the utmost the well-being of the inhabitants of these territories. To that end they
accept certain specific obligations, including the
obligation to develop self-govemment and to assist
the inhabitants in the progressive development of
their free political institutions.
By Chapters XII and XI!I, the Charter provides
for the establishment of an intemational trusteeship system, the basic objectives of which are,
among others, to promote the political, economic,
social and educational advancement of the inhabitants of trust territories, and to promote their
progressive developrnent towards self-governrnent
or independence.
The General Assembly regrets that the Trusteeship Council cannot be brought into being at this
first part of the first session, not because of any
lack of desire to do so but because, before the
Trusteeship Council can be established, trusteeship agreements rnust be concluded.
The General Assernblf holds the view that any
delay in putting into effect the system of international trusteeship prevents the implementation
of the principies of the trusteeship systern, as
declared in the Charter, and deprives the populations of such territories as rnay be brought under
the trusteeship system of the opportunity of enjoying the advantages arising frorn the implementation of these principies.

In conclusion, the General Assembly:
5. Expects that the realization of the objectives of Chapters XI, XII and XIII will make
possible the attainment of the political, economic,
social and educational aspirations of non-selfgoverning peoples.
Twenty-seventh plenary meeting, 9 February 1946.

With a view to expediting the conclusion of these
agr~cments and the establishment of the Trusteeship Council, the Preparatory Comrnission recom- 1Q(I). PROVISIONAL RULES OF PROCEDURE OF
mended that the General Assernbly should call on
T
C
those Members of the United Nations which are
THE RUSTEESHIP OUNCIL
now administering territories held under mandate
The General Assembly requests the Secretaryto undertake practica! steps, in concert with the
General to transmit the "Provisional rules of
other States directly concerned, for the implemenprocedure of the Trusteeship Council" ( section 2
tation of Article 79 of the Charter.
of chapter IV of the Preparatory Commission's
Report) to the Trusteeship Council as soon as it is
Without waiting for the recommendation of the
constituted.
Preparatory Commission to be considered by the
General Assembly, the Members of the United
Twenty-seventh plenary meeting, 9 February, 1946.

13
