S/PV.8030

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8030th meeting

Thursday, 24 August 2017, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Aboulatta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Egypt)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Seck
Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Allen
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-26696 (E)
*1726696*

S/PV.8030

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of South Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. El-Ghassim
Wane, Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations; Mr. Nicholas Haysom,Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Sudan and South Sudan; and
His Excellency Mr. Festus Mogae, Chair of the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, to participate
in this meeting.
Mr. Haysom is participating in today’s meeting via
video-teleconference from Addis Ababa. Mr. Mogae is
participating via video-teleconference from Juba.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Wane.
Mr. Wane: I am grateful forthis opportunity to brief
the Security Council on the Secretary-General’s 30day report and on the overall situation in South Sudan.
The deployment of the Regional Protection Force
(RPF) is under way and, since the submission of the
report a week ago, there have been no significant
updates on the deployment process. The United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) continues
to engage the Government on a regular basis in order to
expedite the deployment. Enhanced cooperation with
the Government will be critical for the RPF to complete
the process and fully implement its mandate.
As has been reported, some misunderstandings
arose with the Government surrounding the
accommodation of the advance party of the Rwandan
contingent of the RPF to Juba. I am pleased to confirm
that, following the active engagement of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. David
Shearer, and his team with Government officials over
the past two weeks, those misunderstandings have
been cleared.
2/11

24/08/2017

In commemoration of the second anniversary of
the signing, on 25 August 2015, of the South Sudan
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan, the Chair of the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, former
President Mr. Festus Mogae, declared yesterday that
little meaningful progress had been achieved in its
implementation. President Mogae will shortly explain
the challenges he faces and his efforts to revitalize
the process, which Special Envoy Haysom actively
supports. Let me say that the Secretariat could not agree
more with his assessment and the calls on the Security
Council to express itself strongly, unanimously and
unreservedly in support of his efforts and those of the
region as a whole, including the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD)-led Revitalization
Forum. More than ever before, there is a need for
continued and close coordination among IGAD, the
African Union, the United Nations and the broader
international community to ensure that we leverage our
collective influence to bring an end to the suffering of
the civilian population and help put South Sudan on a
more positive trajectory.
The security situation in the country is a cause for
serious concern, as it has been over the past few years.
Unfortunately, the expected ceasefire remains elusive,
as military operations continued during the reporting
period, mostly in the Upper Nile part of the country.
While efforts by the Sudan People’s Liberation Army
(SPLA) to take Pagak, the de facto headquarters of the
Sudan People’s Liberation Army-In Opposition (SPLAIO), initially succeeded, fighting around Pagak and
along the corridor to Majang continues, while civilians
in the area remain displaced, including refugees
heading to Ethiopia. Further north, clashes resumed
between the SPLA and the SPLA-IO in Kaka, on the
west bank of the Nile. Insecurity also continued in the
Equatorias, including long main roads. UNMISS has
enhanced its presence in Torit and continues intensive
patrolling to and around Yei in response to persistent
threats to civilians.
Those incidents directly affect humanitarian
operations, which consequently have an impact on
the most vulnerable of the population in dire need of
assistance. In the month of July, 136 access incidents
were reported by the humanitarian community. That is
the highest number recorded in any one month since
December 2013. Of those 136 incidents, 49 involved
violence against personnel and assets, once again
17-26696

24/08/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

illustrating the increasingly dangerous and risky
environment in which humanitarian actors operate. In a
persistent trend, letters threatening violence against aid
workers from different ethnicities have also continued.
Incidents of looting also spiked during the month of
July, with 15 incidents reported across the country. Of
particular concern were the six major looting incidents
of warehouses and trucks in transit, leading to the
loss of 670 metric tons of food meant for vulnerable
communities in Eastern Equatoria, Lakes, Upper Nile
and Wau. Humanitarian actors were also denied access,
both by Government and non-State armed actors, to
several critical areas.
The Under-Secretary-General of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Lacroix, visited
South Sudan from 1 to 3 August. During his visit, he
met with President Salva Kiir and key Government
officials. He reiterated to all his interlocutors that there
was no military solution to the conflict in South Sudan
and that inclusive and credible political processes were
the only way forward. Although President Kiir and
his Cabinet members expressed reservation about the
inclusion of some people in the dialogue process, in
particular Riek Machar, there was an acknowledgment
that sizable communities cannot be left out of the
process just because they were led by, or supported, a
particular individual.
Political attention in Juba appeared squarely
focused on the national dialogue process and the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement reunification, on
which Special Envoy Haysom will report. While the
national dialogue has made some progress, achieving
key enablers for a credible process, such as inclusivity
and a free and secure environment, remain a challenge.
Following the national dialogue secretariat’s request for
technical assistance, UNMISS has been coordinating
with other United Nations entities and institutional
partners to assist with needs and the support
required. In that regard, support was provided to a
steering committee inception seminar, during which
participants acknowledged a better understanding of
the challenges associated with ensuring inclusivity,
confidence-building and the actual implementation of
the process in the prevailing environment. However,
the national dialogue continued to be criticized for its
lack of inclusivity.
The national dialogue steering committee’s
outreach to key opposition figures outside the country,
including Mr. Machar, Thomas Cirilo and Lam Akol,

S/PV. 8030

yielded little, as those actors either refused to receive
visiting national dialogue delegations or objected to
the viability of a national dialogue as a vehicle for
achieving an inclusive political settlement. We have
been informed that their opposition is not directed
against the need for such a nation-building exercise,
but against the conduct of the dialogue in advance of,
or as an alternative to, an inclusive peace process. On
the other hand, the participation of some civil society
and faith-based groups, both in the steering committee
proceedings and in the seminar I mentioned, is a
positive development.
Meanwhile, some progress can be reported in the
negotiations related to the establishment of the hybrid
court for South Sudan. Two weeks ago, the Government
of South Sudan and the African Union Commission
agreed, at the technical level, on the text of the legal
instruments for the establishment of the court. They
will now submit the legal instruments to the Ministers
of Justice and to the senior management of the African
Union Commission for their consideration and approval.
The United Nations Office of Legal Affairs continues
to support that process.
The national dialogue could make a significant
contribution to improving the political environment
through an open discussion of critical national issues.
Participants and observers attest to open debate even
within the steering committee. However, it cannot be
a substitute for a negotiated peace agreement, which,
if implemented in good faith, can silence the guns, end
the conflict and enhance the potential for the national
dialogue to play a part in consolidating long-term
sustainable peace and ensuring true ownership by all
South Sudanese stakeholders.
As has been repeated many times here in the
Chamber, the conflict in South Sudan is a manmade one for which the leaders of the country bear a
direct responsibility. The dire economic situation and
continued conflict there have combined to generate a
dangerous and precarious situation for its citizens, but
the same leaders can also bring the country back from
the brink of the abyss. All that is needed is genuine
political will to halt military operations, peaceably
negotiate and make the compromises necessary to
achieve sustainable peace in the country. I would
also urge the Security Council to pronounce itself in
that regard. It is critical that the leaders and all other
stakeholders in South Sudan hear the international

17-266963/11

S/PV.8030

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

24/08/2017

community’s unified demand of what is expected of
them in the interests of their own people.

initiatives directly related to securing an immediate
cessation of hostilities.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Wane
for his briefing.

Among the regional efforts, the Ugandan initiative
has focused on the reunification of certain factions
of the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement (SPLM).
In late July, that initiative led to President Kiir,
Ms. Rebecca Garang, of the former detainees group,
and First Vice-President Taban Deng committing to
expediting the implementation of the Agreement on
the Reunification of the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement, known as the Arusha Agreement, of January
2015. The Agreement concerned a resolution of SPLM
intra-party problems. With the continued absence of
the SPLM in Opposition, led by Riek Machar, and
some among the former detainees group reluctant to
reconcile with President Kiir in such a manner, the
Ugandan initiative continues to falls short of achieving
its goal. It may even be divisive both among and
between opposition groups. President Museveni has
also begun to engage groups outside the SPLM core,
by, inter alia, encouraging preparations for elections.

I now give the floor to Mr. Haysom.
Mr. Haysom: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the situation in South
Sudan. My remarks will build upon the briefing
provided by Assistant Secretary-General Wane and
will cover the developments relating to a resumption of
the political process in South Sudan.
Since my previous briefing (see S/PV.7982), two
months ago, the five internal and regional initiatives
to address the crisis in one form or another indicate
continuing concern about the trajectory and depth of
the conflict, without any of them thus far presenting
a definite breakthrough in the political impasse.
However, I remain hopeful that some, or a combination
of them, may have the potential to positively impact
the situation.
As we just heard from Assistant Secretary-General
Wane, there is sporadic fighting and widespread
insecurity across the country. Our engagements
with South Sudanese interlocutors, including the
opposition, suggest that battlefield fortunes continue
to inform the calculus of both the Government and
its opponents. Alongside its military pacification
efforts, the Government has created an appearance of
reconciliation efforts, including through the limited
release of political prisoners. The Government has
further linked those efforts to the national dialogue
initiative and to laying the groundwork for calls on
political actors to prepare for elections in 2018. For our
part, we have made clear to all external and internal
stakeholders our view that the prevailing insecurity,
internal and external population displacement and
lack of appropriate institutions, or a reasonably level
political playing field, in an increasingly divided ethnic
environment, militate against organizing credible
elections within the year. Indeed, it may well contribute
to deepening and extending the conflict.
Assistant Secretary-General Wane dealt with some
of the challenges facing the national dialogue and its
potential contribution to long-term sustainable peace. I
would simply draw attention, in the context of current
regional initiatives, to the possibility of the national
dialogue initiative being played off against other
4/11

Another regional initiative — the meeting of
opposition parties, which was to be hosted in Kenya
by President Kenyatta — has not gained much traction.
With the Kenyan Government focused on the outcome
of recent elections and the former detainees, who were
a driving force behind the initiative, preoccupied with
their Kampala discussions, the initiative appears to be
stalled. The apparent advantage to any peace process of
dealing with a coherent opposition and the increaising
competition and conflicts between opposition
groupings have led stakeholders to explore alternatives.
A meeting between opposition parties, possibly outside
Kenya, could be reinstated as part of preparations for
the Revitalization Forum of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD).
The decision of the IGAD Summit of Heads of
State and Government of 12 June to convene a highlevel Revitalization Forum in respect to the 2015
IGAD-sponsored peace Agreement has begun to gain
some momentum. It aims to include Government
and opposition groups in a dialogue to consider how
to implement the peace Agreement, and IGAD has
appointed Ambassador Ismail Wais as its Special Envoy
to follow through on its decisions. Recognizing the
importance of securing President Kiir’s buy-in, IGAD’s
Council of Foreign Ministers met on 24 and 25 July in
Juba. Following that, IGAD, with help from the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission (JMEC), the
17-26696

24/08/2017

S/PV. 8030

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
and my Office, carried out a mapping exercise on
the relevant opposition actors to be included in the
Revitalization Forum.
In mid-August, I attended an IGAD-hosted
meeting in Ethiopia of independent South Sudanese
experts. The discussions were frank and generated a
number of recommendations for IGAD, including on
which opposition parties to engage and on how the
peace Agreement could be adjusted to reflect the new
realities in South Sudan. While the IGAD initiative
continues to have potential, a main concern, which I
have conveyed to IGAD, is its cautious preparation for
engagement with opposition actors. Although those
engagements are delicate, the danger is that the more
the initiative consults with IGAD capitals, including
Juba, the more suspicious the opposition will become
that its agenda is partisan.
Crucially and irrespective of his declared
commitment made to the IGAD Council of Ministers
during their Juba visit to implement the IGAD summit
decisions, President Kiir continues to prioritize the
national dialogue and the reunification of the SPLM,
which he recently stressed would bring about peace, with
the revitalization process playing only a supplementary
role. As IGAD grapples with those challenges, it has
already warned that the indicative timeline for holding
the Revitalization Forum at the end of September will
necessarily slip.
Meanwhile, with regard to the African Union’s
(AU) engagement, the AU Chairperson, President Alpha
Oumar Konaré, is awaiting the internal adoption of a
broad AU engagement strategy on South Sudan before
taking further measures. Previously, President Konaré
emphasized speaking with one voice, the primacy of
internal support for any solutions to the conflict and
a full and robust presence of the Regional Protection
Force. President Konaré will visit Addis Ababa this
week, thereby providing my Office an opportunity
to engage and take stock of the current tracks of
engagement and the respective steps to be taken by
the AU, IGAD and the United Nations. We will be
concerned about establishing mutual complementarity
between IGAD and AU initiatives. That will be
crucial as we enter a period of more intensive public
engagement by the Security Council, the AU Peace
and Security Council and forums on the margins of the
General Assembly, respectively.

Given the motives and underlying logic that drive
the national dialogue, the SPLM reunification process,
IGAD’s peace Agreement Revitalization Forum and
even the AU plan of action, it would, at first instance,
appear to suggest that those initiatives might clash
or undermine one another. On the other hand, they
could harness potential complementarity, and such
an outcome would require a clear commitment to an
inclusive and credible peace process.
We have underlined to the IGAD secretariat the
importance of distinguishing the particular goals of
each initiative and encouraged it to focus on how they
can work to the greater good. The Revitalization Forum,
the national dialogue and the other initiatives should
neither adopt the agenda of the others, nor overload the
agendas of competing initiatives with their own goals.
Therefore, in the quest for a more coherent approach,
my Office will continue to work closely with IGAD,
the JMEC, the AU and UNMISS to support initiatives
towards sustainable peace. I will also continue to
engage South Sudanese stakeholders to open lines to
all sides of the conflict.
The President (spoke
Mr. Haysom for his briefing.

in

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to Mr. Mogae.
Mr. Mogae: I would like to thank the President
of the Security Council, His Excellency Mr. Amr
Abdellatif Aboulatta, for his kind invitation to me to
brief the Security Council today.
This morning, in Juba, I chaired the monthly
plenary meeting of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission (JMEC). I therefore come to the Council
via videolink from the base of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS). Before I begin,
I would like to deal with a housekeeping matter by
noting that as I shall be issuing the pending JMEC
quarterly report by the end of this month, as mandated
under Chapter VII of the peace Agreement. I trust that
it will reach all Council members in good time.
Members will recall that in my briefing to
the Security Council last month, I described the
“one voice” initiative and the process by which the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
mandated the convening of a high-level Revitalization
forum for the peace Agreement in South Sudan (see
S/PV.8008). I was very grateful for the unanimous
support of the members of the Security Council for the

17-266965/11

S/PV.8030

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

IGAD initiative. The Council’s support and endorsement
sends a strong message to all South Sudanese leaders
that the world is watching and has high expectations
for a rapid and sustained improvement in the overall
situation in South Sudan.
The second anniversary of the signing of the
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan passed relatively unnoticed
last week. Our perception at the time of the signing of
the peace Agreement, in August 2015, was that it had
ended a tragic internal conflict that had threatened to
tear Africa’s youngest nation apart, and it was hoped
that disagreements among the parties over substantive
issues had been resolved.
The peace Agreement brought JMEC into being,
and we believed that our task would be simply
to oversee and guide its implementation by the
Transitional Government of National Unity. By now, the
peace Agreement should have achieved considerable
progress towards improved security and governance
in the country. From day one, however, we have had
to persuade the parties to implement each and every
task. Disagreements between the key principals and the
lack of any appetite for compromise slowed progress
to a standstill and led to growing tensions in Juba that
ultimately resulted in the violence of July 2016 and
its continuing repercussions. Two years on since the
signing of the peace Agreement there has been little
meaningful progress in its implementation.
Since July 2016, we, as JMEC, have remained
profoundly shocked by the rampant hostilities across
the country and the rapid deterioration of the political,
security, humanitarian and economic situation in South
Sudan. As a result, we are now rightly absorbed in a
process to restore and revitalize the prominence of the
peace Agreement.
In the past month, the security situation in the
former Upper Nile state has worsened, due to the recent
offensive operations by forces of the Sudan People’s
Liberation Army in Government against the Machar
faction of the Sudan People’s Liberation Army in
Opposition in Matthiang and Pagak. In today’s JMEC
plenary, I condemned all the violence that occurred in
and around Pagak over the past month and urged that
military operations cease immediately. I also urged
all parties involved to facilitate access for the Cease
Fire and Transitional Security Monitoring Mechanism
6/11

24/08/2017

(CTSAMM) to investigate and report on the situation
in Pagak.
In this month in which we marked World
Humanitarian Day, tens of thousands of people in
Upper Nile have been forced to flee their homes, and
humanitarian aid workers have had no choice but to
relocate from the area and suspend delivery of support
to those in need. The cycle of violence, displacement
and deprivation of humanitarian support has been
repeated around the country over the past year and has
led to untold misery among those who seek only to live
peacefully and provide for their families.
Over the past week, there has been some unfortunate
confusion and dispute over the deployment of advanced
elements of the Regional Protection Force. One impact
of this dispute was the temporary grounding of all
United Nations flights, which had a direct impact on
the operations of CTSAMM. This is deeply regrettable,
and I urge the Transitional Government of National
Unity to resolve issues with UNMISS swiftly and
facilitate the deployment of the Force without further
hindrance, in accordance with resolution 2304 (2016).
To that end, I have further urged IGAD to convene
a meeting between the Transitional Government of
National Unity, UNMISS and the Chiefs of Defence
Forces of the troop-contributing countries, as specified
in the IGAD communiqué of 12 June 2017. That meeting
has not yet taken place and, as a result, key issues
affecting the practical deployment of the Force have
not been addressed, and serious challenges are arising.
The IGAD Council of Ministers met on 24 July
for the first time in Juba. In its communiqué that day,
the Council of Ministers empowered the IGAD Special
Envoy for South Sudan to coordinate the revitalization
process, including all stakeholders and the institutions
charged with the responsibility for the implementation
of the peace Agreement. The Council also urged all
South Sudanese stakeholders to embrace the objectives
of the High-level Revitalization Forum and collaborate
with the IGAD Special Envoy to achieve a positive
outcome. It is essential to stress a number of issues
regarding the Revitalization Forum in order to ensure
full understanding. The Revitalization Forum is an
IGAD initiative, mandated by the Summit of Heads of
State and Government and executed by the Council of
Ministers through the office of the new IGAD Special
Envoy. Our role as the JMEC is to support IGAD in its
efforts to convene the Forum.
17-26696

24/08/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

While the Forum was set up to fulfil three
objectives — first, to reinstate the permanent
ceasefire; secondly, to reinstate the full and inclusive
implementation of the peace Agreement; and,
thirdly, to develop revised and realistic timelines for
implementation with a view to elections and the end of
the transition period — the outcomes of the Forum are
not predetermined. It is for the parties and estranged
groups to determine and commit to the outcomes of the
Forum. After all, in the end the responsibility for the
implementation of the peace Agreement lies squarely
with those parties. This is a Forum through which we
can explore options that can restore the prominence of
the peace process, while taking current realities into
account. It is our hope that this revitalization process
will be pursued in the spirit of peace, inclusiveness
and compromise.
In the JMEC’s perspective, for the revitalization
process to succeed, there is a need for demonstrable
political will by the parties and estranged groups to be
inclusive and to accommodate one another politically,
rather than defeat each other militarily.
We must speak with one voice to the leaders of
South Sudan and align our actions. There should be
clear consequences for intransigent groups, spoilers
and violators. The parties must commit to adhering to
any revised timelines and implementation schedules,
and adequate funding for the implementation of the
revitalized peace Agreement must be determined
and secured.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Mogae
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, allow me to thank Mr. Wane and Mr. Haysom and
His Excellency Mr. Mogae for their briefings today.
I will be very concise because, regrettably, the
situation in South Sudan has hardly changed since the
Security Council addressed the issue one month ago
(see S/PV.8008), which is why Uruguay reiterates its
deep concern and alarm over the crisis in the country,
whose political leaders are primarily responsible for
the current situation. We are particularly concerned,
as mentioned in the statements made by our three
briefers, about the continuing impact of the situation
on the civilian population — hampered humanitarian

S/PV. 8030

access, the looting of food reserves — because what
is most important is protecting civilians. We therefore
urge all parties and armed groups to immediately cease
hostilities throughout the territory and to commit now in
good faith to dialogue that will enable the revitalization
of the August 2015 Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan.
Faced with this difficult scenario, I would like to
acknowledge the tireless efforts of the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission
to relaunch a credible political process. We welcome
IGAD’s decision to convene a high-level forum in the
near future to revitalize the peace Agreement. That
will be a good opportunity for the United Nations,
the African Union and IGAD to demonstrate their
joint work and express an unequivocal message
regarding the restoration of the permanent ceasefire,
the full implementation of the peace Agreement and
the holding of democratic elections at the end of the
transition period.
With regard to the Regional Protection Force,
we note the extremely slow progress towards its
complete deployment. We reiterate our urging of the
Government of South Sudan to fully cooperate with
the implementation of resolution 2327 (2016), to cease
restricting the activities of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) and to allow forthwith the
full functionality of the Regional Protection Force.
I would also like to take this opportunity to reiterate
our appreciation for the courage and dedication of
UNMISS staff and of humanitarian actors, who
continue to protect and assist millions of people who are
victims of a humanitarian catastrophe in an extremely
hazardous operational environment.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to thank the
Assistant
Secretary-General
for
Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Wane, the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Haysom, and the Chair of the
Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission (JMEC),
President Mogae, for their informative briefings.
Japan is deeply concerned about the continued
clashes, especially in Upper Nile, despite the unilateral
ceasefire declared by President Kiir. Large numbers
of people and humanitarian actors have fled due to
the Government forces’ advance towards Pagak. The
Government of South Sudan must be fully aware that the
number of displaced people is increasing at a faster rate

17-266967/11

S/PV.8030

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

in South Sudan than anywhere in the world, with one
in three citizens being either a refugee or an internally
displaced person. Children under 18, who represent the
country’s future, account for approximately two thirds
of those refugees.
Japan is concerned that the number of humanitarian
access incidents in July, which included violence
against personnel and assets, were the highest since the
crisis began in December 2013. All parties must take
prompt and effective action. At the joint meeting in July
of the JMEC Humanitarian Working Committee and
the Humanitarian High-Level Oversight Committee
(HHLOC), it was agreed that the HHLOC would meet
quarterly and the Humanitarian Coordination Forum
(HCF) would meet monthly. We urge the Government
to take steps to ensure that the HHLOC and HCF
continue to meet regularly, and that their decisions are
faithfully implemented.
We welcome progress in the deployment of the
Regional Protection Force (RPF) vanguard units. We
thank all troop-contributing countries for their efforts,
and appreciate Kenya’s agreement to deploy troops to
the RPF. Nevertheless, it is regrettable that violations
of the status of gorces agreement ccurred this month
with regard to flight clearances for personnel of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
In a meeting this week with the diplomatic corps in
Juba, the Government again announced a policy of
cooperation on UNMISS activities, including the
deployment of the RPF. Concrete action must follow.
We strongly urge the Government’s full cooperation
with UNMISS, including on the completion of the RPF’s
deployment and its effective operation, as stipulated in
the unanimously adopted resolution 2327 (2016).
We welcome the progress in the various political
processes under way, including efforts by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
to resolve the violence and revitalize the Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan, the national dialogue process and the
reintegration process of the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement. Constructive and continuous engagement
by all key parties in those processes is the only way
to ensure peace in South Sudan. The Council should
provide full support to IGAD Heads of State, the
African Union (AU) Commission Chairperson and AU
High Representative, the Secretary-General and the
JMEC Chair in order to ensure success.
8/11

24/08/2017

To advance those processes with synergy
and complementarity, genuine inclusiveness and
transparency are key. In that regard, we welcome the
news of the recent release of political prisoners by
the Government. We urge continued steps to create
an environment conducive to the advancement of
an inclusive political process. Such steps include
the Government’s full observance of the unilateral
ceasefire, the release of any remaining political
prisoners, the establishment of the hybrid court and
improved media freedom. A ceasefire and constructive
participation in the political process by the opposition
groups are also important.
The Council must be united in ensuring that all
parties are actively engaged in an inclusive political
process to achieve lasting peace in South Sudan.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks the
Egyptian presidency for convening this meeting. We
also thank Assistant Secretary-General Wane and
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General Haysom for
their briefings. We particularly welcome the Chair
of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission
for the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan, His Excellency
Mr. Festus Mogae. Bolivia reiterates its support for,
and recognition of, the important work he is doing.
South Sudan continues to face a grave economic,
political, security and humanitarian crisis with serious
consequences that can be felt both domestically as well
as in neighbouring countries. It is alarming that there
are 1 million South Sudanese refugees in Uganda.
As we stated previously, an immediate cessation of
hostilities between the parties is a crucial step towards
achieving peace.
Bolivia believes strongly that the conflict in South
Sudan should be resolved through an inclusive political
process. Dialogue, understanding, reconciliation and
compliance with the 2015 Agreement are the way
forward. In that regard, we must highlight, and above
all support, the work being done by the main regional
actors to that end.
The efforts of the international community, in
particular such regional actors as the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and the African
Union, may provide fresh impetus to, and lead to the
resumption of, the political process. In that connection,
we welcome the communiqué on the situation in South
17-26696

24/08/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Sudan issued by the fifty-eighth extraordinary session
of the IGAD Council of Ministers, which provides a
clear message and guidelines for the action the Council
should support in an united manner. IGAD initiatives,
in coordination with the African Union and the United
Nations, are the most appropriate alternative to achieve
stable peace in South Sudan. In addition, the high-level
Revitalization Forum is an invaluable opportunity
for that country to emerge from the political crisis in
which it finds itself. However, for that to work, the
commitment of the authorities and opposition groups
must be genuine. We highlight the efforts of His
Excellency Mr. Yoweri Museveni to bring together
different factions of the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement, as well as the role of Chair Mogae in the
mediation and revitalization of the political process,
which is of crucial importance.
With regard to the current state of the Regional
Protection Force (RPF), the deployment of vanguard
units is a very important development that we should like
to highlight. We welcome the progress and encourage
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
and the Government to continue to work together to
facilitate the deployment of the remaining troops. We
followed the recent visit of Mr. Lacroix to South Sudan,
and we highlight the commitment of the Secretariat
to undertake all possible efforts to accelerate the
deployment of the Regional Protection Force with 4,000
troops. The presence of the RPF could make it possible
for UNMISS to extend its presence to other areas of
conflict, provide humanitarian assistance and improve
the security situation in rural areas — something that
is tied to agricultural development, which is very
important to increasing agricultural production, which
in turn is necessary to combat the hunger situation,
contribute to economic growth and improve the quality
of life of the South Sudanese in those areas.
Moreover, Bolivia takes note of the release of
political prisoners after the announcement of an
amnesty in May. We believe that is a step in the right
direction that will strengthen the national dialogue.
Finally, as we have stated on previous occasions,
all the efforts of the international community will
mean nothing if the Government and the opposition do
not enter into a serious and constructive commitment
to resolve the conflict, and therefore achieve a stable
and lasting peace.

S/PV. 8030

Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank Assistant
Secretary-General Wane, Special Envoy Haysom and
His Excellency Mr. Mogae for their comprehensive
and insightful briefings. I also commend them for
their commitment to bring peace to South Sudan under
difficult circumstances. My delegation would like to
make the following observations and recommendations.
We welcome the arrival of the vanguard units of
the Regional Protection Force (RPF), especially the
engineering, technical and high-readiness company
of the Bangladeshi and Nepalese contingents. We
look forward to having the deployment of Rwandan,
Ethiopian and Kenyan personnel completed so as to
make the RPF fully operational. More efforts, such
as the Pakistan level-2 hospital and the deployment
of unarmed aerial systems, should be supported and
encouraged. The Government should speedily allocate
personnel and coordinate the proposed one-stop
shop to resolve impediments to the operations of the
patrols of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) so that they can have greater freedom of
movement. Every proactive measure should be taken to
ensure that UNMISS staff do not face arbitrary arrest
or detention. We hope that the joint meeting of chiefs of
defence forces of the troop contributing-countries, the
transitional Government and the United Nations will
help resolve all remaining issues.
We are gravely concerned that the continuing Sudan
People’s Liberation Army military operations in the
Equatorias and Greater Upper Nile have led to a sharp
escalation in the number of humanitarian incidents and
violence against UNMISS and humanitarian personnel.
That violence has also led to an increase in the number
of internally displaced persons (IDP), most of whom are
women and children. Those hostile actions undermine
the efforts of the Transitional Government and the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission to facilitate
the peace process, and lead to further deterioration in
the humanitarian and security conditions. We therefore
urge all parties to restore a permanent ceasefire and
to stop attacks on humanitarian workers so that access
to famine-affected locations is not adversely affected.
We also encourage the Special Envoy to have more
frequent and intensive dialogue with the parties on the
protection of women and children, which constitute
about 85 per cent of IDPs, and to ensure that vital
lifesaving feeding programmes, including for schools,
are not stopped.

17-266969/11

S/PV.8030

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

We commend the efforts of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) to organize the
Revitalization Forum and include all sides, for the
effective implementation of the Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, and to prepare for the forthcoming democratic
elections. We hope that the outcome of the Forum will
lay the foundation necessary for the building of stable
State institutions. Simultaneously, we need to ensure
that the national dialogue launched in May is truly
inclusive and transparent, for which the assistance
of UNMISS and the Special Envoy will be needed.
That will have to be reinforced by closer cooperation
between the Transitional Government and IGAD.
At the same time, a truly inclusive national dialogue
has to be proceeded by a political process that creates
the necessary security and political environment for
such inclusion.
In conclusion, Kazakhstan fully supports the
concerted efforts of the United Nations, the African
Union and IGAD, and will work with the Council and
key actors to find a lasting solution to the conflict in
South Sudan, which should remain high on our list
of priorities.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): Allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming your duties as the
President of the Security Council for this month. I
assure you of our delegation’s support and cooperation.
My delegation welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral as requested by resolutions 2304 (2016) and
2327 (2016). I would like to make a few points, if you
would allow me, Sir.
On humanitarian access, we have stated in the
Council time and again that it is not, has not been and
will never be the policy of the Government to hinder
or impede access to any humanitarian organization.
We understand the critical role they play in helping our
people. Therefore, as a Government, we strive to see
them succeed in reaching the populace — but we call
for responsible reporting. What I think is lacking in that
regard is an honest, open dialogue and understanding
between the Government and the humanitarian agencies.
As stated by the Secretary-General in his report
issued in May, His Excellency the President declared
a unilateral ceasefire in the country and called on the
10/11

24/08/2017

army command to heed his call. However, it was not
a blank check for the rebels to continue their attacks
and provocations on the local population while the
army stood aside and watched. Those provocations and
hit-and-run attacks led to the hot pursuit that resulted
in the eventual capture of Pagak — the headquarters
of the rebels — by the South Sudan People’s Defense
Forces. Today Maiwut state is calmer than before, and
life is returning to normal.
At this juncture, we would like to applaud the
brotherly gesture of the Federal Democratic Republic
of Ethiopia, through the regional Government of
Gambella, in the prompt holding of a security meeting
with their counterparts in Maiwut state and in
discouraging those who took refuge across the border
from using it as a launching pad for attacks in South
Sudan. We also applaud the President of the Gambella
region for encouraging the South Sudanese refugees
to return to their homes, after he had been assured
of their safety and protection. We would like to take
this opportunity again to call upon the Council to
encourage the opposition leaders and their forces who
crossed into Ethiopia and other neighbouring countries
to embrace the spirit of peace and return home and
joint the reconciliation process.
On the implementation of the Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan, allow me to say that much has been
undertaken by the Transitional Government of National
Unity, including under its chapter V. Therefore,
the upcoming revitalization process — according
to our understanding — which is being led by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
is merely intended to maintain the focus and momentum
of the parties, rather than to renegotiate the Agreement;
just as the national dialogue and Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement reunification process, which is
being shepherded by His Excellency President Yoweri
Kaguta Museveni of Uganda, is a complementary
initiative to consolidate and cement the success of the
Peace Agreement.
Allow me to conclude with the question of the
Regional Protection Force. As a Government, we
agreed unreservedly to the deployment of the Force and
to working closely with the United Nations, the African
Union and IGAD in seeing the smooth implementation
and operationalization of the mandate of those troops
in South Sudan. The Government is still committed
to that decision and to cooperating with the United
17-26696

24/08/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Nations Mission in South Sudan. However, the lack of
consultation that we witnessed few days ago in Juba
is something we hope will not be the norm, but rather
the exception.

S/PV. 8030

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.

17-2669611/11
