United Nations

S/PV.6707

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6707th meeting
Wednesday, 25 January 2012, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Sangqu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(South Africa)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Yang Tao
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Haroon
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Menan
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-21455 (E)

*1221455*

S/PV.6707

The meeting was called to order at 10.45 a.m.

efforts to find a solution. Following my Deputy’s visit
to the two cities on 3 and 4 January, the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) issued a call for
more attention, including focused reconciliation efforts
to accelerate their full return to normalcy, and we have
pursued this in our contacts with the authorities.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ian Martin,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya,
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional
rules
of
procedure,
I
invite
Ms. Navanethem Pillay, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Martin.
Mr. Martin: When I last briefed the Council a
month ago (see S/PV.6698), I noted that the public
mood in Libya was gradually changing as it
increasingly
demanded
improved
institutional
performance that meets popular expectations, and
accountability and transparency in public affairs; and
that as the countdown towards elections began, civil
society was becoming increasingly assertive in
monitoring and critiquing the performance of the
National Transitional Council (NTC) and the
Government. Criticism of Libya’s interim leadership
has grown, and in recent days has been expressed in
ways that go beyond a healthy democratic spirit,
including some physical violence, and has led to the
resignation of the Vice-Chairman of the NTC.
Meanwhile the challenge of reconciliation has
been highlighted in the most serious way by the
outbreak of fighting in Bani Walid. Last week,
Chairman Abdul Jalil discussed with me the challenges
the NTC has been encountering in its efforts to appoint
new leadership of the local councils in Bani Walid and
Sirte that would be broadly acceptable to the people of
each city. In the case of Bani Walid, an NTC committee
had held local discussions with all stakeholders in

2

Regrettably, in the charged local atmosphere, a
security-related incident triggered clashes between
members of the local population and the revolutionary
brigades stationed in the city, as a result of which
several were reportedly killed. This has been
misreported as pro-Al-Qadhafi forces taking back
control of the city. The Government responded by
dispatching units from the national army, and is
currently engaging with all stakeholders to contain the
situation and address the underlying security and
political challenges in Bani Walid.
In very different ways, each of these
developments indicates the problems associated with
the transitional period while the interim authorities
continue to lack the full legitimacy of elected bodies,
at both the national and the local levels. The protests in
Benghazi began as part of a movement to “correct the
path of the revolution” and appear to have been
triggered following widely publicized comments in
early December, made as part of the debate regarding
national reconciliation, about a possible amnesty being
granted to former Al-Qadhafi fighters or members of
his regime. The protests acquired momentum as they
evolved into a platform critical of the NTC’s
performance. Demonstrators focused their demands on
calls for greater transparency and accountability, as
well as the needs of the war wounded. There have also
been calls for supporters of the former regime to be
barred from the political process and purged from all
State institutions, and for the reappointment of local
councils based on local elections. Public frustration
regarding the perceived shortcomings in delivery by
the Government is growing.
When full legitimacy can be established only by
elections, some interim legitimacy must be accepted to
determine the framework for the first elections, which
is a key responsibility of the NTC. The interim
Government was established only in late November,
after months during which there was an almost
complete vacuum of governance. Transparency,
communication and consultation are indeed important
elements of fostering confidence and trust in the
interim authorities.

12-21455

S/PV.6707

But the handicaps are not only on the part of
Libya’s leadership. Libya’s new media are as yet very
far from being a reliable channel to convey correct
information to the public, and civil society is only
beginning to organize itself into forms that facilitate
consultation. The former regime may have been
toppled, but the harsh reality is that the Libyan people
continue to have to live with its deep-rooted legacy:
weak, at times absent, State institutions, coupled with
the long absence of political parties and civil society
organizations, which render the country’s transition
more difficult. This is further complicated by what was
a systematic distortion of the country’s socio-political
fabric.
Those of us who engage with the interim
Government meet committed and capable ministers
struggling to address major challenges with little
support in a context of institutional inexperience and
an over-large bureaucracy of uncertain competence and
allegiance. But the public experiences only the delay in
delivery of funds and services. The agreement of the
Sanctions Committee to the request for the delisting of
the Central Bank and the Foreign Bank has cleared the
way to overcoming the crisis of liquidity, but this is
barely beginning to be experienced by national and
local institutions, let alone by the public at large.
The combination of a tight timeline, inexperience
in drafting electoral legislation, shortcomings in
communication and the lack of proper mechanisms for
consultation have set limitations to the process of
drafting the electoral law. The NTC and most
stakeholders have remained determined that the
commitment in the Constitutional Declaration to
electing a national congress by late June must be
respected. This has left little time for consultations on
the legislative framework, which must embody some
difficult and inevitably controversial political choices.
Within the limits of the time available, the NTC
electoral committee made real efforts to engage the
public, publishing the draft law and convening or
participating in a number of public consultations. It
also welcomed close engagement with the UNSMIL
electoral team, adopting many of its technical
recommendations, as well as responding to concerns
expressed in the public consultations. As a result, we
believe that both the main electoral law and the parallel
electoral administration law, which establishes a
17-member high national electoral commission, gained
in clarity and focus. UNSMIL had presented its

12-21455

concerns in regards to the restrictions in the eligibility
criteria for voters and candidates alike, and welcomes
some progress in making these criteria more inclusive.
Criticism that public consultation has, however,
been inadequate is sharpened by the fact that the
proposed division of the country into constituencies
and allocation of seats has not been published and
remains under discussion by the NTC. Political
groupings are concerned that the law makes no
mention of the rights and responsibilities of political
parties. Of particular concern to UNSMIL, and indeed
to the Secretary-General, is the rejection by the full
NTC of the proposal by the electoral committee that
would have ensured the presence of at least 10 per cent
of women in the National Congress — a proposal that
some women’s groups and civil society voices rejected
as insufficient, while according to the electoral
committee there did not appear to be general public
support for any quota.
The NTC has adopted the electoral administration
law and appointed the High National Electoral
Commission, and had intended also to announce the
main electoral law on 22 January. Amid the protests in
Benghazi, however, the NTC decided to continue
consultations and to consider further amendments until
29 January. UNSMIL’s electoral experts remain
engaged with the NTC team, and are opening
discussions with the Chairman of the High National
Electoral Commission regarding United Nations
support during the operational stage ahead. We
particularly hope that the extended period may allow
for reconsideration of the case for special measures to
promote the representation of women.
As I have highlighted in all my previous briefings
to the Council, security remains a major concern.
Events on the ground over the past month highlight the
risks associated with both the continued abundance of
weapons on the streets and the diverse armed brigades
in the country with unclear lines of command and
control. In the capital, clashes in early January between
rival brigades from Misrata and Tripoli resulted in
several fatalities and injuries; armed clashes later in the
month between brigades in Gheryan and Al-Asabah,
and earlier this week in Bani Walid, required high level
intervention to put an end to the fighting. Although
authorities have successfully contained these and other
more minor incidents that continue to take place across
the country on a regular basis, there is the ever-present

3

S/PV.6707

possibility that similar outbreaks of violence could
escalate and widen in scope.
Those at the head of the interim Government
regard it as their highest priority to assert the authority
of the State and address the future of the members of
the brigades. The success of any integration process
will hinge on the ability of the authorities to conduct
consultations with relevant stakeholders to forge a
consensus on the way forward, including agreement on
processes for the integration or reintegration of
ex-combatants, while at the same time setting up
workable mechanisms to deal effectively with security
challenges, including those related to the upcoming
election. As experience has shown elsewhere, this
process cannot be treated as a purely technical
exercise, but requires a political framework to ensure
its viability.
Amid some initial confusion, an inter-ministerial
committee has initiated a process for registering
ex-combatants, the first phase of which will be carried
out by local councils across the country. Information
collected would then be centrally processed, to be
followed by the referral of registrants to the Ministries
of the Interior, Defence or Labour in accordance with
their preferred option. UNSMIL and the United
Nations Development Programme are in discussion
with the relevant ministries and bodies about their
needs for technical assistance.
As regards the police, the Ministry of the Interior
faces the dual challenge of integrating ex-combatants
at the same time as it strengthens and reforms the
inherited police force, its training and administration.
At the request of the Minister, UNSMIL is increasing
its direct advisory support within the Ministry, as well
as supporting its overall coordination of international
assistance. Several Member States have come forward
with offers of training and other assistance, and some
have signed bilateral agreements to support the police
force in a number of areas. UNSMIL’s assistance
includes supporting the Ministry in the development of
a training strategy and curricula for a number of
courses, including for election security.
Following the mandate given to UNSMIL in
resolution 2022 (2011), I am now supported by a
special adviser on the threats and challenges posed by
arms and related materiel in Libya. Among his
responsibilities is the continuing coordination of efforts
around the identification and eventual control of man-

4

portable air defence systems (MANPADS) and other
explosive remnants of war, ammunition storage
management and mine action. UNSMIL has further
strengthened its team by bringing in a MANPADS
expert to support ongoing mapping efforts and an arms
registration advisor.
The joint United Nations/African Union mission
to several Sahel countries in December confirmed
previous assessments that there is as yet little evidence
that MANPADS have been smuggled out of Libya in
significant numbers. This reinforces the need to focus
on arms control measures within Libya. In this respect,
UNSMIL has started co-hosting with the Ministry of
Defence an operational sub-group on MANPADS,
which coordinates the bilateral mapping and
identification efforts currently under way. While so far
123 weapons holding sites have been visited and an
estimated 5,000 MANPADS systems and components
have been accounted for, access to many of the
holdings of brigades remains a challenge.
A number of donors have come forward to lend
their support for action against landmines and
explosive remnants of war in the period since I last
briefed the Council, and I express my thanks for this
generous response. We now have 28 clearance teams
and 30 risk education teams working throughout the
country. New reports of mines and explosives
contamination, however, are being recorded almost on
a daily basis. The current capacity on the ground
remains insufficient to meet the growing demand and,
in the short term at least, greater external financial
support remains necessary to tackle this issue
effectively until Libyan funding becomes available.
There also has been further progress in the
inspection and verification of chemical materials,
particularly of those previously undeclared materials
located after the end of the previous regime and
identified by the new Libyan authorities in their
declaration of 28 November. From 17 to 19 January,
inspectors of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) visited the sites and
verified the declared chemical weapons, which consist
of sulphur mustard agents that were not loaded into
munitions. Libya must now submit to the OPCW a plan
and timeline for the destruction of the declared
materials by the end of April. Several Member States
have indicated their support in this effort. Regarding
nuclear materials, the eventual sale and transfer of the

12-21455

S/PV.6707

6,400 barrels of nuclear material stored in Sabha
remain a key priority.
The concerns of Libya’s neighbours regarding
arms proliferation are mirrored in Libya’s own concern
that former Al-Qadhafi supporters may be regrouping
and training in neighbouring countries in order to
destabilize parts of Libya. This, together with an
increase in illegal immigration and drug trafficking at
its southern borders, has led border security and
management to become a top priority of the interim
Government. To this end, UNSMIL has now convened
two coordination meetings with senior representatives
of the Ministries of Defence, Interior, Finance and
Foreign Affairs and relevant bilateral partners to
identify Libya’s priority needs in this area and to
facilitate offers of assistance. UNSMIL is coordinating
closely with the European Union, which is fielding its
border management assessment team in February. The
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and the International Organization of
Migration are participating in a sub-group on illegal
immigration and supporting the Libyan authorities
regarding the current influx of Syrian refugees via the
Egyptian border.
On all of these issues, an intensified dialogue
with Libya’s neighbours on the threats emanating from
a porous regime on both sides of Libya’s borders is
indispensable and has been promoted by the first visits
of Libya’s Minister of Foreign Affairs to Niger, Mali
and Chad. Chairman Jean Ping told me during his
recent visit to Tripoli of his positive discussions with
the Government, and welcomed the intention of Prime
Minister El-keib to head Libya’s delegation to the
African Union summit later this week.
The Council is about to hear from the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, so I will limit my
own remarks regarding human rights issues. I regret to
report that there has been only limited progress
regarding the situation of detainees since I last briefed
the Council, with the justice system continuing to face
significant challenges in its operations. To date, the
Ministry of Justice has been able to manage six
transfers of detention facilities from brigades to the
Ministry, two since my last briefing. The process of
transferring facilities is hindered by many factors,
including insufficient numbers of judicial police who
carry out core prison administration functions.
UNSMIL continues to press the Government to
expedite those handovers, so that a comprehensive

12-21455

review of cases of detainees can be undertaken,
culminating either in their release or in formal charges
in accordance with legal standards. The large detainee
caseload is taxing the Ministry’s current level of
capacity, with frustrations mounting, which culminated
into a riot two weeks ago at one facility by inmates
protesting their continued detention without due
process.
The outbreaks of local conflicts highlight the
pressing need to adopt and implement a national
framework for transitional justice and reconciliation.
Towards that end, the NTC has adopted a law on
transitional justice, but has so far not made it public,
pending the further development of the judicial and
legal institutions necessary to implement its provisions.
In that regard, UNSMIL, in partnership with the
Ministry of Justice, as well as with the United Nations
Development Programme and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, organized a conference
from 23 to 25 January to discuss advancing the
transitional justice agenda with national Government
counterparts and members of civil society. The
conference was opened by the Prime Minister, who
stressed the importance of transitional justice to
Libya’s progress.
With regard to Libya’s efforts to locate and
identify missing people, the Government has decided
to incorporate that responsibility within the Ministry
for the Assistance to the Families of Martyrs and
Missing Persons, and to dissolve the commission that
had been established last October. UNSMIL remains
committed to supporting those efforts within whatever
framework the Government decides, and has urged that
the transfer to the Ministry should not prevent the
process for the search for, and identification of,
missing persons from remaining neutral and
independent, and implemented in accordance with
international standards. The Prime Minister and other
Government officials have assured us that those
principles will continue to guide the Government’s
actions.
A positive step towards advancing the protection
of human rights in Libya has been the NTC’s
establishment in December of the National Council for
Public Liberties and Human Rights. The 11-member
Council, comprising human rights defenders including
women and youth, is currently engaging in
consultations with Government officials, civil society
and the international community while they prepare

5

S/PV.6707

their start-up. UNSMIL will be providing technical
assistance in response to their request.
My Deputy, as Humanitarian Coordinator, and the
Libyan Humanitarian Relief Agency continue to
discuss with representatives of the Tawergha
community displaced in Benghazi and representatives
of the local council ways to address ongoing
humanitarian needs, as well as the possibilities of
promoting a durable solution to this issue.
Approximately one half of the remaining internally
displaced persons in the country are Tawerghans who,
as previously reported, remain unable to return to their
hometown.
On 30 and 31 January, United Nations, European
Union and World Bank representatives will participate
with Libyan ministers, officials and civil society in a
workshop aimed at aligning assistance from the
international community with the Government’s urgent
priorities. The Government has decided that this should
focus on seven Government priorities outside the
security sector, namely, civil society and media,
elections, public administration, public financial
management, social service delivery, strategic
communications and transitional justice. We expect
that the workshop will determine whether the
Government wishes to proceed with assessments of
needs in those areas, and its future framework for
coordination of international assistance.
Following the Government’s identification of its
priorities, and the ministries’ efforts to identify their
objectives and targets for a national transitional plan,
the United Nations has been assisting the Deputy Prime
Minister’s Office and the Ministry of Planning
regarding coordination within the Government and
with respect to international assistance. That has
included meetings between United Nations country
team members and ministries to link agencies with
their respective counterparts, so that United Nations
recovery and development activities are in line with
their priorities.
I am very pleased to inform members of the
Council that, on 10 January, the status of mission
agreement was signed by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation, Mr. Ashur Saad
Bin Khayyal, and myself. The signature of the
agreement in such a short period of time since the
establishment of the Mission in mid-September and the
formation of the interim Government in late November

6

is a reflection of the excellent relationship already
established. Meanwhile, we have consulted Libyan
authorities regarding the role of UNSMIL beyond its
current mandate, and are finalizing the integrated
mission planning process, which will be reflected in
the Secretary-General’s recommendations in the report
to be submitted to the Council by the end of February.
I think that it is not hard to understand the
contexts of the difficulties facing Libya’s interim
authorities, which have been manifested in recent days.
They do indeed require determined political
management by transitional leaders, who must be given
the space to address their internal priorities, rather than
the longer-term interests of external actors. UNSMIL
remains focused on supporting them in those key
challenges, and that will be reflected in the proposals
that I look forward to discussing with the Council on
the basis of the Secretary-General’s recommendations
in March.
The President: I thank Mr. Martin for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Pillay.
Ms. Pillay: I thank the Council for the invitation
to brief it on human rights developments in Libya. I
welcome the ongoing attention given by the Council to
this fragile country situation.
Through their courage and resilience, the Libyan
people have emerged from 42 years of systematic
human rights violations. In the weeks that followed the
declaration of liberation, the challenge before them has
been to create the conditions necessary for achieving
long-term stability and security and to ensure respect
for the rule of law and human rights. In that regard, the
development and implementation of inclusive,
transparent and victim-centred transitional justice
policies is essential.
Importantly, the interim authorities have
repeatedly expressed their commitment to human rights
and have taken some encouraging steps. In November
2011, Interim Prime Minister Abdurrahim El-keib told
the media that his Government would “build a nation
that respects human rights and does not accept the
abuse of human rights”. He noted that they need time
to put that into practice. As Mr. Martin said, in
December the National Council for Public Liberties
and Human Rights was established.

12-21455

S/PV.6707

In addition, the authorities have begun
undertaking the arduous task of legal reform and the
adoption of new legislation. Of relevance in that regard
is the adoption of a law on transitional justice, as yet to
be made public, on which the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) provided extensive comments through our
staff in the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL). I commend the Libyan authorities for their
sense of urgency in addressing pressing issues by
means of strengthening the legal framework. Before
new laws are enacted, care needs to be exercised to
ensure their compliance with international human
rights standards and to undertake wide consultation on
their provisions with all relevant actors and
stakeholders.
At the same time, the human rights situation
remains of concern and requires increased vigilance by,
and sustained assistance from, the international
community. Undoubtedly, immense challenges lie
ahead. The interim Government still does not exercise
effective control over the revolutionary brigades, and
that has human rights repercussions in a number of
areas. Light and heavy weaponry in the hands of such
brigades pose a threat to public security and the
protection of the human rights of the population.
A related area that I am extremely concerned
about is the conditions of detention and treatment of
detainees held by various revolutionary brigades. The
International Committee of the Red Cross visited more
than 8,500 detainees, in approximately 60 places of
detention, between March and December 2011. The
majority of the detainees are accused of being
Al-Qadhafi loyalists and include a large number of
sub-Saharan African nationals. The lack of oversight
by the central authorities creates an environment
conducive to torture and ill-treatment. My staff have
received alarming reports that that is happening in the
places of detention that they have visited.
It is therefore urgent that all detention centres be
brought under the control of the Ministry of Justice and
the General Prosecutor’s Office. Moreover, a structure
and process for the judicial screening of detainees
should be put in place immediately so that those
detainees held without any legal basis can be released,
while others receive a fair trial.
The interim Government has made some effort to
address the existing legal vacuum. For example, on

12-21455

29 November 2011, the Minister of the Interior issued
a decision stipulating which authorities have
jurisdiction to arrest, detain and investigate. In
addition, in December, the Minister of Justice reported
that the judicial police had assumed control over six
detention facilities. However, detainees continue to be
held in unacceptable circumstances outside any legal
framework or the protection of the State.
The situation of persons subjected to internal
forced and involuntary displacement also remains an
area of concern. The United Nations estimates that, as
of January, 60 per cent of Libyans have been able to
return to their homes in the towns of Bani Walid and
Sirte since the end of the fighting. However, several
other groups are unable to return home for fear of
reprisals. For example, some 35,000 residents of
Tawergha who are accused by residents of the nearby
town of Misrata of involvement in serious crimes are
housed in camps or other accommodation across the
country. Many of the men are held by revolutionary
brigades in detention, where many have reported being
subject to torture.
Let us not forget the situation of women in Libya.
Despite some gains for women’s rights in previous
years, inequality and discrimination in many areas of
women’s life persist in law and practice. Diverse views
exist within Libyan society as to the status of women
and their role in society. In the light of the recent
decision of the National Transitional Council not to
stipulate a minimum percentage for the representation
of women in the National Congress, I would like to
emphasize that facilitating their stronger representation
in public life will be an essential step towards ensuring
that the revolution brings meaningful achievements for
women and girls across the country.
In addition to addressing ongoing human rights
concerns, Libyans are faced with the enormous
challenge of addressing past abuses. Those include
violations committed during the former regime, as well
as violations of international human rights and
international humanitarian law committed during the
conflict, as documented in the first report of the
international commission of inquiry on Libya,
mandated by the Human Rights Council (see
A/HRC/17/44).
We must not forget that the Libyan people rose up
in order to remove a tyrannical ruler whose regime
committed atrocious human rights violations against its

7

S/PV.6707

people. Torture, unlawful killings and enforced
disappearance were widely practised. The families of
the disappeared, including over 1,200 prisoners
allegedly killed in the 1996 Abu Salim prison
massacre, continue to wait for the truth and for justice
to be done. Acts amounting to the mere exercise of
freedom of expression and association frequently
resulted in the death penalty, including after unfair
trials before the People’s Court and, later, the State
Security Court.
I commend the Libyan authorities’ stated
commitment to transitional justice processes and
mechanisms, as they would enable Libya to deal with
such abuses. We stand ready to provide assistance.
Those processes should lead to the legislative and
institutional reforms, including within the security
sector, required to ensure justice, accountability and
reparations
for
victims
and
guarantees
of
non-repetition, in compliance with international human
rights standards. Moreover, international law requires
the prosecution of individuals who may be criminally
responsible for international crimes.
Furthermore, there remain outstanding questions
regarding possible civilian deaths resulting from NATO
operations. The commission of inquiry is currently
investigating such allegations. Any findings that it
reaches will be important in shedding light on the
extent to which NATO forces took all feasible
measures to protect civilians in all their military
operations. Information so far indicates that NATO
made efforts to keep civilian casualties to a minimum,
but where civilians have been killed and injured, the
Alliance should disclose information about all such
events and the remedial actions undertaken.

Following the publication of that second report,
the focus should be on the implementation of all
recommendations issued by the commission. With the
support of my Office, the Human Rights Section within
UNSMIL, as mandated by the Council, will play an
important role in that regard.
In addition to providing Secretariat support to the
commission, in October, I sent two senior OHCHR
staff members to Tripoli, Benghazi and Misrata on a
one-week mission to assess needs and to assist in
setting the priorities of the human rights component
within UNSMIL. Particular attention was given to the
issues of transitional justice, detention, women’s rights,
minorities, migrants, racism and xenophobia in their
discussions with Government representatives and
emerging civil society actors. With the establishment
of the Human Rights Section within UNSMIL, headed
by my representative, I deployed OHCHR staff
members on a temporary basis to bolster capacity. I
have initiated a consultancy to strengthen civil society
capacity in monitoring and advocating for human
rights protection.
Allow me to conclude by stressing the following
points. First, urgent steps need to be taken to put an
end to current abuses, particularly those occurring in
detention.
Secondly, I welcome the priority attention given
by the authorities to transitional justice processes and
mechanisms, and encourage them to expeditiously
make their commitment to transitional justice a reality.
The processes and mechanisms must address abuses
committed both by the former regime and by all actors
during the conflict, and must be established after an
informed national consultation.

Current investigations by the commission also
seek to deepen initial findings into the question of
sexual violence, in particular, to ascertain the extent
and whether cases were linked to incitement by the
command of either side. I call upon all sides, including
NATO, to cooperate fully with the commission of
inquiry in the current final phase of their investigations
into those and other issues.

Thirdly, in the major undertakings of the coming
weeks and months, the authorities should use civil
society activists and organizations, including women’s
and youth groups, as a key resource in addressing a
range of social and political challenges. Thorough
consultations with civil society groups will be critical
in developing lasting solutions to today’s challenges.

In that phase of the commission’s investigations,
members of the Secretariat and the commissioners are
currently in Libya to conduct the last of three missions.
On 9 March, the commissioners will discuss the
findings of their final report with members of the
Human Rights Council.

Finally, I would like to reiterate my Office’s
commitment to continuing to support the Libyan
people in realizing their rights. Working together,
UNSMIL, the Human Rights Section and OHCHR
headquarters are ready to respond to requests for
technical assistance, for example, in the area of legal
and institutional reform; to help in consultation

8

12-21455

S/PV.6707

processes; to build capacities, including those of key
State institutions, such as the police, the judiciary and
penitentiary institutions; and to monitor and report on
human rights developments.
Ultimately, the task of the Libyan people is to
forge their own future on a firm basis of respect for the
rule of law and international human rights standards.
The President: I thank Ms. Pillay for her
briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Libya.
Mr. Shalgham (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to thank you, Sir, for convening this
meeting so that we can follow the developing situation
in Libya. I would like to welcome Mr. Ian Martin and
to thank him for his efforts in Libya. I can say that he
has been able to build a strong relationship with the
parties concerned. Every time he visits Libya, I meet
and speak with him. I believe that his approach will
produce optimal results. I would also like to thank
Ms. Pillay for her presence here and for her efforts to
assess the situation in Libya.
All Council members are aware of what happened
in Libya. We experienced an atrocious war, in which
acts were committed that run counter to the nature of
Libyan society and our Arabic and Islamic culture and
precepts. Massacres and rapes were carried out on the
orders of Muammar Al-Qadhafi. In one family, the
father, grandfather and daughter were raped on
Al-Qadhafi’s orders. In Zuwara, young girls, aged 14
and 15, were raped, their bloodied and naked bodies
thrown into the streets. That was truly a tragedy.
The situation is not bright. There are
complications and problems. There is an interim
Government and a National Transitional Council
(NTC). There is power without legitimacy and
legitimacy without power. There are armed young
people who need structure and leadership. There are
detention centres that we are unaware of, and not
subject to, State control. We do not accept and
condemn the use of such detention centres. However,
the key point is that we will not accept mistakes, nor
will we attempt to hide them. Errors have been made
and there have been transgressions and complications,
but we do not condone or accept them. We will make
changes.

12-21455

There is an electoral law, on which Mr. Abdel
Jalil has said that 14,000 comments had been made. I
have a number of comments myself and I have shared
them with Mr. Jalil. The question of exclusion has been
completely rejected. We have simply said that those
whose hands have been stained with Libyan blood and
those who have stolen money from the Libyan people
will face justice. As an Ambassador and Minister under
Al-Qadhafi, I will be the first to subject myself to any
such judicial proceeding.
We have an interim justice law, which is not yet
in full force. There are approximately 8,000 prisoners
being held in Tripoli. We have spoken to our brothers
there and have said that all individuals who did not
commit a crime or who did not participate in any
massacres can obtain their passports without delay, but
be placed under surveillance.
The 17 February revolution was launched in
order to protect laws and human rights. In Benghazi,
the revolution was sparked by the Abu Salim prison
massacre. It was a revolution for justice and human
rights. Ms. Pillay and Mr. Martin did not distinguish
between the Tuaregs from near Misrata and those from
Algeria; the two groups are quite often confused. The
Tuaregs are Libyan citizens who were not affected, but
Al-Qadhafi did call on the Tuaregs of Mali and Niger
to serve him. We requested that the latter return to their
homes. The Libyan Tuaregs, however, are respected
people and will remain at home in Libya. The Tuaregs,
who originated from black Africa, remained near
Misrata following the abolition of slavery. They were
not targeted because they were black, but because they
supported Al-Qadhafi and took part in rape and other
crimes in Misrata. I attempted to bring about
reconciliation, but ran out of time. We have asked the
religious leaders to intervene for the purposes of
reconciliation in Benghazi and Tripoli, and hope that a
solution will be found in the near future.
In terms of administrative issues in Libya, I
personally believe that we have been slightly off the
mark. The country was not divided into governorships
or even into states, which creates complications in
terms of organizing elections. There is some confusion
in that regard. I spoke with Mr. Martin the day before
yesterday and told him that it was possible for him and
his team to look into those issues and into
administrative preparations in Libya.

9

S/PV.6707

Armed combatants must not be forgotten. They
are the ones who launched the revolution. They are the
ones who made the sacrifice. Either we establish a
consultative council for them, or some of them can
become members of the National Transitional Council.
Some are doctors, university professors and lawyers.
We cannot exclude or marginalize them. That would be
unthinkable. We cannot manage Libya with a single
group of people who have lived outside our country for
more than 30 years and who are unfamiliar with it. We
have said as much in all frankness to our Libyan
brothers.
In terms of reconciliation, that is an extremely
important issue. The role of reconciliation can be
assumed by religious leaders, elders and experts,
following the examples set by South Africa or the
Kingdom of Morocco. Reconciliation is extremely
important. We must reject any exclusionist policy in
that process.
Turning to the question of women, statistics show
that women account for more than 53 per cent of
Libya’s population. A reference was made earlier to the
10 per cent rate of political participation by women. I
believe that those quotas have been eliminated. In the
African Union, we have a gender-based decision that
substantially increases the quota for women’s
legislative and political participation to 50 per cent. We
have therefore done away with that 10 per cent quota.
If we want to build a modern society, we cannot
leave women out of it, nor can we disregard their role.
That is not part of Islamic law. Islam does not leave
women out or discriminate against them. Progress
cannot be achieved through discrimination. We need at
least 30 per cent representation of women, but if we
deny the role of women, then we will not see
development. In Egypt, in Libya and in Tunisia,
women say that they will not vote for someone who
does not hear their voice. Vote and voice are actually
the same word in Arabic: “saut”. So we have to address
this issue of women, and we must do so courageously
and loudly.
Progress and freedom cannot begin by looking
backwards. There was a religious movement in Europe
after the Second World War. After such developments,
people look to religion and values. That is positive.
What we are seeing here are the basic principles and
values of Islam — tolerance, co-existence, forgiveness.
But Islam does not mean slavery, nor does it mean

10

mutilation or stoning as punishment. We want the
values and precepts of Islam. The Koran stipulates
tolerance, forgiveness, kindness towards the family and
orphans, and punishment for those who commit murder
or who deprive others of their lives or prosperity.
Those are the values that we need, not the rhetoric of
vengeance.
In Bani Walid, for example, there were several
incidents. There is, of course, the whole background
with pro- and anti-Qadhafi forces. Some members of
my delegation are from Bani Walid, and yes, after 42
years of a closed society and of repression and spilled
blood, there were certain internal incidents.
In general terms, there is one overall positive
aspect, which is the great freedom that is felt in Libya
today, thanks to the new openness and the process of
discussion. Democracy makes it possible to manage
and handle differences in opinion. Dictatorship
imposes agreement. This process of managing
differences is something new for us. From its very
beginnings, Libya has never had political parties or
unions, not even under the king. Only for one year,
when it was a British protectorate, did we have
political parties. Things take time. Naturally, we have
problems. However, freedom, democracy and openness
are in full bloom, and the Libyan people yearn for
progress.
We are a nation of only 7 million. We have
important resources, including human ones. More than
20,000 Libyans have studied in American universities.
More than 90 per cent of Libyan women are educated,
as are 95 per cent of the men. We also have important
natural resources at all levels.
As to the NATO victims, there were four
incidents. In Brega, NATO bombarded revolutionary
tanks. The commander of the forces told me at the time
that the revolutionaries had been conducting an
unprogrammed manoeuvre and had thus become victim
of the bombing. After another important incident,
Al-Qadhafi said that NATO had bombed civilians, but
he sent his troops into places such as schools and
hospitals where there were civilians. There was also
another incident, for which NATO apologized. As to
the remainder, one of those responsible had stored
weapons in a private home, and that home was
supposedly bombed by NATO, even though we have
information that it was Al-Qadhafi himself who
bombed the house. This is under investigation.

12-21455

S/PV.6707

I have a memory I would like to share. There
were 1,800 telephone calls between Al-Qadhafi and
Mr. Al-Mahmoudi, the Prime Minister at the time, and
Mr. Al-Mahmoudi asked the head of the Al Khadra
Hospital to put the bodies of Al-Qadhafi’s victims in
locations that had been bombed by NATO. The head of
the hospital responded by saying that the victims’
families were refusing to do that. There was a
conversation between a father and his son, and the
father was saying that his son had been wounded by
NATO when the mother’s voice was heard from behind
saying that that was a lie, and that her son had been
injured in a car crash. I repeat, there were 1,800
conversations, which we will transcribe and send the
Council a copy. People say that they have opened
empty graves and that there were no more bodies to put
in them.
On 25 February I said that by March, if NATO
did not intervene, Benghazi would become the largest
mass grave in the world. Al-Qadhafi had sent a
60-kilometre-long military column to destroy
Benghazi. I hope that the accusations against NATO
will not be used as an excuse to protect other tyrants. I
hope that does not happen.
We all know history. We all know how Poland
and France were liberated from Nazism, and how
Kuwait rid itself of Saddam Hussein. One of the
physicians who was very close to Muammar
Al-Qadhafi told me that NATO was so precise that if
they wanted to cut off one ear they could leave the
other one intact.
As to the list of names, the Palestinian Centre for
Human Rights, the Arab Association for Human Rights
and the Public International Law Group came to see us
in Libya. We opened the doors of prisons and hospitals
to them and they undertook investigations, including of
NATO activities.
Two hours ago, I received a message from Tripoli
concerning civilian victims of NATO. We have already
established a commission to consolidate information
and data from the National Transitional Council, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Ministers of Defence,
Justice and the Interior, and the Human Rights Council,
as Ms. Pillay has stated, so that information can be
gathered from sites that were targeted by NATO.
Secondly, there will be consultations with
Ambassador Dirk Brengelmann, NATO Assistant
Secretary General, who is currently in Libya and has
begun talks with the Minister for Foreign Affairs today.

12-21455

The new Libya is prepared to cooperate with any
international investigating body under the auspices of
the United Nations. We intend to establish a mechanism
to indemnify victims with financial and moral support
once we have obtained the results of the investigations.
All investigation results will be made public.
One of my assistants showed me orders to burn
me and all the members of my family in my village.
One of my nephews was found dead. One of my
cousins was slain; another saw all his family members
gunned down. Had it not been for the protection of the
revolutionaries from the north and for NATO, my
entire tribe would have been killed. More than 500,000
people would have died in Benghazi. In one hour, 95
people were killed in Benghazi by Al-Qadhafi forces.
Two MiG planes bombed Benghazi, and that was not
the act of NATO forces. In one month, Misrata, Brega,
Ajdabiya, Zawiya, Fashloom and other towns were
destroyed. Graves were opened and robbed. NATO did
not do that.
With respect to the rhetoric about Christians and
Crusaders within the NATO forces, there were people
from Qatar, Jordan and the United Arab Emirates who
fought together with us. They were not part of a
crusade; that was slander promoted by Al-Qadhafi.
Al-Qadhafi referred to an older woman who was
supposedly the mother of Shalgham — myself — and
was reported to have said that she did not wish to
recognize him any more. But my mother died more
than 10 years ago. It was a lie.
I have spoken frankly. We are not hiding the
truth. We have been telling the good and the bad. Once
again, on behalf of the Libyan people, I would like to
thank the Council for its courage in coming to the
salvation of Libya. I thank all countries that sent planes
and soldiers to assist and save Libya. King Idris and
Al-Qadhafi sold oil to Europe and to America, and we
will do so too. There is not one single foreign soldier
on Libyan territory, so it is not worthwhile exploring
that issue further.
On behalf of the Libyan people, I would like to
thank the Council for its great, historic decision to save
my homeland.
The President: There are no further names
inscribed on my list. I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

11
