General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

138

-------------

no one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatmcnt or punishment,
Recalling also the Declaration on the Protection of
All Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,
unanimously adopted by its resolution 3452 (XXX) of
9 Deccmbcr 1975, as wcll as its resolution 31/85 of
13 December 1976,
Recognizing the necessity far further international
action in the form of a convention far thc elimination
of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishmcnt,
Recognizing also the importance of action by Member
States to develop and utilize their national machinery
to climinate torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading trcatment or punishment,
l. Calls upon all Membcr States to reinforce their
support of the Declaration on the Protcction of All
Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
by making unilateral declarations against torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, along the lines of the text which is annexed to
the present resolution, and depositing them with the
Secretary-Gcneral;
2. Urges all Member States to give maximum publicity to their unilateral dcclarations against torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading trcatment or punishment;
3. Requests the Secretary-Gcneral to inform the
General Assembly, in annual reports. of such unilateral
declarations against torture and other cruel, inhuman
or dcgrading treatment or punishment as may be deposited by Member Statcs.
98th plenary meetini
8 December 1977
ANNEX
Model unilateral declaration against torture aud other
cruel, inhuman or degradin~~ treat1nent or punishment

The Government of ........ hereby declares its intention:
(a) To comply with the Declaration on the Protection of
Ali Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (General
Assembly resolution 3452 (XXX), annex);

( b) To implement, through legislation and other effectivc
measures, the provisions of the said Declaration.

32/65.

Torture of political prisoners and detainees in southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, 30 in particular its articlc 5,
Bearing in mind the Declaration on the Protection of
All Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, contained in the annex to its resolution 3452
(XXX) of 9 Deccmber 1975,
30Resolution 217 A (III).

Taking note of the report of the Ad Hoc Working
Group of Experts on Southern Africa, 31 established pursuant to resolution 2 (XXIII) of thc Commission on
Human Rights, conccrning thc dcaths of dctainees and
policc brutality in South Africa sincc the Sowcto mas~acre of 16 Junc 1976,
Grave/y concerned about the reports regarding thc
torture of political prisoncrs and thc deaths of a number of dctainccs and about the growing wavc of acts
of reprcssion against individuals, organizatinns and information media in South Africa,
Deeply shocked by thc cowardly and dastardly murder in detcntion of Stephen Biko,
1. Condemns the South African régime far its continuing violation of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and thc Dcclaration on thc Protection of Ali
Persons from Bcing Sl!lbjected to Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment;
2. Reiterates its deep aversion to the practice
whcrcby the South African régime persistently subjects
ali opponcnts of apartheid to summary banning, detention, imprisonment and somctimes murder;
3. Stronily condemns the practice of subjecting
political detainccs and other victims of apartheid in
South Africa to torture and other cruel, inhuman or
dcgrading trcatment or punishment;
4. Strongly condemns, in particular, the arbitrary
arrest, detention and torture which led to the murder
of Stcphen Biko by agents of the racist minority régime
of South Africa;
5. Demands that thc minority apartheid régime of
South Africa:
(a)
Releas e all política! prisoncrs without precondition;
( b) Lift ali banning and housc arrcst orders imposed on opponents of apartheid;
(e) Put an immediate cnd to the indiscriminate use
of ~iolencc against peaceful demonstrators against apartheid and to thc persistcnt rccourse to torture of política!
detainces;
6. ExpressC's its conviction that the martyrdom of
Stephcn Biko and ali othcr nationalists murdercd in
~outh A~rican J?risons and_ thc ideals for which they
fought w11l con~muc to ennch thc faith of the peoplcs
of southcrn Afnca and other parts of the world in thcir
struggle against apartheid and for racial cquality and
the dignity of thc human person.
98th plenary meeting
8 Deccmber 1977
32/66.

Status of the lnternational Covenant on
Et•onomic, Social and Cultural Rights the
International Covenant on Civil ancl' Politin1l Rii!hts and the Optional Protocol
to the lnternational Covenant on Civil
ami Political Rights

The General Assembly,
Convinced that thc International Covenants on
Human Rights~ 2 constitutc the first all-embracing and
:n A/32/226, annex.
3 2 Resolution 2200 (XXI), annex.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Jegally binding international treaties in the field of
human rights,
Recalling its resolution 31/86 of 13 December 1976
and in particular the importance of the entry in_to force
of the International Covenants on Human R1ghts as
a major step in the international efforts to promote and
encourage rcspect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms for ali, thereby contributing greatly to the
co-operation of States in the attainment. of the ~urposes
and principies of the Charter of the Umted Nat10ns,
Recalling in this respect its resolutions 2200 A (XXI)
of 16 December 1966 and 3270 (XXIX) of 10 December 1974,
Noting with appreciation that following its appeal
severa! Member States have acceded to the International Covenants on Human Rights,
Having noted the report of the Secretary-General on
the status of the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol
to the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, 33
Bearing in mind the important responsibilities of the
Economic and Social Council in relation to the international Covenants on Human Rights.
Recognizing the important role of the Human Rights
Committee in the implementation of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and thc Optional
Protocol thereto,
1. Recognizes the importance of the International
Covenants on Human Rights as a major step in the
international efforts to promote universal respect for and
observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
2. Notes with appreciation the report of the Human
Rights Committee on its first and second sessions34
and expresses satisfaction at the serious manner in
which the Committee is undertaking its functions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to States parties to
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
which have extended their co-operation to the Human
Rights Committee;
4. Invites again all States which have not yet done
so to become parties to the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights as well
as to consider the possibilities of acceding to the Optional Protocol thereto;
5. Appreciates that the Human Rights Committee
strives for uniform standards in the implementation of
the provisions of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights and of the Optional Protocol
thereto;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the
Human Rights Committee informed of the activities of
the Commission on Human Rights, the Sub-Commission
on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of
Minorities and the Committee on the Elimination of
Racial Discrimination;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-third session a report
33 A/32/ 188.

34 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 44 (A/32144 and Corr.1).

139

on the status of the International Covcnant on Economic Social and Cultural Rights, thc International
Coven°ant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional
Protocol to thc International Covenant on Civil and
Política! Rights;
8. Recalls that the lnternational Covenant on Civil
and Political Riohts envisagcs that the Secretary-General
shall provide the necessary staff and facilities for the
effective performance of the Human Rights Committee.
98th plenary meeting
8 December 1977
32/67.

Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugces on the activities of
his Office 3 " and having heard bis statement, 3 u
Recalling its resolution 31 /35 of 30 November 1976
and taking into account the additional responsibilities
assumcd by the High Commissioner in different parts
of the world for the benefit of an increasing number of
refugees and displaced persons.
Recognizing the eminently humanitarian character
of the various activities of the High Commissioner and
the importance of permanent solutions being promoted
by bis Officc, including voluntary repatriation, local
integration or resettlement in othcr countries,
Concerned by infringements of the basic human
rights of refugees and the urgent need on the part of
Governments to ensurc their effective and continued
protection,
Recognizing the need for further accessions to and
effective implementation by Governments of the relevant
international instruments, including in particular the
1951 Convention relating to thc Status of Refugeesª 7
and the 1967 Protocol relating to the Status of Refugces, ª8
Commending the increasing number of Governments
contributing to the High Commissioner's programmes
and emphasizing the need for a wider sharing of the
financia! burden to provide the vital humanitarian assistance required by rcfugees and displaced persons,
1. t;xpresses its deep satisf action at the effi.cient
manner in which the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and his staff continue to accomplish
their humanitarian tasks;
2. Requests the High Commissioner to continue to
provide humanitarian assistance to refugees and displaced persons of eoncern to his Office, including those
in urgent need of help in Africa. Asia and Latin
America;
3. Further requests Unitcd Nations agencies and
programmes to render the fullest possible support to the
High Commissioner's humanitarian tasks;
4. Urges Governments to extend the necessary cooperation to thc High Commissioner in promoting permanent and speedy solutions to the problems facing
35 /bid., Supplement No. 12 (A/32/12 and Corr.1) and
Supplement No. 12A (A/32/12/Add.l).
36 /bid., Thirty-second Session, Third Committa, 45th meeting, paras. 1-9; and ibid., Tlzird Committee, Sessional Fascicle,
corrigendum.
:n United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545, p. 150.
:18 /bid., vol. 606, No. 8791, p. 267.
