Requests the Secretary-General to establish and
maintain a list of persons qualified to assist
United Nations missions in the functions of observation and supervision, such persons to be
called to service in response to a specific resolution by a competent organ of the United Nations;
such list shall be known as the United Nations
Panel of Field Observers and shall be established
and maintained with due regard to the observations contained in the report of the Special Committee and based upon the principle of equitable
geographical distribution.

ment to limit the individual exercise of those
rights in the control of atomic energy to the extent
required, in the light of the foregoing considerations, for the promotion of world security and
peace, and recommends that all nations agree to
exercise such rights jointly.

254th plenary meeting,
23 November 1949.

300 (IV). Regulation. and reduction
of conventional armaments
armed forces

252nd plenary meeting,
22 November 1949.

and

The General Assembly,

298 (IV). Report of the Security
Council

Recalling its resolution 192 (IIl) 30 of 19 November 1948, and in particular its recommenda-

The General, Assembly
report26

Takes note of the
of the Security
Council covering the period from 16 July 1948 to
15 July 1949.
252nd plenary meeting,
22 November 1949.

299 (IV). International Control of
Atomic Energy

tion that the Commission for Conventional Armaments, in carrying out its plan of work, devote its
first attention to the formulation of proposals for
the receipt, checking and publication, by an international organ of control within the framework
of the Security Council, of full information to be
supplied by Member States with regard to their
effectives and their conventional armaments,

Having examined the records of the discussions
in the Security Council and in the Commission
for Conventional Armaments regarding the implementation of the above-mentioned recommendation,

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions I (IJi 7 of 24 January
1946, 41 (1) 28 of 14 December 1946 and 191
(III) 29 of 4 November 1948,
Aware that atomic energy, if used for peace,

will lead to the increase of human welfare, but if
used for war may bring about the destruction of
civilization,

Anxious to free humanity from the dangers
which will continue to exist as long as States
retain under their individual control the development and operation of atomic energy facilities,

I. .-lpprovcs the proposals:lll• formulated lJy the
Commission for Conventional Armaments for the
submission by Member States of full iuformation
on their conventional armaments and armed forces
and the verification thereof, as constituting the
necessary basis for the implementation of the
abovr·-mentioned recommendation;
2. Considers that the early submission uf this
information would c011,titute an essential step
towards a substantial reduction of conventional
ani1amcnts and armed forces and that, on the
uth('r hand, nu agreement is likely to he reached
on this matter so long as each State lack;; exact
and authenticated information concerning the conventional armaments and armed forces of other
States;

Convinced that an international co-operative
effort can avoid these dangers and can hasten the
development of the peaceful uses of atomic energy
for the benefit of all peoples,
1. Urges all nations to join in such a co-operative development and use of atomic energy for
peaceful ends ;
2. Calls upon Governments to do everything
in their power to make possible, by the acceptance
of effective international control, the effective prohibition and elimination of atomic weapons;

3. Requests the permanent members of the
United Nations Atomic Energy Commission to
continue their consultations, to explore all possible avenues and examine all concrete suggestions with a view to determining whether they
might lead to an agreement securing the basic
objectives of the General Assembly in this question, and to keep the Atomic Energy Commission
and the General Assembly informed of their
progress;

3. Noles that unanimity among the permanent
members of the Security Council, which is essential for the implementation of the above-mentioned proposals, has not yet b<.'en achieved ;
4. Rcrommcnds therefore that the Security
Council, despite the lack uf unanimity among its
permanent members on this essential feature of
its work, continue its study of the regulation and
reduction of conventional armaments and armed
forces through the agency of the Commission for
Conventional Armaments in accordance with its
plan uf work, in order to make such progress as
ma1· he possible;
S. Calls upon all members of the Security
Council to co-operate to this end.

4. Recommends that all nations, in tl1e use of
their rights of sovereignty, join in mutual agree-

:!oStlz ('frnary mcclin,1.
5 nee ember 1 o IV.

26
·
See Official Records of the fourth session of the Grneral Assembly, Supplement No. 2.
27
See Resolutions adopted b1• the General Assscmblv
during thr first part of its first session, page 9.
.
2
~ See Resolutions adopted by the General Assembly

w Sec () ffrcial Records of the third scs.rinn of tl,c C,·neral As.rc111hly, I'art I, Resolutions, page 16.
3
" /1,id., page 17.
0
" " ~ce 0(/irial Naords ,,f f/,c Sa11rih· Council, Third

durmg the second part of its first session, page 65.

Year, Supplement for September 1948, document S:1372.

22
