United Nations

A/RES/63/269

General Assembly

Distr.: General
7 May 2009

Sixty-third session
Agenda item 118

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 7 April 2009
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/63/648/Add.5)]

63/269. Information and communications technology,
disaster recovery and business continuity
for the United Nations: arrangements
for the secondary data centre at Headquarters
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 63/262 of 24 December 2008,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Information
and communications technology, disaster recovery and business continuity for the
United Nations: arrangements for the secondary data centre at Headquarters” 1 and
the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions, 2
0F

1F

1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;1

2.
Reaffirms the need for a global operational framework to enable the
United Nations to respond effectively to emergency situations that may impair
operations of critical elements of its information and communications technology
infrastructure and facilities;
Encourages the Secretary-General to take a unified approach to disaster
3.
recovery and business continuity, utilizing all available infrastructure, in order to
achieve economies of scale and cost efficiencies;
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the United Nations uses
4.
enterprise data centres rather than local data centres as far as possible;
5.
Notes with concern the continued deficiencies in the planning and
management of the project;
6.
Regrets that the proposal of the Secretary-General did not provide the
necessary assurances that its implementation would sufficiently mitigate risks,
including risks related to the physical security of data, during the relocation of the
primary data centre to the North Lawn at Headquarters;
_______________
1
2

08-48693

A/63/743.
A/63/774.

A/RES/63/269

7.
Requests the Secretary-General, when utilizing the services of the
International Computing Centre, to ensure compliance with all regulations and rules
regarding procurement, in order to guarantee the cost-effectiveness of the services
provided by the Centre;
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report
8.
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,2 subject to
the provisions of the present resolution;
9.
Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General, expressed in section IV,
paragraph 7, of its resolution 63/262, to ensure that the leased space is fully utilized
if it is not possible to terminate the lease;
10. Notes with concern that the delays caused by the lack of reliable disaster
recovery and business continuity services for Headquarters may lead to further cost
escalation, including in respect of the capital master plan, and risk to data;
11. Decides that any further proposal for risk mitigation measures to protect
data and the information and communications systems of the Secretariat during the
construction work of the capital master plan, if necessary, shall be reported in the
context of the annual progress report on the capital master plan;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to absorb 5,096,880 United States dollars
within the approved budget of the capital master plan, and decides that 2,031,860
dollars shall be financed from the resources to be approved for the support account
for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010 in
order to pursue the most reliable and cost-effective risk mitigation measures during
the migration of the primary data centre to the North Lawn;
13. Also requests the Secretary-General to carry out a classification of
critical/non-critical systems of the Secretariat and to provide to the General
Assembly an inventory of systems classified according to their degree of criticality
at the time of its consideration of the proposal for a permanent secondary data
centre;
14. Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the level of
protection proposed has been subject to a thorough cost-benefit analysis;
15. Recalls paragraph 12 of section IV of resolution 63/262, and requests the
Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly no later than at the main part
of its sixty-fifth session a unified disaster recovery and business continuity plan,
including a permanent solution for Headquarters.
79th plenary meeting
7 April 2009

2
