S/PV.8397

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8397th meeting

Tuesday, 13 November 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ma Zhaoxu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Cordova Soria
Mr. Toure
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Temenov
Mr. Almunayekh
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Hickey
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-37409 (E)
*1837409*

S/PV.8397

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to participate in today’s meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
Ms. Joséphine Mbela of the Congolese Association for
Access to Justice.
Ms. Mbela will join today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Kinshasa.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Ms. Zerrougui.
Ms. Zerrougui (spoke in French): I thank the
members of the Security Council for this opportunity to
brief them on the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, including the latest developments with
regard to the electoral process under way and the
implementation of the 31 December 2016 agreement.
The scheduled holding of presidential and legislative
elections at the national and provincial levels is fast
approaching, as we are now only nine days away from
the beginning of the official campaign and less than
six weeks away from the scheduled date of elections
on 23 December. It should be noted that, despite
continuing differences, in particular with regard to the
use of voting machines and the reliability of the voter
registry, all stakeholders remain firmly committed to
the electoral process. The main opposition candidates
for the presidential elections agreed on a single
candidate on Sunday in Geneva. After a three-day
conclave facilitated by the Kofi Annan Foundation,
they appointed Martin Fayulu to represent them within
a new coalition called Lamuka, which means “Wake
up!” in Lingala. The coalition announced that a public
2/22

13/11/2018

meeting would be held in Kinshasa in the near future
to introduce the joint opposition candidate, an agreed
programme and the campaign staff.
The choice of Martin Fayulu, however, as the joint
presidential opposition candidate has given rise to
strong opposition among the militant elements of the
Union pour la démocratie et le progrès social (UDPS)
and the Union pour la nation congolaise (UNC). In
response to their challenges, the leaders of the UDPS
and the UNC announced their parties’ withdrawal
from the agreement signed the day before. Concerning
the Front commun pour le Congo, it has just made
public the team that will support the campaign of its
candidate — Emmanuel Ramazani Shadary — whose
programme should be unveiled on 15 November.
At the same time, preparations for the holding of
elections continue.
On 31 October, President Joseph Kabila Kabange
chaired an inter-institutional meeting to assess
the electoral process, in which the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), as a partner
organization, was invited to participate. The Government
reported that it had disbursed $322.2 million to the
Independent National Electoral Commission on
23 October, with the latter announcing that it had been
provided the means for ground and air transport and
was ready to distribute election materials throughout
the country in time for the 23 December elections. In
addition, as announced by the Independent National
Electoral Commission, the training of approximately
600,000 election workers is under way so as to ensure
the smooth operation of 75,563 polling stations at more
than 23,000 different sites.
Although the accreditation process for witnesses,
observers and journalists has begun, Congolese civilsociety organizations have announced their intention to
deploy thousands of observers on the ground so as to
ensure the transparency and credibility of the process.
The Southern African Development Community
(SADC) also expressed its desire to deploy an electoral
observation mission. That commitment at the regional
level was reinforced by two high-level visits last week
in Kinshasa: one by the SADC Electoral Advisory
Council and one by the African Union Commissioner
for Peace and Security.
In order to contribute to the holding of peaceful
elections, a platform made up of various religious
18-37409

13/11/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

leaders — through the Commission for Integrity and
Electoral Mediation — has just organized a forum
for peace and reconciliation with the aim of bringing
participants together to sign an act of commitment
for the holding of peaceful, credible and transparent
elections. Similarly, the Conférence épiscopale
nationale du Congo (CENCO) will hold its fifty-seventh
plenary assembly from 20 to 22 November in Kinshasa,
also in order to evaluate the electoral process.
It is worth noting that, in a recent interview with
international press, the Vice-President of CENCO
and new Archbishop of Kinshasa, Monsignor Fridolin
Ambongo Besungu, emphasized the need to reach
consensus with regard to the voting machines so that
that element does not constitute an obstacle to the
holding of elections.
In spite of this dynamic that is setting the course
for the elections on 23 December, the opposition is
concerned about the narrowing of the political space,
including the impossibility of holding meetings
throughout the country and a lack of equitable access
to public media. The opposition also condemns what
it regards as the alleged use of State resources for the
benefit of the candidate of the Front commun pour
le Congo.
There is still much progress to be made to create
an environment conducive to credible elections. It is
precisely for that reason that I am sparing no effort
in my good offices. I have initiated meetings with
all the candidates for the presidential election and, in
each of my encounters, I have insisted on the need to
demonstrate tolerance and a patriotic spirit in order to
reach consensus on their differences so as not to miss
the opportunity to make the 23 December elections a
veritable success.
I am also appealing to the Congolese authorities
to ensure that the freedoms of expression and
demonstration — which are the prerequisites for the
establishment of a democratic debate — are respected.
Elections that are accepted by the broadest possible
majority of Congolese men and women will mark a major
turning point in the history of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo by contributing to the strengthening of
institutions, peacebuilding, democratic gains and the
sustainable development of the country.

S/PV. 8397

(spoke in English)
These long-awaited elections will take place in
a volatile security environment in many parts of the
country. Allow me to highlight several of our biggest
concerns today.
First, I have grown increasingly alarmed over the
situation in Beni in recent months, where we continue
to face major challenges in implementing our mandate.
As I mentioned to the Council during my previous
briefing (see S/PV.8370), civilians, the Forces armées
de la République Démocratique du Congo (FARDC)
and MONUSCO alike are being targeted by the Allied
Democratic Forces and Mayi-Mayi groups. Despite
FARDC efforts and the Mission’s robust patrolling and
ongoing joint operations — the latest of which started
yesterday — the attacks continue and are increasingly
taking place near the centre of the town of Beni.
As members know, we are not only facing
security challenges in Beni, but also supporting a
major Ebola response effort. The recent visit by the
Director-General of the World Health Organization
and the Under-Secretary-General of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations helped to underscore the
commendable results that can be achieved through
coordinated efforts. Teams from the Ministry of Health,
the World Health Organization and other humanitarian
partners are doing a remarkable job, with the support
of MONUSCO.
However, we are still seeing a growing number
of cases in the major population centres of Beni and
Butembo, as well as significant community resistance
to response efforts. Women are disproportionately
affected, representing about 60 per cent of all probable
and confirmed cases, due to a number of factors,
including their roles as caregivers of the diseased.
The Mission will continue its support to Ebola efforts
as a matter of the utmost priority while also taking
into account a gendered response lens. Our teams
on the ground are providing extensive logistical and
protection support to partners and are engaging with
local authorities and communities to encourage their
acceptance of response efforts.
Secondly, there is potential for armed group
interference in elections in specific areas throughout
eastern parts of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo — particularly in Tanganyika, South Kivu and
the Grand and Petit Nord areas of North Kivu. Armed
group violence in those key provinces could affect the

18-374093/22

S/PV.8397

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

secure deployment of electoral material and may prevent
certain parts of the population from voting on election
day, thereby impacting the inclusivity of the process. It
will be especially important for the Government to take
steps in the coming weeks to secure polls, particularly
to ensure the participation of women, who make up
50 per cent of registered voters.
Thirdly, we are also carefully watching the
situation in the Kasais, following the forced return of
Congolese migrants from Angola. Given the pace of
returns, the limited capacity to receive returnees on
the ground and the difficulties they face in returning
home, there is a possibility for ethnic tension to flare up
in certain areas of the Kasais. Despite the remoteness
of the area, in which the Mission has a very limited
footprint, MONUSCO has been providing support to
humanitarian partners and engaging with Congolese
and regional actors to advocate for a more measured
pace of return.
It is in that dynamic context that we move towards
the long-awaited elections in just over one month’s
time. Our collective focus must now be on ensuring the
credibility of the process. It is of paramount importance
that candidates have equal access to political space
during the campaign period and that restrictions
on peaceful demonstrations are lifted consistently
throughout the country.
Further progress in the implementation of
confidence-building measures and the existence of a
level political playing field throughout the campaign
period leading up to 23 December will significantly
enhance the credibility of polls and contribute to postelectoral stability. I will continue to advocate with all
parties in that regard. I count on the members of the
Council to support our efforts and to convey the same
messages in the coming weeks.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ms. Zerrougui for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mbela.
Ms. Mbela (spoke in French): I would first like
to thank the Ambassador of China for inviting me
to address the Security Council on behalf of my
organization, the Congolese Association for Access
to Justice.
I am Joséphine Mbela and I am a human rights
lawyer in charge of advocacy and administration within
the Association. It is a non-governmental and apolitical
4/22

13/11/2018

organization that works to promote and protect human
rights, the primacy of the law and the consolidation of
the rule of law. It provides legal and judicial assistance
to victims of rights violations, particularly before the
United Nations human rights protection mechanisms. I
will focus on three points during my briefing: first, the
political and electoral situation; secondly, the human
rights situation; and, thirdly, the low participation of
women in the electoral process.
First, with regard to the political and electoral
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the political climate remains tense 41 days on the
eve of the elections scheduled by the Independent
National Electoral Commission, due to the failure to
fully implement the Saint-Sylvestre agreement of
31 December 2016, mainly with respect to political
de-escalation measures.
To date, the Association has remained alarmed by
the detention of 51 political prisoners, including the
young Eugène Diomi Ndongala, Jean-Claude Muyambo
and Gérard “Gecoco” Mulumba Kongolo. And we note
that of the 51 political prisoners, 46 have benefited
from the amnesty accorded in 2014, although they
have not yet been released. To that we must add the
28 citizen movement activists, including Carbone Beni
and Gloria Senga.
It is also worth noting that four opposition media
outlets are still closed in Lubumbashi, namely, Radio
Télévision Lubumbashi Jua, Nyota Radio Télévision,
Télévision Mapendo and La Voix du Katanga. Several
leaders were forced into exile, including Moïse
Katumbi, Musanya Mouissy and Oscar Rashidi Akidi.
The electoral process has been marred by strong
political tensions resulting from the Independent
National Electoral Commission imposing the use
of voting machines, even though article 237 ter of
the electoral law bars electronic voting and there are
approximately 10 million voters without fingerprints
on the electoral register.
Secondly, the human rights situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo also remains a cause
for much concern, insofar as it has been punctuated by
insecurity and a growing number of incidents of sexual
violence in the Kasais, the resurgence of massacres of
civilians in Beni, diminishing civil liberties, arbitrary
arrests and detentions accompanied by acts of torture and
mistreatment by security services and law enforcement,
and the use of justice for political purposes. Finally,
18-37409

13/11/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

the senior-most officials responsible for human rights
violations, including the security agents responsible for
the arbitrary arrests and detentions, enjoy impunity.
More concretely, three days ago three activists from
the youth movement Lutte pour le Changement were
arrested in Goma by the security services because they
were peacefully demonstrating at the university. There
are also seven members of the citizen movement Les
Congolais Debout that have been held incommunicado
for two months in the prison of the national intelligence
agency for raising awareness among citizens about
the use of voting machines. Twenty-two members of
the various citizen movements have been arrested for
holding demonstrations to demand that the girls that have
become victims of sexual violence in the Kasais receive
treatment. Finally, 17 other members of the movement
Vigilance Citoyenne were arrested for demonstrating
and encouraging the people towards civic engagement
and the fight against corruption. Those are some cases
of human rights violations for which we call upon the
Government to ensure their release.
Thirdly, I now turn to women’s participation in the
electoral process. Women are the least represented in
political and administrative functions in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Law No. 15/013 of 1 August
2015, on the implementation of women’s rights and
gender equality, has not been upheld, particularly when
drafting the lists of candidates for the political parties
for the various elections that were held, as the electoral
law does not make that obligatory. To be more precise,
while women make up 51 per cent of voters registered
in the electoral roll, they represent only 12 per cent
of the candidates, which is less than the 30 per cent
recommended by the gender parity law.
However, working as a human rights defender is
especially perilous, specifically for a woman like me,
who has chosen to defend equal rights for all, including
the right to live in dignity, especially in a country
plagued by strong tensions such as the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, as well as given my work as
a former member of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO). I am committed to that challenge
despite the risks posed by continuing my fight for the
well-being of the people of all political leanings.
All that notwithstanding, our Association calls
upon the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to implement political de-escalation measures

S/PV. 8397

by releasing all political prisoners and prisoners of
conscience to ensure the opening of a space for the
exercise of public freedoms for all political and social
movements; ensure effective protection of persons
and their property; fight against the impunity of the
senior officials of the security services; guarantee
equal opportunities for all candidates; and promote
women’s leadership in public affairs management by
implementing the gender parity law. We call upon the
Independent National Electoral Commission to quickly
reach consensus with all stakeholders in the electoral
process on the conditions for the use of voting machines
and the fate of voters without fingerprint records.
We call upon MONUSCO to step up its patrols in
the areas affected by the massacres, particularly Beni
and Lubero, in order to prevent recurrent attacks by
elements of the Allied Democratic Forces. We also call
upon MONUSCO to continue to renew its readiness to
provide logistical support to the Independent National
Electoral Commission. We call upon the United Nations
Joint Human Rights Office to continue its monitoring
throughout the process.
Lastly, our Association calls upon the Security
Council to remain galvanized on the issue of the
protection of civilian populations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in general, and Beni in particular;
the implementation of the Saint-Sylvestre agreement
by the Congolese Government; and the fight against
impunity for a successful conclusion of the electoral
process by 23 December.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ms. Mbela for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), Ms. Leila Zerrougui, for her
very informative briefing. On behalf of France, allow
me to reiterate our full support for her commitment at
all levels, as well as that of MONUSCO. I also thank
Ms. Joséphine Mbela for her insightful testimony on
the expectations of the Congolese people with regard to
the elections, especially the key role that women must
be able to play. She can rest assured that her important
messages have been and will continue to be heard.

18-374095/22

S/PV.8397

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

As I had the opportunity to say during the Council’s
visit to the Democratic Republic of Congo, we are at a
crucial moment in the history of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We are all convinced that there is now a
historic opportunity, with the elections on 23 December,
for the first democratic and peaceful transfer of power
in the country. Successful elections — which is to say
free, credible, open and transparent ones, in the context
of a peaceful environment and the results of which are
recognized by all — would undoubtedly give way to
a new chapter in the country’s history. It would pave
the way for stability in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and would contribute significantly to creating
the conditions for its development.
Progress has been made to that end. Electoral
materials are beginning to be distributed throughout
the country, provisional voter rolls have been published
for everyone to review and the Government has once
again begun to contribute to the Independent National
Electoral Commission to enable it to operate fully.
France welcomes the progress.
However, that technical progress will be meaningful
only if all candidates can compete freely in the elections
and if the Congolese people have confidence that their
vote will be fully recorded. Trust is therefore the key
to success. Efforts have been made to reconcile views
on the use of machines for printing ballots and on the
electoral register, and technical questions have been
raised. It is essential that dialogue among all parties
continue to be pursued to respond to them and so that
agreement is reached quickly on the conditions for
preparing for the elections. All Congolese political
actors involved in the elections, whether in organizing
or competing in them, must rise to the challenge and
heed the people’s call for overcoming their differences
and finding the broadest possible consensus.
As the Council has frequently call for, fully and
in good faith implementing the so-called relaxation
measures called for in the Saint-Sylvestre agreement
remains necessary. Through its Commissioner for
Peace and Security, the African Union has called on
all parties
“to ensure calm and arrive at agreement to find
viable solutions to candidate and ballot security,
reach consensual solutions to issues related to the
electoral register and to making the political space
more inclusive, and ensure equitable access to
public media for all actors”.
6/22

13/11/2018

The Saint-Sylvestre agreement provides for the lifting
of the general ban on demonstrations. Although some
political meetings have been held in Kinshasa without
incident, which France welcomes, the lifting is still
awaited. Out in the provinces, we continue to see
frequent instances of political rallies being prohibited,
often on very short notice, with demonstrators being
manhandled and arrested. It is essential that the
lifting of the ban on demonstrations be implemented
throughout the entirety of the territory.
The official campaign begins in 10 days’ time.
During the Security Council’s visit to the Democratic
Republican Congo, the Government undertook to
ensure that all political activities would be free and
unhindered during the time of the visit. For their
part, the opposition leaders whom we met committed
themselves to carrying out those activities in a peaceful
manner. We call on all parties, both Government and
opposition candidates, to honour their commitments for
the good of the Congolese people.
Finally, we respect the choice of the Congolese
authorities to organize elections without external
assistance. We will remain ready to support the holding
of the elections, in particular through MONUSCO,
should the Congolese Government so request. Similarly,
the African Union has also reiterated its readiness to
pool its resources and coordinate its efforts with those
of MONUSCO in order to provide additional support
for organizing elections. I would also like to briefly
address three points that, although not related to the
elections, remain especially important.
First, regarding the situation in the east of the
country, armed group activities, in particular by the
Allied Democratic Forces, continue to jeopardize
civilians, particularly around the town of Beni. We
are aware of the situation in that particular part of the
country. France encourages MONUSCO, specifically
its Intervention Brigade, to ambitiously neutralize
those groups and restore to the civilian populations of
Beni the peace to which they aspire.
Secondly, the Ebola epidemic is raging in that
same region of the country, while the security situation
has significantly complicated the response. France
commends the courageous commitment of Congolese
health services and international partners, including
MONUSCO, in combating the epidemic. We encourage
the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s partners to
respond to the call and fund the regional response
18-37409

13/11/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

plan. Otherwise, the risk of regional spillover is high.
Along those lines, I would refer to the Council’s call in
resolution 2439 (2018) for ensuring access and safety
for humanitarian and medical personnel.
Finally, turning to the humanitarian situation
in the Kasais, the return of thousands of Congolese
people from Angola has significantly complicated the
response to the crisis, in an area already ravaged by
recent tensions. France commends the solidarity shown
by the people of the region who provided assistance to
the returnees, even though most of them are themselves
living in difficult conditions. Also on this point, the
country’s partners must rise to the challenge and
provide the necessary assistance to help the people
concerned. On all of those points, you, Mr. President,
may be assured of France’s steadfast commitment.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): Let me
thank Special Representative Zerrougui and Ms. Mbela
for their briefings and their insights.
I want to direct my comments today to my
colleagues, but above all to the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo as they approach elections
with great consequences for their future. At an Arria
Formula meeting on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo last February, the Congolese Foreign Minister
made a comment that “you have to visit the Congo to
really understand the situation there”. I have visited the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, met with its leaders
and listened to its people. I spoke with mothers, fathers
and children, in and out of camps. Their message was
heartfelt and unmistakable: they want a better life. And
they want a voice in their own futures. The people of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo want what every
human being wants — to be safe and free to raise their
children and live their best lives.
There are voices today telling the Congolese that
democracy is not the way to achieve their hopes for
themselves and for their families. They want them to
believe that representative Government is too risky and
too inefficient. They are asking them to continue to
put their trust in Government that is not accountable to
them. Those voices are wrong.
Democracy can be messy, and it can be unpredictable.
But democracy is a process, and it is not dependent
on a single event or decision. It is the result of years,
decades — sometimes centuries — of actions and
decisions. Democracy is the hard work of allowing
the people to fairly and safely express their will, and

S/PV. 8397

giving them the confidence that their decisions will
be honoured.
My country, the United States, has over 200 years
of experience with democracy. It took us much of that
time to fully include all Americans in the vote. And our
democracy is still far from perfect. Democracy takes
time and effort, but history shows us that it is worth
it. Democracies are more prosperous, more peaceful,
less corrupt and more innovative. Most importantly,
democracy honours the desire in every one of us to
build lives of dignity and self-determination, not just
for ourselves — not even mostly for ourselves — but for
our children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren
yet to come.
That is why so many people have fought so hard
and sacrificed so much over the years for the right to
hold their Governments accountable.
The democratic process is under way in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It began with the
Saint-Sylvestre agreement of 31 December 2016, built
on the foundation of the Congolese Constitution. It
gathered strength with the electoral calendar that set
out a clear process for elections on 23 December 2018.
It gained momentum with President Kabila Kabange’s
agreement that he would not run in the upcoming
elections. Democracy in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is now poised for its greatest test. It is a
historic opportunity.
For any country struggling to govern itself, the
peaceful transfer of power is a decisive moment. It is
the moment when all of the theory of representative
Government fades into the background and the decisions
of real people in real situations come to the forefront.
Peacefully surrendering power tests the ability and
willingness of individual men and women to put aside
their personal interests and agendas and put the people
first. The hopes and aspirations of more than 80 million
Congolese people now depend on the leaders of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo passing that test.
The Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has been very clear that it is holding elections
on 23 December and that it is doing so without the
help of the international community. We respect their
sovereign right to make that decision. It is a decision
with tremendous consequences for the Congolese
people. We have spent the past two years reiterating
in the Security Council the necessity for free, fair
and credible elections on 23 December. All of the

18-374097/22

S/PV.8397

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

parties know what they need to do. President Kabila
understands his role. The Democratic Republic of the
Congo Government understands what must be done.
The National Independent Electoral Commission knows
the preparations that it must undertake in the coming
six weeks. There is no excuse for failure, no reason for
delay. All that is remaining is for the leadership of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to show the will to
follow the democratic path that has been laid out before
it. The whole world is watching to see what the legacy
of President Kabila will be.
To the Congolese people, as they prepare to take
this momentous leap into their future, my message is
this: life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness is the
birth right of each citizen and every human being. They
must claim it; demand it; seize it for themselves and
their grandchildren yet to come. I want them to know
that there are people throughout the world hoping for
their success. And I want them to know that the prayers
and best wishes of the American people are with them.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, we would like to express our
gratitude to the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, for her excellent briefing
on the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
with only six weeks remaining before the holding of
elections. We also wish to recognize and express
gratitude to Ms. Joséphine Mbela of the Congolese
Association for Access to Justice for her briefing.
Having read and analysed resolution 2439 (2018),
concerning the recent outbreak of the Ebola virus, we
commend the efforts made by all humanitarian and
health personnel on the ground, including the World
Health Organization (WHO) and its partners in the
Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network, as
well as all other front-line agents involved in response
activities. In that regard, we commend the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) for
supporting the efforts made by the Government, WHO
and other actors to respond to the Ebola outbreak amid
a complex environment.
In that regard, we also wish to commend the capacity
of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo for its leadership in responding to the Ebola
outbreak, and in particular for providing free health
care in the affected areas, as well as for the daily updates
on the status of the outbreak. We urge the members of
8/22

13/11/2018

the Council and the international community in general
to increase their financial and humanitarian assistance
through reliable organizations in order to respond to
the urgent needs of the population.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea reiterates that it
attaches the utmost importance to the events unfolding
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, given the
strong bonds of brotherhood and friendship that unite
us and given that we are both States members of the
same subregional institutions. We once again reiterate
that stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
crucial to the stability of the wider subregion, of which
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea is part. We value
the efforts deployed by the country to achieve stability
in the build-up to the triad of elections to be held in
the country on 23 December, namely, presidential,
legislative and provincial elections. That is a key aspect
for the future and definitive stabilization of the country.
In that regard, it is worth noting that considerable
progress has been made to date. Preparations are
advancing in line with the electoral calendar, including
the publication of the voting roll in accordance with
legislation, the easing of political tensions and dialogue
among all parties, particularly on the use of voting
machines. We are also pleased to note that, as indicated
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
the Government has made a significant amount of
money available to the Independent National Electoral
Commission to guarantee the successful holding of the
upcoming elections.
It is for those reasons that we continue to
encourage the Government, the Electoral Commission,
the political parties, civil society and all national
stakeholders concerned to continue strengthening
the electoral process so that all citizens are able to
exercise their right to vote in the best conditions, as
well as to raise awareness among the population on
how to exercise that right to vote. It is important that
they continue working to peacefully carry out political
activities and do everything possible to ensure that the
23 December elections are credible, transparent and
inclusive and that they take place in an atmosphere of
peace, harmony and security, with the full and safe
participation of women. Compliance with the SaintSylvestre agreement of 31 December 2016 is the best
guarantee for the satisfactory holding of the elections
and the subsequent peaceful transfer of power, which
are key aspects for the legitimacy of the authorities
18-37409

13/11/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

that are elected and, above all, for the stability of the
country and the region.
The easing of political tensions, implementing the
recommendations of the International Organization
of la Francophonie, which we previously referred to,
and ensuring dialogue among all parties on the use
of voting machines are also important aspects. In
that regard, we welcome the meeting of the various
political stakeholders in the country that took place on
29 September.
One of the lessons learned from the Security
Council’s most recent visit to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo was that for the definitive and
resounding success of the upcoming elections and in
order for them to be a turning point for the Congolese
people, all possible post-election scenarios must be
clearly analysed and appropriate measures must be
implemented in order to guarantee the building and
consolidation of lasting peace in the country.
We reiterate our satisfaction at the public statement
made by President Joseph Kabila Kabange on 19 July
before a joint session of the National Assembly and the
Senate, in which the President reiterated his intention to
respect his country’s Constitution and underscored that
his Government remained firm in its intention to fully
shoulder the responsibility to finance the presidential,
legislative and provincial elections, as well as his
intention not to run as a candidate in the upcoming
elections. Those gestures represent a legitimate exercise
of sovereignty and independence, illustrating President
Kabila’s determination and commitment to his country.
The international community should continue to support
the Government and the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in the electoral process, while
respecting the principle of non-interference, as well as
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the country.
The security situation in the east of the country,
especially in Beni, must be closely monitored in
the days leading up to the elections, due to the
challenges that it poses. In that regard, we encourage
the Government to continue to implement measures
to address the security situation and the activities of
armed groups in various provinces, as well as to protect
civilians, with the support of MONUSCO. We also urge
all of the parties concerned to act responsibly so as to
promote social cohesion, especially during the electoral
and post-electoral period, and we call for the cessation

S/PV. 8397

of hostilities on the part of the armed groups. We also
encourage the Congolese authorities to continue to fight
impunity to ensure that those responsible for crimes
and gross violations of human rights and humanitarian
law are brought to justice.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea strongly
condemns the pillaging and exploitation in conflict
zones and the transfer of raw materials to other regions,
actions that serve to underscore the double standards
observed during conflicts and, at times, explain the
reasons for them. Without a definitive solution to
that problem, the possibility of achieving a genuinely
successful outcome to it will decrease considerably.
The illegal exportation of the natural resources of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo generates
astronomical economic benefits that do not go to
benefit the Congolese people, but other actors instead.
It is therefore important to take steps to put an end to
that situation and, if necessary, impose sanctions on
those who do not comply with international standards
in that regard.
Equatorial Guinea strongly believes that
the assistance provided by various international
organizations, including the United Nations, in close
collaboration with the European Union, the African
Union, countries of the region, the Southern African
Development Community, the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region and the Economic
Community of Central African States, is essential to
facilitate political dialogue in the Democratic Republic
of Congo and throughout the region and in the quest
for a lasting solution to the political situation in that
country. To that same end, Equatorial Guinea would
like to echo the call made by the African Union Peace
and Security Council to establish a coordination
mechanism that includes all of the actors I mentioned,
with a view to ensuring effective and consistent support
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Equatorial
Guinea also calls for the guaranteed implementation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
signed on 24 February 2013 in Addis Ababa. We urge its
signatories and guarantors to take the necessary steps
and redouble efforts to ensure its full and effective
implementation. It is therefore crucial to neutralize the
armed groups operating in the east of the country.
Let me conclude by inviting all parties involved in the
process to continue along the path of internal inclusive
dialogue and avoid any violent acts that could lead to a

18-374099/22

S/PV.8397

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

disruption of the process. We also take this opportunity
to spiritedly call on the international community to fully
support the Government, MONUSCO, the Electoral
Commission and other parties directly concerned in
the process to foster confidence-building measures so
as to ensure an environment that is conducive to the
holding of peaceful elections and the commitment to a
road map towards the peaceful transfer of power in an
environment of peace and national harmony.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and the
important briefings by Special Representative Leila
Zerrougui and Ms. Joséphine Mbela. We would like
to highlight the efforts being made by the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Independent National Electoral Commission to comply
with the electoral calendar and hold on 23 December
transparent, free, credible and inclusive elections.
In that regard, we must reiterate the importance
of ensuring that citizens exercise their electoral rights
by giving all candidates and their parties full and
equal opportunities to promote and advertise their
proposals and platforms. That means, among other
things, guaranteeing the full exercise of the freedoms
of association, expression and the press. We also
underline the crucial importance for all political actors
to remain committed to the 31 December 2016 political
agreement and the subsequent implementation of
confidence-building measures.
We urge the political actors to maintain close
coordination with the Government and the Electoral
Commission, with a view to resolving any concerns
on logistical issues such as the use of voting machines
and voter registration, so as to prevent any possible
challenge to the results and ensure a normal electoral
process. In that regard, we also consider it necessary to
have in place contingency plans for possible incidents.
We deem essential the constructive involvement of all
actors in supporting security measures that may be
necessary to ensure a normal electoral process. We note
with particular concern the situation of insecurity in
the east of the country. In addition, we highlight that
the outbreak of the Ebola virus makes addressing the
serious challenges the country is facing even more
complicated. We must condemn the latest attacks in
Beni and lturi perpetrated by armed groups against
civilians and health personnel, as well as the kidnapping
of minors, and express our solidarity with the victims.
10/22

13/11/2018

In that connection, we would like to highlight
the work carried out in such difficult conditions by
Government health personnel, with the vital support of
the World Health Organization and the United Nations,
as well as the protection provided by the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We underscore the importance
of the international community redoubling its efforts
to address the grave humanitarian situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Finally, we wish to
stress the importance for the international community,
including the relevant regional and subregional
organizations, to continue to closely monitor the
electoral process and the post-election period, with a
view to supporting and accompanying the process of
building sustainable peace in the country.
Mr. Toure (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation thanks Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and Head of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), for her detailed briefing on developments
in that country. We also thank Ms. Joséphine Mbela for
her enlightening briefing.
As the holding of the presidential, legislative and
provincial elections in the Democratic Republic of
Congo is five weeks away, my delegation commends
the Independent National Electoral Commission for its
successful preparation of the electoral process, which
will enter its crucial phase at the 22 November launch
of the electoral campaign. In that regard, Côte d’Ivoire
calls on all Congolese political actors involved in the
electoral process to carry out a peaceful campaign
and create an environment conducive to the holding
on 23 December of free, transparent and credible
elections. We also encourage the Commission to
strengthen its efforts to raise awareness among voters
on how to use voting machines and to inform them that
they are secure.
On the eve of the launching of the electoral
campaign, the health situation in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, marked by the
continuing Ebola epidemic, remains a matter of concern
for my delegation. Indeed, the electoral campaign,
which will bring about large gatherings and movements
of the population, gives rise to fears of high risks of
the spread of the disease. My delegation therefore calls
on national and international health authorities to be
vigilant in strengthening preventive measures during
18-37409

13/11/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

the electoral period. To that end, we welcome the joint
evaluation mission on the situation on the ground
carried out on 5 November in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo by Mr. Jean Pierre Lacroix, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, and
Mr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, Director-General
of the World Health Organization, a few days after
the adoption of resolution 2439 (2018), on the Ebola
epidemic in the Democratic Republic of Congo. We
also commend the work of the United Nations staff,
MONUSCO, the Ministry of Health of the Democratic
Republic of Congo and all the bilateral and multilateral
partners who are in a challenging environment leading
the fight against that epidemic.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire appreciates the efforts
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
all the staff of MONUSCO and the United Nations
agencies, regional and international organizations and
all the partners that provide support to the Democratic
Republic of Congo. We encourage all of them to
maintain and increase their level of assistance to that
country with a view to restoring peace and stability.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative and Head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), for her continuous, tireless
efforts, as well as those of her team. We believe
that the United Nations, including her good offices,
play a significant role, and we deeply appreciate her
updates to the Security Council. We are also very
grateful to Ms. Mbela for her valuable perspectives
from the ground. We understand that the situation and
the circumstances under which she operates are not
always easy.
We are now less than two months away from decisive
elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I was
encouraged by the Special Representative’s message
today that the main players are committed to making
sure that the electoral process is successful, because
transparent, credible and inclusive elections would
contribute to peace and stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the entire region. Should
they fall short, all of that would no longer be certain.
The Council must therefore remain actively engaged.
I would like to focus on three important aspects in the
preparations for the elections: confidence-building,
ensuring democratic space, and international support.

S/PV. 8397

Confidence in the electoral process will be key for
the elections to be credible and to produce an outcome
that would be acceptable to all. Important progress has
been made in recent weeks, especially on the technical
aspects of preparations. However, significant challenges
remain to bridge the confidence gaps. In that regard, we
welcome the steps taken by the Independent National
Electoral Commission and Special Representative
Zerrougui to build trust in the electoral process. We call
on all parties to re-engage in consultations to resolve
outstanding issues. The Government, of course, holds a
particular responsibility in that regard.
Disagreement on voting rolls and voting machines,
including the uncertainty around timely delivery of the
equipment, continues to be of concern. There is still
need for greater outreach and public information about
the electoral process, including the voting machines,
from the Electoral Commission, the Conférence
épiscopale nationale du Congo and other civil society
stakeholders. That is especially important in regions
outside of Kinshasa. There now needs to be a clear,
common understanding among the main political actors
as regards the outstanding technical aspects, including
on the voting machines, in order to de-escalate tensions
and quell over-politicization of the issue.
The restrictions on democratic space continue to
hamper the prospects for credible elections, as set out
today by Ms. Mbela. The New Year’s agreement and the
confidence-building measures foreseen therein must be
fully implemented by all parties. It is important that
all candidates have the same possibilities to campaign,
including through access to media. National civilsociety-led observations of the elections will play a
crucial role and must be allowed to carry out their work
without interference. Safeguarding the democratic
space through ensuring the full and equal participation
of women is also critical. That includes clear information
about voting rights and registration processes.
The high levels of violence, including sexual
and gender-based violence, and other human rights
violations and abuses must be addressed. As we heard
today, the security situation also has a direct impact on
the Ebola response. We welcome the recent visit of the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Lacroix, and the Director-General of the World
Health Organization, Mr. Tedros, to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Council remains unified
in its support to halt this health crisis, as reflected in
resolution 2439 (2018), which we adopted two weeks

18-3740911/22

S/PV.8397

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

ago. We appreciate the Government’s efforts, as well
as those of the United Nations and health workers on
the ground, and we continue to emphasize the need
to prevent the disease from spreading, including to
neighbouring countries. We have heard the concerns
in that regard today by the Special Representative,
including on the security situation in Beni.
We welcome the regional initiatives by the Southern
African Development (SADC) and the African Union
(AU) to support the Democratic Republic of the Congo
with election observation missions. The Government
should be encouraged to also engage with other regional
and international actors in that regard. It is crucial that
the United Nations and MONUSCO continue to assist
the Government and the Electoral Commission before,
during and after the elections. Technical support as
well as the Special Representative’s good offices
are essential. MONUSCO should also continue to be
prepared to support the logistical preparations for
the elections.
International and United Nations staff, including
election observers, peacekeepers and experts working
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, must be able
to safely carry out their tasks. The Government bears
the primary responsibility to protect international staff
within its territory and to hold perpetrators accountable.
We would like to recall that attacks on peacekeepers and
United Nations personnel and experts are sanctionable
offenses under the Democratic Republic of the Congo
sanctions regime.
The international community’s united support for
credible elections is clearly demonstrated in the joint
communiqué issued by the African Union Peace and
Security Council and the United Nations Security
Council in July, as well as the joint communiqué of the
AU, SADC, International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region and United Nations on the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region. Maintaining that unity for
the entire electoral cycle, including the post-election
period, will be significant.
In conclusion, bridging the confidence gaps,
ensuring democratic space, addressing violence and
maintaining unified international support will be
critical to ensure credible, transparent and inclusive
elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The elections on 23 December are not a panacea for all
troubles, but they would be a crucial step in the work
12/22

13/11/2018

towards achieving peace and stability in the country
and beyond.
Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and Ms. Joséphine Mbela for their
statements and information provided.
During the recent visit to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which was led jointly by France and
Equatorial Guinea, we had an opportunity to converse
with the Independent National Electoral Commission,
as well as with Government authorities, including
President Kabila Kabange. That allowed both the host
country and the members of the Security Council to
make clear their positions and expectations regarding
the forthcoming elections. We believe, in that context,
that the most propitious thing to do at this stage is to
express full support for the progress and commitment
shown by the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
meet the deadlines established in the electoral calendar,
without prejudice to the implementation of the SaintSylvestre agreement of 31 December 2016, in particular
to the confidence-building measures enshrined therein,
which are conducive to the effective realization of
elections and a peaceful transfer of Government. In
order to arrive at consensus on key issues surrounding
the electoral process, and in accordance with the
call made by the Conférence épiscopale nationale du
Congo last October, we call again for its complete and
effective implementation.
Another conclusion that the visit allowed us to
reach is the fact that there is a need for the Government
and the opposition to work together in order to be
able to advance confidence-building measures. With
that understanding, although it is necessary for the
Government to take the initiative and assume leadership
with regard to its implementation, those measures
will not be feasible without the participation of the
opposition. We therefore condemn the call to protests,
which is inflammatory and leads to violence. We urge
the populace to respect the law. We reiterate our call
to all parties to work together and collaborate with a
view to the holding of transparent, credible, peaceful
and inclusive elections, with the full and effective
participation of women and young people at all stages
of the electoral process. We take note of the meeting
held by the Vice-Prime Minister and Minister of the
18-37409

13/11/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Interior, Mr. Henri Mova, regarding the participation of
women in the electoral process and his commitment to
improving the security of the candidates. Only the active
participation of women as constituents and elected
officials will ensure an inclusive election process.
On the other hand, we value the work of the
Independent National Electoral Commission, in
particular its willingness to address the concerns of the
presidential candidates regarding the electoral process,
as evidenced by their meeting on 4 October. Likewise,
we commend its commitment to providing support to
political parties for the training of electoral observers
in the use of voting machines, as well as its pursuit of
consensus through a technical committee. Likewise, we
support the sovereign decision to finance the elections
in accordance with the logistical and technical needs
of the Electoral Commission; however, we invite the
Commission to call on MONUSCO should it deem such
action appropriate.
We commend the initiatives and good offices of the
Special Representative and her meetings with various
actors in order to exchange views and establish a
coherent and coordinated approach between the United
Nations and regional actors. Likewise, we welcome
the meetings held with various authorities, political
platforms and civil society groups to discuss the
electoral process. We support the work of MONUSCO,
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Great Lakes Region of Africa in preparing for
the elections and encourage them to maintain their
cooperation with the Independent National Electoral
Commission. We also encourage them to redouble their
efforts to improve the security situation, respect for
human rights and to combat Ebola.
The challenges facing the Democratic Republic of the
Congo on the margins of the elections have exponentially
increased and their solution lies in addressing the
root causes of the conflict, one of which is the lack of
control over natural resources, which is a factor that
contributes to prolonging the crisis as a result of the
fragmentation of armed groups and the systematic
exploitation of the country’s resources by transnational
corporations that operate without oversight.
For that reason, we believe that it is not enough
to monitor and sanction armed groups — both their
leaders and individual members — and the parties to
the conflict. We must apply sanctions to the networks

S/PV. 8397

that make up the entire chain of those involved in
the conflict, including commercial and financial
facilitators. In that regard, the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council must work
together to investigate and identify these corporations,
thereby countering or definitively eliminating these
criminal networks.
In short, the control of areas rich in natural
resources and their sovereign administration is
paramount, both for the cessation of hostilities and
for economic development. When a country maintains
effective control of its resources and there is a political
will to administer them for the benefit of the population,
it is possible to achieve a structural change that leads
to the stabilization and strengthening of the rule of
law, while fully respecting the country’s sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): Let me begin by thanking
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Leila
Zerrougui for her briefing. We also appreciate the
statement by Ms. Joséphine Mbela.
As indicated in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2018/882), progress has been made in the
implementation of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo electoral calendar. At this critical juncture,
it is important that all national stakeholders engage
constructively in facilitating the holding of the elections
according to the provisions of the 31 December 2016
political agreement. It is vital for the peace and stability
of the country that the Congolese people be allowed
to exercise their democratic rights and choose their
leaders in an inclusive and transparent election on
23 December to ensure a peaceful transfer of power.
We are encouraged by the peaceful conclusion of
the 29 September political rally in Kinshasa, which was
organized by seven opposition leaders; the 1 October
demonstrations in Kananga, Central Kasai; and the
4 October meeting of the Independent National Electoral
Commission with the 21 presidential candidates or their
representatives, who have exchanged information and
views on the electoral process.
We hope that all national stakeholders and
politicians will respect the interests of their people and
refrain from inflammatory rhetoric. In this context,
we agree with the call of the Conférence épiscopale
nationale du Congo, which highlighted the importance
the implementation of the confidence-building measures
by the Government, as provided in the agreement.

18-3740913/22

S/PV.8397

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

13/11/2018

We encourage the Independent National Electoral
Commission to utilize United Nations readiness
to provide technical and logistical support for the
successful conduct of the 23 December elections. The
advisory support of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) in warehouse management, as
well as the development and implementation of training
strategies and procedures for 440,000 polling staff,
besides women’s participation, is commendable.

involvement of all national stakeholders in the electoral
preparations. Poland hopes that the constructive
commitment of all the parties will be maintained until
the end of the election campaign and in the post-electoral
period. We are highly encouraged by Ms. Zerrougui’s
words that all stakeholders remain committed to the
electoral process. In that context, we reiterate our call
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo authorities to
organize truly fair, credible, transparent and inclusive
elections on 23 December.

We want to welcome the outcome of the ninth Heads
of State summit of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo — the Regional Oversight Mechanism — held
in Kampala on 8 October, which was encouraged
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and all concerned national stakeholders to
create conditions conducive to credible, inclusive and
peaceful elections. We also note with satisfaction the
invitation extended to the African Union Commission
and the Southern African Development Community,
which are preparing to deploy electoral observers to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Poland continues to recognize the building of trust
among all political and social actors as a precondition
for the establishment of an environment conductive
to credible elections. We encourage all stakeholders
to continue their engagement through dialogue in
order to build political consensus, especially on key
contentious issues, including the voting machines and
the voter register. Let me also reiterate that respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms remains key
to a democratic transition of power and the stability
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In this
context, persistent reports of restrictions of freedom
of expression, freedom of assembly and violations of
media freedom are of great concern to us.

Finally, we welcome the visit of the DirectorGeneral of the World Health Organization and UnderSecretary-General Lacroix to the epicentre of the
Ebola outbreak to meet with health workers, civil
society representatives, United Nations peacekeeping
troops and local authorities. Following the adoption of
resolution 2439 (2018), the visit by the two senior United
Nations officials sent a very good message highlighting
the gravity of the Ebola situation and the security
challenge. We reiterate our appreciation to MONUSCO
for its continued support to the Ebola-response efforts.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, for her briefing and
for her tireless efforts aimed at strengthening peace,
stability and democracy in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Allow me also to thank Ms. Mbela for
sharing with us civil society’s views and expectations.
Let me seize this opportunity to stress that Poland
highly values the input of civil society into the Security
Council’s work because civil society quite often
provides us with a reality check on the ground.
Like other delegations, Poland welcomes the
progress achieved this year in the implementation of
the electoral calendar, as well as the visible and active
14/22

We are also worried about shrinking space for civil
society, as a strong and active civil society remains an
essential element of a vital democracy. Furthermore,
the awarding of the Nobel Peace Prize to Dr. Denis
Mukwege underscores the urgent need to address in
an effective way the sexual violence faced by so many
women in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Poland encourages the Democratic Republic of the
Congo Government to pursue dialogue, fully implement
the confidence-building measures contained in the
Saint-Sylvestre agreement, ensure a level playing field
for all the parties and open public space. We urge the
Democratic Republic of the Congo authorities to release
all political prisoners remaining in detention, including
civil society activists and human right defenders.
We note the Government’s recent initiative on
women’s participation in elections, and encourage the
authorities to increase their engagement in this regard.
The fair and safe participation of both women voters
and aspiring women candidates in the ongoing electoral
process needs to be assured.
The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has a significant impact on the stability of Central
and sub-Saharan Africa. Poland calls on all regional
18-37409

13/11/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

and subregional organizations, as well as neighbouring
States, to continue their coherent and effective support
for the political process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. In that context, we welcome the assistance
provided by the Southern African Development
Community to the electoral process.
In conclusion, the upcoming elections mark an
opportunity to take an indispensable step towards
lasting security and development of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We express the hope that this
chance will not be wasted and that the ambitions of the
Congolese society will be fulfilled.
Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): We join others in
thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Leila Zerrougui for her insightful briefing. We
also extend appreciation to Ms. Joséphine Mbela for
her informative update.
On the political front, Kazakhstan positively notes
the progress made by the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in the process of preparing for
the elections on 23 December, in accordance with
the electoral calendar. This nationally owned process
should be held with respect for the sovereignty, political
independence, territorial integrity and unity of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We call on the Congolese authorities to continue
executing measures to create conditions conducive to
holding credible and transparent elections, with the
meaningful participation of women in the process.
Further efforts must be made by all key political actors
to establish a constructive and inclusive dialogue to
achieve political progress, and to build confidence
in the electoral process. The recent nomination of
the joint opposition candidate for the upcoming
presidential elections was a positive sign of constructive
engagement. We further reiterate the importance of
all parties implementing the political agreement of
31 December 2016.
We commend the committed determination of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
assume full responsibility for organizing the elections.
In this regard, we welcome the measures taken by the
Congolese Government to supply the Independent
National Electoral Commission with the means of
transportation necessary for the timely deployment
of electoral materials throughout the country. We
also note the peaceful nature of the demonstrations
authorized by the Government that were held recently

S/PV. 8397

in Kinshasa, and call on all parties to continue to
engage in a tolerant and constructive manner. It is also
important to provide security for the elections at all
stages, which is a prerequisite for credible and peaceful
elections. In that regard, we encourage the Congolese
authorities to ensure the capacity and coordinated work
of the national security forces, with the support of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
Although the elections are an important step in
stabilizing the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, we would like to stress the importance
of addressing the root causes of the conflict through
enhanced support of the international community and
regional partners.
On the security front, we are deeply concerned
by the continuing activities of armed groups in the
east of the country, particularly in Beni, which pose
a major challenge to the protection of civilians. We
strongly condemn such attacks on civilians, including
the abduction of children. Enhancing the response
capability of the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo is therefore crucial.
With regard to the epidemic situation, we would
like to note that while collective measures to tackle
the Ebola outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo are working, the epidemic remains dangerous
and unpredictable. It is occurring in an area of active
conflict, so physical insecurity is a persistent challenge
and complicates the ongoing response efforts. We
pay tribute to the dedicated staff of the World Health
Organization, MONUSCO, the Ministry of Health and
all partners who are fighting a dangerous outbreak
in extremely difficult conditions. It is obvious that
further effective response measures on the part of the
international community are needed.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands) (spoke
in French): There are only 39 days left before the
elections — the first in the history of the Democratic
Republic of Congo leading to a democratic handover
of power. We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Zerrougui and her team for their
good offices and excellent briefing. We also thank
Ms. Mbela for her statement, which provided the
necessary additional context on the electoral process.
Today, I would like to address three points: first, the
progress of the preparations for the elections; secondly,
the need to further open the political space; and thirdly,

18-3740915/22

S/PV.8397

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

13/11/2018

our concerns about the deterioration of the situation in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.

to face the humanitarian and security challenges that
persist in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes the
progress made in the implementation of the electoral
calendar. These include the distribution of equipment
and the training of polling station staff. We also welcome
the invitation to the Southern African Development
Community (SADC), the African Union and the Carter
Center to send independent observers. They will play
an important role alongside the 40,000 local observers.
We also encourage political parties and citizens to be
certified as election witnesses.

Thirdly, I would like to address the deterioration
of the security situation in the east of the country. The
number of armed groups has increased significantly.
Attacks on civilians and humanitarian personnel in
the Beni region are unacceptable. They threaten the
already uncertain fight against the Ebola epidemic,
which has been the largest in Congolese history to date.
We welcome the important work of MONUSCO in the
protection of civilians in this context. It is essential
that the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
international community work together to stabilize
Beni and gain the trust of local people. In that regard, we
welcome on this subject the recent visit of Mr. Lacroix
and Mr. Ghebreyesus.

The Secretary-General notes in his report
(S/2018/882) that the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) and the Independent National
Electoral Commission are working together to increase
women’s participation. We applaud their efforts and
urge all parties to use these final days to strengthen
women’s participation in this election. We remind
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo that MONUSCO remains ready to contribute
to logistical support. Much progress has been made in
recent months, but challenges remain, such as a lack
of trust and restricted political space. We call on all
political parties to campaign constructively and to help
find compromises to meet these challenges.
This brings me to my second point, concerning
the need to open the political space further. We
congratulate the Congolese Government on having
recently authorized several demonstrations, which took
place peacefully. Other demonstrations, however, have
been banned in several major cities. We once again urge
the authorities to lift the total ban on demonstrations
and to respect freedom of expression. We remind the
authorities of their promise to release 130 political
prisoners, including high-profile cases, in accordance
with the New Year’s Eve agreement.
With the start of the campaign, it is essential to build
trust and to find consensus between the political parties
and the Independent National Electoral Commission.
In that regard, we welcome the opening of dialogue on
4 October and encourage all actors to work together in a
constructive spirit. We congratulate all political parties
on maintaining their commitment to participating in
the process.
The stakes of this historic election are immense. A
huge task awaits the winner, since he or she will have
16/22

In other areas, including around Bijombo, the
population is still suffering the consequences of violent
conflict and human rights violations. The humanitarian
crisis continues to deteriorate, and we call on all Member
States to increase their contribution to the humanitarian
assistance plan. We call on the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and neighbouring States to implement the
compliance framework of the Political and Security
Committee of the European Union, and to cooperate on
the issue of internally displaced persons, including with
a view to their return, in accordance with international
human rights law.
In conclusion, we are witnessing a decisive moment
in the history of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
a moment that the Congolese people have been hoping
for. In order to permanently eliminate the root causes of
the conflict and instability in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, it is crucial to ensure that a democratic
transfer of power follows credible, peaceful and
transparent elections. The Congolese citizens will cast
their votes and judge the credibility of the process. At
this final stage, the Council and its regional partners,
including the African Union, SADC, the Economic
Community of Central African States and the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
should continue to closely monitor the situation.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for her
thorough briefing on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the preparations for the
18-37409

13/11/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

elections to be held on 23 December. We also take note
of the statement by Ms. Joséphine Mbela.
We continue to believe that holding the planned
elections according to schedule will help reduce the
political tensions in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. As is evident in the Secretary-General’s latest
report (S/2018/886) and as we all had the opportunity
to see for ourselves during the Security Council
mission to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
technical and legislative groundwork for the elections
is happening in line with the Independent National
Electoral Commission’s electoral calendar. It is
important that once the electoral rolls had been audited,
a final version, without duplications or inaccuracies,
was published. We have noted the publication of the
final lists of candidates, and we are pleased that half of
the country’s political parties have signed the election
code of conduct.
The political contest in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is intensifying and its political forces are
consolidating. In that regard, we call on the Congolese
parties to adhere to the comprehensive political
agreement of 31 December 2016. We do not deny how
important it is to ensure that the Congolese authorities
step up their implementation of confidence-building
measures, and that also applies to the so-called
emblematic cases mentioned in the political agreement
regarding political actors living abroad. We once again
call for respect for the sovereignty and laws of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. At the same time,
we urge the opposition forces to abandon negative
agendas, play by the established rules of the game
and respect decisions already handed down by the
Congolese judicial bodies. The question of the fairness
of such decisions is not part of the Security Council’s
remit, although for the sake of fairness, we should point
out that in reviewing lawsuits about electoral issues,
the Constitutional Court has already reached verdicts
in favour of opposition parties.
We urge colleagues not to obsess about the situation
regarding the Electoral Commission’s decision to use
electronic voting machines, which is the sovereign
prerogative of the relevant Congolese bodies. As we
were able to see at first-hand during the Security
Council’s visit, they are essentially printing devices for
ensuring the rapid output of ballots in a compact form.
It is our understanding that the Electoral Commission is
already making logistical preparations for the holding
of elections. We agree that it is essential to ensure that

S/PV. 8397

Kinshasa provides reliable funding for the electoral
process in order to avoid disruptions. We respect
the Government’s decision to rely mainly on its own
resources in dealing with this issue and note that the
next instalment of funds for pre-election needs was
disbursed in October. However, we also want to point
out that the logistical capabilities of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) should not
be forgotten.
As we understand it, the Mission’s role in organizing
and conducting elections should not go beyond the
mandate established in resolution 2409 (2018). The
protection of civilians in the context of elections must
be carried out with full respect for the basic principles
of peacekeeping and without any interference in
Kinshasa’s internal affairs.
I want to emphasize that the elections by
themselves will not be able to resolve every single one
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s problems.
We must focus on addressing the underlying causes
of the crisis. We urge everyone not to forget about the
importance of continuing to fight the illegal armed
groups in the east of the country, which still pose a
threat to civilians and are capable of destabilizing the
Great Lakes region. We definitely believe that solving
that problem should be seen as the main indicator
for the country’s stabilization and the withdrawal of
MONUSCO, whose chief function, after all, is dealing
with the security situation.
It will be impossible to stabilize the situation in the
eastern parts of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
through military measures alone. The implementation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
must continue, along with assistance in strengthening
State governance institutions and restoring social
institutions in areas that have been liberated from
the insurgents.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Special Representative Zerrougui and Ms. Mbela
for their briefings. I would particularly like to thank
Ms. Mbela for her brave work as a human rights
activist in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and for making such clear recommendations to the
Council, her Government and the Independent National
Electoral Commission. I hope to touch on some of those
recommendations later.

18-3740917/22

S/PV.8397

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

As both of our briefers and many of my colleagues
today have made clear, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is at a crucial point in its history. The elections
scheduled for 23 December could lead to the country’s
first peaceful democratic transfer of power. That would
be a huge achievement for the 85 million Congolese
people who have faced such devastating conflicts over
their history. These elections are about more than merely
democratic rights. Successful elections have the ability
to enhance the political security and humanitarian
stability of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the region, which in turn can enable future security,
growth, trade and prosperity.
A stable, prosperous Democratic Republic of the
Congo is vital not only for the Congolese people but
also for the region and the world. As we have seen over
many years, the insecurity in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo has not only had a negative impact on
millions of Congolese people, it has devastated the
wider region. It is therefore entirely appropriate that
we as a Council hold regular discussions, follow the
situation closely and ensure that there is follow-up to
the Security Council’s visit of just over a month ago,
particularly in order to take stock of what progress is
being made on many of the commitments undertaken
by the Government and other political leaders in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I think it is important to register the positive
developments in recent months. We welcome the
positive steps that the Government has taken with
regard to elections, including on voter registration and
the publication of the final list of candidates for the
elections. We also welcome President Kabila’s repeated
commitment that he does not intend to stand for a
third term, in accordance with the Constitution of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. But as Ambassador
Haley reminded us earlier today, democracy is not
about a single event, it is about a process. So we call
on all political actors in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to create the conditions for free, fair and
credible elections, particularly by implementing the
confidence-building measures of the 31 December 2016
agreement so as to ensure that civil and political rights
are upheld. That includes fully respecting the political
space and allowing political parties to gather peacefully.
We welcome the commitment made by President
Kabila to the Security Council during our visit that
his Government would allow peaceful protests by
the opposition. We are therefore deeply concerned about
18/22

13/11/2018

reports of further arrests and detentions of protesters
and the continued detention of political prisoners. We
call on President Kabila and his Government to live up
to their commitments to allow peaceful protest by the
opposition and to release all political prisoners.
Political parties and their leadership must also do
their part and encourage their supporters to engage
peacefully in the democratic process. Any violence will
diminish the credibility of the elections in the eyes of
the Congolese people and the international community.
We also call on the key political actors, including the
opposition, to engage constructively with the electoral
process, including with regard to the vexed question of
voting machines and the voter registry. The Electoral
Commission’s efforts will be crucial to delivering a
credible election, and we join Ms. Mbela in her call
to the Commission to engage with key stakeholders in
order to address their concerns and restore confidence
in the electoral process. One way to restore confidence
in the electoral process and the elections, and
particularly in the voting machines, is by implementing
the recommendations of the Westminster Foundation
for Democracy. We were encouraged by the fact that
during the Council’s visit to Kinshasa, the Electoral
Commission said it was determined to implement
the Foundation’s recommendations, and we urge it to
continue to implement them as soon as possible in order
to increase confidence in the voting machines.
We commend the logistical support that the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
has provided for the upcoming elections so far, and
welcome the fact that it is ready to give further support
if needed at the Government’s request. We call on the
Electoral Commission to engage with MONUSCO as
soon as possible for any logistical assistance that it may
need. The United Kingdom stands ready to support
the political process both in the region, where we have
provided funding for voter education, civil-society
engagement, women’s participation and domestic
observation, and here at the United Nations.
In conclusion, it is not the politicians who stand
to win or lose the most in these elections. It is the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
who have seen devastating levels of conflict and the
resulting humanitarian suffering since independence.
We therefore call on all leaders to put aside their
personal ambition and to do what is right for their
people — participating in and supporting what is
18-37409

13/11/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

potentially the first of many credible elections in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), and
Ms. Joséphine Mbela, civil-society representative, for
their valuable briefings.
We are less than two months away from the most
important event in the history of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the holding of presidential and
legislative elections at the national and provincial levels.
We hope they will be held on schedule on 23 December
so that the Democratic Republic of the Congo can enjoy
the first democratic and peaceful transfer of power in its
history. The commitment of the Congolese Government
to the electoral calendar and the announcement by a
majority of political and national parties that they will
participate in the elections are positive and hopeful
signs. We hope they will culminate in secure, total
transparent and credible elections that can realize the
aspirations of the Congolese people to security, stability
and reconstruction.
Despite the fact that the presidential elections
are fast approaching, we will continue to stress the
importance of taking advantage of the remaining
time to make concrete progress in implementing
the confidence-building measures stipulated in the
political agreement of 31 December 2016, ensuring
that the political process includes all sectors of the
population of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The publication on 19 September of the electoral rolls,
along with the efforts of the Independent National
Electoral Commission — including a meeting with
presidential candidates or their representatives to share
information and views on the electoral process — will
all contribute to the smooth holding of the elections.
The issue of voting machines, however, continues to
pose a significant challenge. We hope the Government
will be able to deal with it by reaching a consensus
among all the political parties.
Given the significance of the event that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is about to go
through, the weight of which we felt first-hand during
the Council’s recent visit, we hope that it will help to
end the political tensions and security challenges in the
country. We also hope that the Congolese Government

S/PV. 8397

will support the election process by ensuring an
environment conducive to freedom of expression
and by allowing peaceful protests to take place. We
appreciate the Government’s commitment to financing
the electoral process with its own resources. We are also
looking forward to seeing it cooperate with MONUSCO
so that the necessary logistical and technical assistance
for holding the elections is provided. In that regard,
we value the role played by regional organizations
at this critical juncture in the political process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The persistent humanitarian crisis in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is extremely
worrying. The statistics on the humanitarian situation
of refugees, displaced persons and others in need
of urgent assistance are alarming. According to the
November Humanitarian Bulletin of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, 10.5 million
people are receiving emergency assistance in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. That is disturbing
and makes it incumbent on the international community
and the Congolese Government to redouble their efforts
to deal with that difficult situation.
In conclusion, I would like to express my deep
concern about the persistence of Ebola in the country’s
eastern regions, as well as the worsening security
situation there, which undermines efforts to counter the
epidemic and the return of refugees from neighbouring
countries. It poses a serious threat to civilians and a
direct problem for neighbouring countries. In that
regard, we greatly appreciate the joint efforts to
counter the Ebola epidemic of the Congolese Ministry
of Health, the World Health Organization (WHO) and
the United Nations, represented by MONUSCO. We
also commend the joint visit last week by the DirectorGeneral of WHO and the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations to the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in order to assess
the Ebola outbreak. We hope that all such efforts will
continue in order to eradicate that epidemic as soon
as possible.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
I would like to begin by thanking Special
Representative Zerrougui for her briefing. I appreciate
her efforts to promote peace and stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and China will

18-3740919/22

S/PV.8397

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

continue to support her work. I would also like to thank
Ms. Mbela for her briefing.
The Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has recently been working actively to maintain
domestic peace and stability, promote dialogue among
all the political parties and ease intercommunal
tensions in the Kasai region. The Independent National
Electoral Commission is fully functioning and forging
ahead steadily with preparations for the elections. This
is a clear demonstration of the firm commitment of the
Government and the people of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to safeguarding national peace and
stability with a Congolese-led approach and achieving a
smooth transfer of power by holding peaceful elections.
China commends the efforts of the Government and the
Electoral Commission in that regard.
The Security Council and the international
community should fully respect and acknowledge the
aspirations and efforts of the Government and people
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. At the same
time, the Democratic Republic of the Congo is still
facing challenges on issues such as mutual trust among
political parties and armed groups in the eastern part
of the country. Moreover, there is a risk that the Ebola
epidemic in certain north-eastern regions may spread.
While respecting the Democratic Republic of the
Congo’s sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity, the Security Council and the international
community must provide it with constructive assistance.
The priority now is to ensure that the elections
are held smoothly. All of the country’s stakeholders
should act in the country’s fundamental interests,
resolve their differences peacefully through dialogue
and consultations and work together to advance the
electoral and political processes.
The international community should respect the
right of the Government and people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to lead the political process.
The African Union and the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region, as well as other regional
and subregional organizations, should enhance their
coordination and cooperation and play an active role
in mediation.
The United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) has played an important role in the
maintenance of peace and stability in the country.
20/22

13/11/2018

China hopes that MONUSCO will continue to enhance
its communication, coordination and consultation with
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and perform its functions in accordance with its
mandate.
The international community should continue
to respond actively to the appeal for humanitarian
assistance to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
support the work of the World Health Organization and
the International Committee of the Red Cross with a
view to containing the Ebola outbreaks.
China will continue to work with the international
community to achieve peace, stability and development
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, based on
national ownership, as soon as possible.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Gata Mavita Wa Lufuta (Democratic
Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): Let me begin
by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
November. I am particularly pleased to salute, through
you, the friendly country of the People’s Republic of
China, with which the Democratic Republic of the
Congo enjoys excellent relations. I would also like
to thank you for taking the initiative to organize this
important meeting to consider the electoral process
and the implementation of the political agreement of
31 December 2016 in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I would also like to thank all the members of the
Council for their unwavering interest in the situation in
my country.
I should not omit to greet Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), and to express our appreciation for her
very informative briefing.
I would like to take this opportunity to convey the
views of my Government on the issues under discussion,
as we have always done when addressing the Council.
Before doing so, however, I should point out that as the
report under consideration (S/2018/882) underscores,
the political situation in my country remains focused
on the elections of 23 December, for which preparations
18-37409

13/11/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

are going well. In fact, a month or so before the longawaited date, we have completed all the activities
scheduled to be done by this date, in line with the
Independent National Electoral Commission’s electoral
calendar. The current and pending activities can be
broken down into the areas of recruiting and training
the 511,901 electoral agents; educating and raising the
awareness of voters and civic educators, including on
the use of the voting machines and the application of
the code of conduct; training the trainers of officials
for polling and counting stations and local centres
for compiling results; deploying electoral equipment
throughout the country and accrediting witnesses,
observers and journalists.
With regard to electoral equipment, it is important
to point out here that the various logistics centres
around the country — in Matadi, Kinshasa, Bunia,
Kisangani, Goma and Lubumbashi — have received the
voting booths, polling and counting station kits, ballot
boxes and other accessories. The same goes for the
voting machines, which arrived at the port of Matadi to
be sent to the country’s western and central provinces
and at the ports of Dar es Salaam and Mombasa to be
assigned to polling stations in the eastern provinces.
With regard to logistics, the Government has provided
the Electoral Commission with land, air and sea
equipment, including motor vehicles, aeroplanes,
helicopters, motorcycles and speedboats, along with
a total of $50 million to enable their deployment
throughout the country. Regarding funding, everything
is going according to the established disbursement
plan and showing an implementation rate of more than
72 per cent. The Government is working to provide the
Commission with the $122 million in funding required
for the remaining critical stages.
On the security front, additional police units have
been recruited and trained. They will be deployed
shortly in accordance with a security plan whose
implementation should shortly be fixed through a new
regulatory act. Some of those units will also be used
for security for the candidates for the presidency of
the Republic.
Concerning the management of electoral disputes,
courts of appeal have been set up in the country’s 26
provinces and the magistrates who will lead them have
been appointed, assigned and trained. They have already
done good work in managing disputes that have arisen
during the submission of candidacies and have made
proposals for improving and securing their workplaces.

S/PV. 8397

To return to the issues that continue to be sources of
concern for the opposition and some members of civil
society, as noted in the report under discussion, my
delegation was pleased that the Council members were
able to make a working visit in October to Kinshasa,
where they had the opportunity to discuss all these
issues with Electoral Commission officials and my
country’s authorities, as well as all other stakeholders
in the electoral process.
I firmly believe that where the voting machines
are concerned, our discussions and the testing of the
machines that was done on the ground will now have
ended any apprehensions that Council members may
previously have had about their use. In our view, the fact
is that when we are dealing with 35,016 candidates for
three combined elections that will all be held at once,
the voting machines — compared to a 54-page electoral
register with photos of all the candidates — is manually
the easiest for voters to use. The representatives of
the political opposition and civil society whom the
Commission invited to test the machines can also attest
to this. They understand that the machines cannot
undermine the reliability of the voting results because,
as we have already explained, the machine merely
prints out the ballot paper that the elector deposits in
the ballot box. After this operation, the counting will be
done manually before witnesses and observers.
As it has done for the voting machines, the Electoral
Commission has also provided clarifications for the
electoral register. It was audited by the International
Organization of la Francophonie, who concluded that it
was inclusive, comprehensive, reliable and up-to-date.
It now numbers 40,024,897 voters. The provisional lists
were posted for consultations on potential amendments,
and 6,500,318 voters’ names were expunged from
them following a purging process and another 337,208
following the audit, so that 40,024,897 voters now
remain on the electoral lists. As for the 6 million
voters who were registered without fingerprints, the
International Organization of La Francophonie, which
carried out the audit of the electoral register and noted
the issue, emphasized in its conclusions that it did not
jeopardize the voting status of those concerned.
With regard to the implementation of the
confidence-building measures and restrictions on
the political space, I would be grateful not to have
to repeat the explanations that have already been
provided to the Council on many previous occasions.
In our humble opinion, however, it is important to

18-3740921/22

S/PV.8397

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

note that the Government has already taken a number
of measures to meet the requirements outlined in the
political agreement of 31 December 2016 regarding
the release of the so-called political prisoners. All
those classified in that category have been released,
with the exception of two people who are still being
held for ordinary infractions rather than for political
reasons. In view of that, my delegation therefore does
not share the view stated in paragraph 16 of the report
that no progress has been made in implementing the
confidence-building measures.
On the contrary, with regard to restrictions on the
political space, we feel we can say that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is now one of the countries in the
Central African region whose citizens — politicians,
ordinary civilians, journalists and activists of various
kinds — enjoy a very broad and sometimes perhaps
excessive scope of freedoms. With 601 political parties,
476 radio stations, 210 television channels and 445
print and other media outlets, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is setting a record in terms of political
freedom and expression. Of course, not everything is
perfect, as is true of any country. But we remain open
and always do our best to adapt to the requirements
of human rights and democracy. In that regard, as
the report acknowledges, the public protests held in
Kananga, Kasai Central and Kinshasa are generally
permitted. If some in other parts of the country have
not been authorized, that is not in any way meant to
stifle freedom of speech, assembly or expression but
rather to protect public order.
To close this chapter, my Government would like
to assure Council members that the electoral campaign,
which will begin in nine days, will be conducted in
full respect for electoral law. All the candidates will
be treated equally and have access to the media under
the same conditions. They will be entirely free to
campaign. It is important to note that these will be only
the third elections to be held in the country’s history.
Given their importance, all candidates will be called
on to adhere to the code of conduct established by the
National Independent Electoral Commission for the

22/22

13/11/2018

smooth holding of the elections. The stakes are high,
but things must not get out of hand.
To touch on the security situation, while things seem
relatively calm elsewhere in the country generally, the
situation in the Beni and Butembo areas in North Kivu
remains worrying in the wake of repeated attacks by
some armed groups, particularly the Allied Democratic
Forces. That situation could have a negative impact on
the holding of the elections in that part of the country, as
well as on the management of the response to the Ebola
epidemic. That is why my country welcomes the joint
operation to address the attacks recently launched by
the Forces armées de la République Démocratique du
Congo and MONUSCO. As for the Ebola outbreak, my
Government, together with the support of our partners,
is continuing its efforts to eradicate it.
As we have previously emphasized in addressing
the Council, my Government believes that the road
to the elections is irreversible. The Congolese people
are determined and are preparing to exercise their
sovereign right to elect their leaders on 23 December.
In that context, the Council will agree with us that
those who call for the rejection of the voting machines
and a new assessment of the electoral register just a
few weeks before the elections are not actually ready
for the elections, or have no real wish to participate in
them. Now that the process is coming to an end, my
Government and the people of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo expect the international community and
the United Nations to provide the necessary support
and guidance for its successful conclusion. I should not
conclude without thanking all those who are directly
or indirectly committed to my country’s cause so as to
enable it to restore the stability and lasting peace that
we so sorely need to rebuild it. To all the members of
the Security Council, I reiterate our deep appreciation.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 5.05 p.m.

18-37409
