A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/131
26 February 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 112 (b)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/52/644/Add.2)]
52/131. Strengthening of United Nations action in the field of human rights
through the promotion of international cooperation and the importance
of non-selectivity, impartiality and objectivity
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that among the purposes of the United Nations are those of developing friendly
relations among nations based on respect for the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples
and taking other appropriate measures to strengthen universal peace, as well as achieving international
cooperation in solving international problems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character
and in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without
distinction as to race, sex, language or religion,
Desirous of achieving further progress in international cooperation in promoting and encouraging
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Deeply convinced that United Nations action in this field should be based not only on a profound
understanding of the broad range of problems existing in all societies but also on full respect for the
political, economic and social realities of each of them, in strict compliance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and for the basic purpose of promoting and encouraging
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms through international cooperation,
Reaffirming all its resolutions in this regard,

98-76951

/...

A/RES/52/131
Page 2

Reaffirming also the importance of ensuring the universality, objectivity and non-selectivity of the
consideration of human rights issues, as affirmed in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action,
adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993,1
Affirming the importance of the objectivity, independence and discretion of the special rapporteurs
and representatives on thematic issues and on countries, as well as of the members of the working groups,
in carrying out their mandates,
Underlining the obligation that Governments have to promote and protect human rights and to carry
out the responsibilities that they have undertaken under international law, especially under the Charter, as
well as various international instruments in the field of human rights,
1. Reiterates that, by virtue of the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, all peoples have the right freely to determine, without
external interference, their political status and to pursue their economic, social and cultural development
and that every State has the duty to respect that right within the provisions of the Charter, including
respect for territorial integrity;
2. Reaffirms that it is a purpose of the United Nations and the task of all Member States, in
cooperation with the Organization, to promote and encourage respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms and to remain vigilant with regard to violations of human rights wherever they occur;
3. Calls upon all Member States to base their activities for the protection and promotion of human
rights, including the development of further international cooperation in this field, on the Charter of the
United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,2 the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights,3 the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights3 and other relevant
international instruments and to refrain from activities that are inconsistent with that international
framework;
4. Considers that international cooperation in this field should make an effective and practical
contribution to the urgent task of preventing mass and flagrant violations of human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all and to the strengthening of international peace and security;
5. Reaffirms that the promotion, protection and full realization of all human rights and fundamental
freedoms, as legitimate concerns of the world community, should be guided by the principles of nonselectivity, impartiality and objectivity and should not be used for political ends;
6.

Underlines the importance of the promotion of dialogue on human rights issues;

1

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

2

Resolution 217 A (III).

3

See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
/...

A/RES/52/131
Page 3

7. Emphasizes that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated and
that, as such, the international community must treat them globally in a fair and equal manner, on the
same footing and with the same emphasis;
8. Requests all human rights bodies within the United Nations system, as well as the special
rapporteurs and representatives, independent experts and working groups, to take duly into account the
contents of the present resolution in carrying out their mandates;
9. Expresses its conviction that an unbiased and fair approach to human rights issues contributes
to the promotion of international cooperation as well as to the effective promotion, protection and
realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
10. Stresses, in this context, the continuing need for impartial and objective information on the
political, economic and social situations and events in all countries;
11. Invites Member States to consider adopting, as appropriate, within the framework of their
respective legal systems and in accordance with their obligations under international law, especially the
Charter, and international human rights instruments, the measures that they may deem appropriate to
achieve further progress in international cooperation in promoting and encouraging respect for all human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all;
12. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to take duly into account the present resolution and
to consider further proposals for the strengthening of United Nations action in the field of human rights
through the promotion of international cooperation and the importance of non-selectivity, impartiality and
objectivity;
13. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to consult Member States, intergovernmental
organizations and non-governmental organizations on ways and means for the strengthening of United
Nations action in the field of human rights, including the promotion of international cooperation and the
importance of non-selectivity, impartiality and objectivity, and to submit a comprehensive report on this
issue to the General Assembly at its fifty-third session;
14. Decides to consider this matter at its fifty-third session under the item entitled "Human rights
questions".
70th plenary meeting
12 December 1997
