S/PV.8150

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8150

th meeting
Thursday, 21 December 2017, 3.55 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bessho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Lie Cheng
Mr. Awad
Mr. Woldegerima
Mrs. Guegeun
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Dovganyuk
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Allen
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli Frieri

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operation
Letter dated 18 December 2017 from the Permanent Representative of Japan to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2017/1077)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-45855 (E)
*1745855*

S/PV.8150

United Nations peacekeeping operation

The meeting was called to order at 3.55 p.m.

closely with such organizations and their member States
to ensure that United Nations peacekeeping standards
are understood and observed. We work together on
efforts to better plan the start-up of future missions
and mission transitions. The capacity-building and
training efforts of United Nations troop-contributing
countries in Africa are also intricately linked to those
of the African Standby Force, and more comprehensive
information-sharing in that regard is required.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
Letter dated 18 December 2017 from
the Permanent Representative of Japan
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2017/1077)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/1077, which contains a letter dated
18 December 2017 from the Permanent Representative
of Japan to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note on the
item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Ms. Keita.
Ms. Keita: I would like to start by thanking Japan
for convening this meeting today.
The adoption of resolution 2378 (2017) in
September clearly demonstrated the Council’s strong
commitment to strategic force generation as a core
element of peacekeeping reform. It is one of the ways in
which we can achieve the Secretary-General’s vision to
help to ensure that the United Nations is more nimble,
pragmatic and flexible in its ability to plan, launch and
manage a range of operations.
As the Security Council has noted, United Nations
peacekeeping missions must be resourced with the
right capabilities, delivered at the right time to meet
the challenges that they face today and those that lie
ahead. We must continue to strive to ensure a diverse
mix of contributors that provides the right capabilities.
However, ultimately, we remain dependent on the
capabilities that Member States are willing to provide.
Regional and subregional organizations, including
the African Union and the European Union, can also
play an integral role in filling gaps, especially during
the start-up and surge phases of missions. We work
2/21

21/12/2017

The Security Council has an integral role to play
in defining and in helping us to fulfil the current
and future capability gaps in our missions, including
through training and capacity-building assistance.
Council members have hosted high-level meetings,
pledged and prepared new capabilities, offered
training and capacity-building support and provided
direct financial and political support to our strategic
force generation and training efforts. That momentum
continued at the United Nations Peacekeeping Defence
Ministerial Conference in Vancouver last month, where
49 new pledge announcements, including more than 20
training and capacity-building pledges, were made.
To assist Member States in deciding where and how
to provide training, the Department of Field Support
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
will continue to provide advice and technical support.
We encourage Member States to ensure that their
training and capacity-building assistance is focused on
developing sustainable national training capacities and
that their engagement is for the medium- to long-term
rather than being a one-off event.
In order to adapt to the evolving operational
realities and to address the changing threats, missions
require different capabilities at different periods in
their life cycle. The mission concepts of operations
will be continually reassessed and force compositions
and operational plans will need to be adjusted. In
that context, troop- and police-contributing countries
must remain flexible and adaptive with regard to the
capabilities that they provide and the time period for
which they provide them. The generation of capabilities
for United Nations peacekeeping cannot focus solely
on the type of equipment or the number of personnel
being sought. Instead, we must increasingly focus on all
the aspects that make a capability perform effectively,
including agility, training, equipment, technology,
doctrine, leadership, discipline, interoperability,
welfare, mindset and gender balance, as well as the
absence of caveats.
17-45855

21/12/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operation

Deploying forces that meet our operational
performance and conduct standards is a critical
component of filling capability gaps. This begins
with proper basic skills training and United Nationsspecific training that needs to be refreshed regularly.
Critical training, such as e-learning programmes on the
prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse, should be
further supported by Member States and included as part
of mandatory predeployment training for all uniformed
personnel. Equipment, too, cannot be sustained without
appropriate systems for maintenance, repair and the
acquisition of spare parts.
To this end, Member States themselves should
continue to invest in more sustained training initiatives
and better equipment to maintain United Nations
standards and adapt to new operating environments.
One-off training just before deployment and the
provision of equipment for one unit will not deliver
self-sufficient capacities. The constant turnover of
personnel should be addressed by directing both United
Nations and bilateral training support as far upstream
as possible in order to build self-sustaining national
training capacity.
Opportunities for successful matchmaking between
providers and recipients to fill capacity gaps have
proven to be best realized through targeted engagement
to develop partnerships around specific missions and
countries and to address specific capabilities. These
initiatives are vital to the success of missions, but new,
creative ways of generating and sustaining the required
capabilities are also needed going forward.
Mission-specific force generation events for
missions with persistent capability gaps will continue
and evolve based on the lessons learned from the
force generation conference for the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali. Capability-specific capacity-building efforts must
also continue. For example, the triangular partnership
project should be expanded to include additional
geographic regions, additional enabling capabilities
and francophone countries. Furthermore, ongoing
work on medical standards should be further buoyed
through a partnership of interested Member States.
Coordinated by the Secretariat, these Member States
provide funding, expertise, convening and training to
help improve engineering, signals, medical and other
capabilities deployed to peacekeeping missions.

S/PV. 8150

Ensuring that every United Nations peacekeeping
mission is supported by properly trained, equipped, led
and motivated troops and police, rotation after rotation,
is a significant challenge that will require more
partnership, resources and time to overcome. Much
progress has been made over the past few years, but
much work remains to be done. The Secretariat, for its
part, will further enhance its ongoing work on strategic
force generation and targeted training support. To that
end, we will establish a light coordination mechanism to
bring Secretariat entities involved in training, capacitybuilding and force generation together with relevant
Member States involved in order to allow Member
States with resources to contribute. This coordination
role would better direct those resources to troop- and
police-contributing countries or missions.
A more flexible and responsive mechanism is also
required to support a wider range of initiatives and meet
multiple and sometimes unforeseen capacity-building
and training needs. One such mechanism proposed is a
pooled, multi-donor grant as part of the existing DPKO
Trust Fund to augment existing resources to coordinate
and deliver additional targeted and sustained training
support for troop- and police-contributing countries.
It would allow us additional flexibility to quickly
respond to priority emerging issues and support more
sustainable strategic engagement with troop- and
police-contributing countries.
Despite the substantial progress made in recent
years to strengthen our approach and develop
partnerships with Member States to fill capability gaps,
there are inevitable limitations and some capability
gaps remain to be filled. Therefore we will need to
continue to enhance our collective efforts and be
creative to fill some of our most pressing gaps. This
will, of course, require troop- and police-contributing
countries themselves to invest in more training and
better equipment to maintain United Nations standards
and adapt to new operating environments.
Security Council members also have a strong
leadership role to play in ensuring that mandates are
matched by appropriate resources and by continuing to
support the Secretariat in its strategic force generation
efforts. The Secretary-General’s recommendations,
contained in his letter to the Council, highlight
an assortment of ways to move forward in this
effort together.
The President: I thank Ms. Keita for her briefing.

17-458553/21

S/PV.8150

United Nations peacekeeping operation

I now give the floor to members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank the Japanese presidency for
haven taken the initiative to organize this briefing on
peacekeeping operations, just two months after that held
in October under the French presidency (see S/PV.8064).
This reflects the Council’s ongoing concern and efforts
to make its missions — the main instruments available
to the United Nations to ensure international peace and
security — ever more responsive, agile and effective.
It also illustrates the importance of the Security
Council Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations,
which is increasingly emerging as an open and suitable
forum for discussing, without prejudice or taboos, the
best ways and means to bring peacekeeping operations
into line with the constantly evolving threats and
challenges to peace and security, as well as the changing
conditions for their deployment on the ground.
That is why the Security Council considered it
appropriate, through its resolution 2378 (2017), to
entrust the role of monitoring the implementation of the
recommendations to the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations, thereby strengthening its action.
This is very relevant when considering the number
and variety of peacekeeping operations, ranging from
the most complex and multidimensional missions
and hybrid missions to those conducted by regional
and subregional organizations that are authorized or
supported by the United Nations.
I shall limit my remarks to the important question
of the capability needs of peacekeeping operations.
We must welcome the introduction of innovations,
including the establishment of the Strategic Force
Generation and Capability Planning Cell, that render
the capacity-building system more efficient. In another
area, work under way in partnership with regional
organizations, particularly the African Union, will
undoubtedly help to strengthen the operational
capacities of African units called upon to carry out
missions in the context of the use of force. Examples
of such units include the Force Intervention Brigade of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Regional
Protection Force of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan and, to a different degree, the African Union
Military Observer Mission in Somalia force. These
innovations are important because they allow us to gain
4/21

21/12/2017

better understanding of the capacities of Member States
and better coordinate efforts for faster deployment of
the units offered by the contributing countries, thereby
responding to the most urgent needs.
It is also encouraging to see this new mechanism
come to fruition with support and commitment at the
highest level from member countries, including several
troop-contributors. That is reflected in the commitments
made by several troop- and police-contributors at the
September 2015 Leaders’ Summit on Peacekeeping, as
well as at ministerial meetings in London, Paris, and,
most recently, in Vancouver. That means that troopand police-contributing countries show a real political
will to work with the United Nations in the realization
of this innovative vision.
Notwithstanding all the strategic approaches,
much remains to be done to achieve the United
Nations ambition in the area of force generation and
peacekeeping-operation capacity-building. That is
why, despite the commitment of the troop-contributing
countries and the announcements made during the
recent force-generation conference for Mali, it has
proved difficult to reach the ceiling of United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali troops. In truth, the capacities required for the
full implementation of mandates in certain theatres
of operation are lacking. Similarly, it is not always
easy to gather the required capabilities in terms of
medical support, engineering, construction, air and
road transport, security, and so on, commonly called
“enabling units”.
In order to bridge the capacity gaps facing various
missions, pooling national efforts through ad hoc
coalitions among Member States and/or regional
actors could prove effective. In that vein, the Council
could stimulate the search for partnerships and the
definition of the minimum means to be used for the
rapid mobilization of adequate forces to respond to
multiple and complex crises. That was the point of
the Vancouver summit, which sought to solidify such
cooperation under the term “smart pledges”.
In conclusion, and at the end of Senegal’s mandate
as head of the Security Council Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations, I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his firm commitment to
moving the peacekeeping reform agenda forward, as
part of his vision of the comprehensive reform of the
United Nations peace and security architecture. In
17-45855

21/12/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operation

her presentation, Assistant Secretary-General Keita
gave us a vivid demonstration of that. My delegation
welcomes with great interest the Secretary-General’s
letter of 20 December on the continuing efforts to fill
the capacity gaps and the recommendations to remedy
them, including through more efficient and effective
training and constant capacity-building.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): First, I
should like to thank you, Sir, for organizing this very
timely meeting. During the course of 2017, the Council
has repeatedly reaffirmed the value of peacekeeping
operations as one of the most essential tools of the
United Nations for peace and international security.
By emphasizing the need for continued efforts to
have adequate peacekeeping capabilities, this meeting
contributes to that discussion.
I would also like to thank the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for her very comprehensive and concrete
briefing. France shares the Secretariat’s assessment of
the need for agile, rapidly deployable forces that have
the specialized capabilities and expertise necessary for
the proper implementation of their mandates. I wish to
highlight three points in particular.
First, France welcomes the efforts of the Secretariat
to develop an ambitious and innovative approach to
force generation. The past few years have made clear
the shortcomings that peacekeeping operations face, in
terms of air capabilities, medical support, equipment,
pre-deployment training, intelligence and more. We
must aim for greater speed and greater efficiency.
In the face of the existing constraints, innovation
is the best way to respond to such challenges. For
example, the establishment of the Peacekeeping
Capability Readiness System within the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations was a breakthrough that can
be described as historic. It has already made it possible
to increase the number and develop the specialties of
the contingents ready to be deployed within operations.
It should be further strengthened, in particular by
promoting better use of its levels 2 and 3. At the same
time, ongoing efforts should be made to increase
the number of countries accessing level 1 through
interaction with troop-contributing countries.
France is also supporting the development of new
force-generation mechanisms. The Force Generation
Conference of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
held last May, was a major milestone in ensuring

S/PV. 8150

the predictability of peacekeeping capabilities. That
model should be applied to other operations and other
specialized capabilities, so as to tailor the resources
made available to the needs of our missions.
We also welcome the development of joint
commitments and smart pledges involving several
Member States, aimed at generating critical capabilities
and allowing each Member State, according to
its means and ability, to participate in improved
operational performance. In that regard, we commend
the progress made at the Vancouver conference. Those
mechanisms have made it possible to provide critical
capabilities, particularly air capabilities, within the
framework of MINUSMA, but also to broaden the
spectrum of training needed to acquire new know-how
related to asymmetric environments, such as protection
against improvised explosive devices. We also support
the goal of increasing the number of women in
peacekeeping operations.
In view of those needs, and this is my second
point, France supports the efforts of the Secretariat
and troop-contributors to strengthen their capabilities.
Through our bilateral partnerships and our security and
defence cooperation, France has been contributing to
the training and equipment of many contingents that
are to be deployed in peacekeeping operations. Thus,
on the African continent alone, France has participated
in the training of more than 29,000 African officers
and soldiers per year, in 11 countries and in over 57
different subjects.
France is also working with many troop-contributing
countries to foster the development of French-language
peacekeeping capabilities. That is the reason behind
the Paris Conference on Peacekeeping in the Frenchspeaking Environment organized last year, and the
establishment of the Boutros-Ghali Peacekeeping
Observatory, which seeks to strengthen Frenchspeaking peacekeeping capabilities. In cooperation
with the International Organization of la Francophonie,
France has developed and made available to its partners
a course for learning French for armed forces personnel
in a United Nations environment called “En Avant”.
Capacity-building support for troop-contributing
countries also includes operational support and
deployment support. As Foreign Minister Jean-Yves Le
Drian pointed out at the Council’s high-level meeting
on 20 September (see S/PV.8051), we must continue
to create new ways to better involve and empower the

17-458555/21

S/PV.8150

United Nations peacekeeping operation

States primarily concerned by the threats in the world
so that they can take charge of their own security. That
was our wish in supporting the Group of Five for the
Sahel initiative, which strengthens the capacities of the
States concerned to better deal with the challenges of
the region, which concern us all.
Our support for capacity-building in various
countries is being carried out, naturally, in synergy with
the efforts of international organizations, including, of
course, the United Nations and the European Union.
In Mali, the Niger, the Central African Republic
and Somalia, the European Union is committed to
strengthening African peace and security capabilities
through its European Union Military Training and
European Union Capacity-Building Missions operations
and through financial support for operations.
In order to meet the challenges of effective
peacekeeping, both the Secretariat and Member States
must step up their efforts. Providing peacekeeping
operations with adequate and effective capabilities
is the shared responsibility of the Secretariat and
Member States. Contingent training is primarily the
responsibility of the State concerned. In order to meet
the current challenges of peacekeeping, it is particularly
necessary to continue and intensify individual and
collective training efforts to deal with the asymmetric
environment, which requires very specific capabilities.
It is our responsibility to give each one of our
soldiers initial basic training. That would ensure their
safety and that of the people they are tasked with
protecting. The States Members of the United Nations
must also guarantee the highest level of conduct and
discipline in order to ensure respect for United Nations
principles, in particular in the fight against exploitation
and sexual abuse.
Identifying capability gaps and properly
coordinating efforts to bridge them are also vital.
Otherwise, the individual efforts of the States
Members of the United Nations will not be maximized.
The Secretariat’s proposal to implement a standby
coordination mechanism that would allow States to
request and provide useful information appears to be
a step in the right direction. As underscored by the
Secretariat, it would be useful for efforts to enable
triangular partnerships to be further developed to
cover issues, such as specialized capabilities and
language competency.
6/21

21/12/2017

At the organizational level of the Secretariat, we
fully support the positive impact of the SecretaryGeneral’s reforms of the peace and security and
management pillars, so as to ensure that peacekeeping
operations are more effective. The goal of implementing
the values and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations with the goal of fostering international peace
and security is at the core of peacekeeping. Our joint
efforts will enable us to implement that vision.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Keita for her briefing on
areas in peacekeeping where improvement is needed
and on how it can be achieved.
Unlike many other issues related to peacekeeping
that require our attention, force generation and
capability gaps present challenges where concrete
progress is not only possible, but measurable.
Since 2005, the United States has invested more
than $1.3 billion in 66 partner countries and five
international organizations through our peacekeeping
capacity-building initiatives alone, demonstrating a
shared commitment with our partners to work together
to address critical gaps in United Nations and regional
peace operations. The United States will remain the
largest contributor to United Nations peacekeeping in
terms of assessed contributions, bilateral training and
capacity-building efforts.
We understand that missions require resources
and capabilities to fulfil their mandates and to support
sustainable political solutions. Such investments have
yielded demonstrative positive outcomes. Yet sustained
efforts, in partnership with other financial donors,
troop- and police-contributing countries and the United
Nations, are required to further strengthen capacity
so as to execute operations effectively. One crucial
aspect of filling capability gaps is through training and
capacity-building aimed at improving peacekeeping
performance. Deficiencies in training and equipment
undermine the success of missions. Even the most
well-designed mission will fall short of its mandate if
its peacekeepers are not proficient in basic soldiering
and policing skills. With that in mind, we would like
to see a move towards more objective decision-making
on elements such as deployment, remediation and
repatriation when approaching force generation and
addressing capability gaps. It is important that the
United Nations know where the needs are greatest
and what has to be remedied, so that countries, like
17-45855

21/12/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operation

S/PV. 8150

the United States, can better target their support and
diplomatic engagement.

recommendations recently submitted to the Council,
which China will carefully study.

We encourage, in particular, the Office of Military
Affairs, the Police Division and other relevant offices
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
the Department of Field Support to redouble their
efforts to integrate performance-based data into
the force-generation process and regular reviews of
mission staffing. We commend the work conducted
by the Strategic Force Generation and Capability
Planning Cell on those fronts. A performance-based
decision-making process must be transparent and
standardized, and the States Members of the United
Nations must fully understand all of the assessment
processes and standards that are employed. In saying
that, we are not seeking to punish countries that
provide forces to the United Nations or individual
units. Performance-based decision-making will allow
the best mix of capabilities to be matched to mission
requirements and improve the potential for mission
success. It will also help contributing countries to focus
on what must be improved, while helping to target
capacity-building assistance to those who most need
and deserve it.

United Nations peacekeeping operations are
important tools in maintaining international peace
and security. Peacekeeping forces are responsible for
implementing the Council’s mandates on the ground.
Enhancing the rapid deployment capabilities of
peacekeeping forces and improving the capabilities of
peacekeepers are important for increasing the efficiency
and effectiveness of peacekeeping operations. I would
like to emphasize two points.

For our part, we are eager to see how the improved
capture and analysis of peacekeeping performance
information can help us target our training support.
We understand that performance is just one part of
improving peacekeeping capacity, but it is a part
where we must work together to see results. The
Security Council, the Secretariat and troop- and
police-contributing countries must partner to make
missions more effective, efficient and safer.
In October, Ambassador Nikki Haley joined
Ambassador Fodé Seck of Senegal and several other
permanent representatives in a meeting of the Council
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations to discuss
those and other issues. We believe the Working Group
is a good venue for the Council, the United Nations
and troop- and police-contributing countries to engage
in such discussions, and that it would be helpful for
performance to be considered in that Group, under Côte
d’Ivoire’s leadership in the New Year.
Mr. Lie Cheng (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
you, Sir, for convening today’s meeting.
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Keita for her
briefing, and the Secretary-General for the written

First, the international community should pay
great attention to the real needs of troop-contributing
countries (TCCs), in particular developing countries,
and strengthen support to troop-contributing countries
in the area of capacity-building. We must also ensure
that peacekeeping operations have the necessary
training, resources and capabilities for fulfilling their
tasks, as well as adequate and targeted pre-deployment
training and the necessary equipment to ensure that
such tasks are carried out. The international community
should enhance the peacekeeping capacity-building of
developing States that are TCCs through bilateral and
multilateral cooperation. Meanwhile, it is vital to attach
great importance to and support the important role that
the African Union and other regional and subregional
organizations play in maintaining peace and security
in Africa, and assist Africa in strengthening its
peacekeeping capacity-building.
Secondly, as the manager of peacekeeping
operations, the Secretariat should provide more efficient
and higher-quality support to peacekeeping forces so as
to enhance their ability to address complex situations.
The Secretariat and peacekeeping missions should
give priority to the security and medical capabilities of
peacekeepers, improve the internal sharing of security
information and ensure that security protection,
medical equipment and measures are in place on time.
Peacekeeping missions should give priority to the
training of peacekeepers being deployed, which should
be targeted in the light of the situation in the area
concerned. The Secretariat should further improve the
management and efficiency of an optimized logistical
guarantee mechanism so as to maximize the use of
peacekeeping resources.
As a major troop-contributing country to United
Nations peacekeeping operations, China remains
committed to enhancing pre-deployment training and

17-458557/21

S/PV.8150

United Nations peacekeeping operation

the standby capabilities of its peacekeeping forces
and police. China has also actively supported other
TCCs and police-contributing countries in the area
of capacity-building. China works hard to deliver on
the commitments made by Chinese leaders at the 2015
United Nations summit on peacekeeping operations.
Over the past two years, China has trained more
than 800 peacekeepers for the United Nations and
other countries. China has also dispatched the first
helicopter contingent to a peacekeeping mission in
Africa. It is also providing military assistance valued
at $100 million to the African Union. China has also
decided to work through the China-United Nations
Peace and Development Trust Fund to support TCCs,
in particular African countries, in their capacitybuilding. China has formally completed its registration
of a standby force of 8,000 peacekeepers in the
United Nations standby mechanism. Two Chinese
peacekeeping police contingents have also been
established and have been registered as part of the
United Nations standby mechanism. The first group of
contingents and equipment has met the requirements
for rapid deployment.
China remains committed to honouring its
commitment to world peace, and we join hands with
all parties to further promote the United Nations path
towards peace.
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I would like
to thank Assistant Secretary-General Keita for her
comprehensive and clear briefing. I would also like
to take this opportunity to congratulate the Canadian
delegation, its partners and the Secretariat for the
successful United Nations Peacekeeping Defence
Ministerial meeting in Vancouver last month. The
focus on innovation, training and capacity-building
that we saw in Vancouver is essential for successful and
modern peacekeeping and for bridging capacity gaps.
Allow me also to pay tribute to the men and women
of all countries who have served with United Nations
peace operations. Their commitment and dedication
have saved countless lives. Many have lost their own
lives in the service of the United Nations, and, as
others have said, we owe them a huge debt of gratitude.
The recent criminal and fatal attack on Tanzanian
peacekeepers in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is a reminder of the dangers that peacekeepers face
everyday as they protect others. I would like to make
three points today.
8/21

21/12/2017

First, on force generation, we look forward to
reviewing the Secretary-General’s report and his
recommendations on force generation and on bridging
capacity gaps, including effective and efficient training
and capacity-building. We recognize that planning,
pledges, performance and partnerships are the right
way forward, not only to improve force generation and
mitigate capacity gaps, but also to integrate gender
perspectives and the protection of civilians, especially
women and children, in peacekeeping operations.
We appreciate the efforts of the Secretariat to improve
the strategic force generation of uniformed personnel,
not only in terms of units and numbers, but also and
equally importantly, in terms of new capabilities such
as peacekeeping intelligence, warning radar systems,
gender advisers and multinational air-assets, as well
as increasing the number of female military observers
and staff officers. We support the Secretariat’s efforts
to validate pledges in the Peacekeeping Capability
Readiness System and evaluate mission headquarters,
deployed units and staff officers in order to measure
effectiveness and readiness and to meet the exceptional
challenges of peacekeeping missions.
In the light of those challenges, it is important that
all police- and troop-contributing countries live up to
their responsibility to train and equip their units so that
they can deliver on mandates, be present throughout
their areas of responsibility and minimize the risks of
casualties and wounded personnel.
Sweden will continue to take full responsibility
for its units, and ensure that they are fully trained and
equipped to meet all challenges. At the same time,
we will continue to support other police- and troopcontributing countries with training and capacitybuilding. Examples of that are: courses at the Swedish
International Training Centre and at the Nordic Centre
for Gender in Military Operations, located in Sweden;
mobile training-team support to peacekeeping centres
in Africa, including the United Nations presence in
Uganda; increasing the number of seats at courses for
those that deploy gender advisors to United Nations
peacekeeping missions; and mobile training-team
support for an infantry battalion in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali. We are ready to consider the same support to
sector headquarters in the future. Peacekeeping benefits
us all, and all contributions to peacekeeping operations
count. We would welcome an increase in the number
17-45855

21/12/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operation

of contributing countries, including contributors from
a wide range of regions.
Secondly, on the peace and security architecture,
the range and nature of threats to international
peace and security are complex and interlinked. We
strongly support the Secretary-General’s ambitious
reform plans for the peace and security architecture,
not least regarding an enhanced focus on prevention.
The Secretary-General’s proposal seeks, among
other things, to strengthen the link between political
strategies and operations. Delivering on that vision
will require a system-wide approach to sustaining
peace and the primacy of politics, which is reflected
in how the United Nations operates. That will include
closing the gap between peacekeeping operations and
the development system.
Presidential statement S/PRST/2017/27, adopted
earlier today, is a welcome step in that regard,
further outlining the link between peacebuilding and
sustaining peace and the mandates and configuration
of peacekeeping missions. The frank and timely
analysis of information is critical for effective conflict
prevention, mediation, management and resolution.
It is also essential for the Council to play its part in
designing the mandates for peacekeeping operations.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s efforts to
streamline and coordinate information and situational
awareness within the Secretariat. Joint analysis and
information-sharing need to be systematized from
the outset of a mission, and intelligence needs to be
integrated in each mission.

S/PV. 8150

flexible, predictable and sustainable funding for African
Union peace operations, including access to assessed
contributions. We look forward to the next report from
the Secretary-General on strengthening the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union.
Thirdly, we need to better integrate a gender
perspective and the protection of civilians into
peacekeeping operations and their mandates, so as to
ensure that missions are deployed with appropriate
staffing and competence. In that context, it is important
to stress the need to fulfil all obligations under
resolution 1325 (2000). It is also of utmost importance
to prevent sexual exploitation and abuse, and to
investigate any incidents and hold to account those
responsible. We welcome the Secretariat’s initiatives
to achieve gender parity and increase the amount of
women in peacekeeping.
We believe that the process of force generation
can benefit from greater openness and transparency,
increased frankness and better strategic military and
police advice from the Secretary-General to the Council,
as well as sequenced mandates with prioritized tasks
and the use of enhanced new capabilities that reduce
risks and enhance performance. Equally, it is vital to
look into new ways of capacity-building, training and
funding to achieve that. We will continue to contribute
and do everything we can to ensure that United Nations
peacekeeping can meet the challenges of the twentyfirst century.

The Secretariat also needs to give informed, sound
and frank military and police strategic advice, based
on troop-to-task analysis, with regard to the expected
delivery of any given mandate, which should have clear
and prioritized objectives that can be measured through
operational criteria for follow-up success and can help
to sequence the campaign plan in accordance with the
troops generated by the Secretariat and made available
by Member States.

Mr. Woldegerima (Ethiopia): We thank the
Japanese presidency for organizing this important
briefing on strategic force-generation capability and
training for United Nations peacekeeping. That is
indeed a very important issue that needs to be seriously
considered by the Council as part of the efforts to
reform United Nations peacekeeping. We welcome the
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution
2378 (2017), which was adopted during the Ethiopian
presidency in September, and we appreciate the briefing
of Assistant Secretary-General, Ms. Bintou Keita.

Resolution 2378 (2017) reflects and acknowledges
efforts of the African Union and subregional
organizations to strengthen their capacity in the
field of peace and security. The current momentum
around the Framework for a Renewed United NationsAfrican Union Partnership on Africa’s Integration and
Development Agenda 2017-2027 needs to be capitalized
on. That entails discussing concrete options for more

We all know that the United Nations does not have
its own army, and that it depends on Member States
to generate forces for its peacekeeping missions.
Nevertheless, securing sufficient personnel with
the necessary capabilities, adequate resources and
rapid-deployment capability has been one of the key
challenges that the Organization has been facing. The
speed, mobility and flexibility of personnel deployment

17-458559/21

S/PV.8150

United Nations peacekeeping operation

in the field has also been slow and bureaucratically
rigid, which has imposed constraints on missions’
operational effectiveness on the ground.
The need to undertake considerable efforts to
enhance the way in which the United Nations mobilizes
and deploys its uniformed personnel is well recognized.
In that respect, we hope that some of the aforementioned
challenges will be addressed through the ongoing reform
that the Secretary-General is undertaking to make the
Organization more nimble, efficient and effective.
We express our full support for the recommendations
contained in the latest report of the Secretary-General
on force generation, training and capacity-building.
Of course, we recognize the important steps that
have already been taken by the Secretariat to improve
the United Nations force-generation processes and
capability-analysis system. The establishment and
operationalization of the Peacekeeping Capability
Readiness System and the Strategic Force Generation
and Capability Planning Cell within the Secretariat is a
particular case in point.
As the report of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (S/2015/446) rightly stated, force
generation is not simply a technical and operational
issue to be delegated to the Secretariat. Achieving
progress requires the mobilization and political support
of Member States. That is why greater consultation
with current and potential contributors is absolutely
imperative so as to provide them with timely, adequate
and relevant information, and help them make informed
decisions concerning their contributions of personnel.
Therefore, enhancing triangular cooperation among
the Security Council, the Secretariat and troop- and
police-contributing countries is very crucial. We also
fully agree with the proposal made by the SecretaryGeneral to establish a light coordination mechanism,
which would, we believe, serve as an important platform
for matching the right capabilities and training with
the skill and equipment needs of potential troop- and
police-contributing countries.
Although the increase in the number and quality of
pledges by Member States continues to be significant,
it is equally important to ensure that the pledges and
commitments made thus far are honoured. That requires
following-up on recently made pledges, including those
made during the Vancouver ministerial conference last
month. We look forward to the Secretariat’s update on
10/21

21/12/2017

that issue in September 2018 pursuant to resolution
2378 (2017).
We believe that the United Nations strategic
force-generation processes should also support and
encourage regional capabilities, such as the African
Standby Force. Such regional forces certainly play an
important role as first responders in crisis situations,
and have demonstrated their ability to serve as bridging
forces until the United Nations is ready to deploy. It
is, therefore, our strong hope that the Secretariat will
develop innovative options and mechanisms that will
enhance the potential synergy between the United
Nations peacekeeping capability readiness system and
the African Standby Force.
Lastly, I would be remiss if I were to conclude
without expressing our appreciation to Japan for its
commitment to this issue and for the capacity-building
and training support that it has been providing to
African troop-contributing countries through the
triangular partnership project.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Ms. Bintou
Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for her briefing.
Since 1948, peacekeeping operations have
encountered great challenges. Currently, the most
significant among them have been related to the
protection of civilians and the asymmetric threats faced
by the personnel of missions on the ground. Moreover,
there are also logistical challenges in general, as
well as those related to the development of personnel
capacities, adequate equipment, force generation
and the concept of operations, which are instruments
needed to foster the strengthening of the execution of
peacekeeping missions.
For nearly 70 years, through the implementation
of their mandates, missions have contributed to
peacebuilding in various countries. Unfortunately, that
has taken place at a very high cost, owing to the loss of
the invaluable lives of soldiers and civilian personnel
carrying out their duties. Bolivia pays its most sincere
and heartfelt tribute to every man and women among
the contingents and personnel of United Nations
peacekeeping operations around the world, who spare
no effort in fulfilling their mission and mandate
despite material constraints, insufficient resources
in some situations, difficult conditions on the ground
and a volatile security environment. We also thank
17-45855

21/12/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operation

troop- and police-contributing countries and those that
contribute observers and civilian personnel for their
impartiality, solidarity with and commitment to the
United Nations system and to countries suffering from
the consequences of armed conflicts and instability.
The international stage is obviously not static in
nature. It is undergoing remarkable transformations.
The constant threat posed by terrorist groups and
transnational crime highlight the need for peacekeeping
missions to undergo structural changes that would
allow them to adapt to deal more effectively with their
respective contexts. Accordingly, the effective and
adequate provision of the necessary financial, human
and material resources to missions requires technical,
logistical and, above all, political analyses in line with
the mandates adopted by the Security Council, which
must be more realistic, precise and better-focused.
We believe that the Vancouver principles provide
an important foundation with respect to training,
monitoring, reporting, the protection of minors and
the participation and inclusion of women in all aspects
of peacekeeping operations. We therefore emphasize
prioritizing the improvement of institutional flexibility
regarding the deployment of troops, as well as selecting
the best trained and most specialized among them
to respond to the asymmetric contexts that we just
mentioned. Similarly, it is essential that improvements
in the material and, above all, technological aspects
enable peacekeeping missions to be more effective in
fulfilling their mandates. It should be highlighted that
adequate equipment and training of troops are not only
the responsibility of contributing countries, but also of
our entire Organization.
The constant attacks against peacekeepers, an
example of which occurred only a few days ago with
tragic consequences, illustrate the need to strengthen
key aspects of missions — especially those involving
situational awareness on the ground, mobility and the
reaction response of units — above all by reinforcing
the defensive and protective resources of the camps and
personnel. In that regard, we must consider all possible
support modalities for funding peace operations
in a sustained, predictable and flexible manner in
accordance with the provisions of resolution 2320
(2016). Those modalities must also be assessed and
revised in a manner that accords greater autonomy
to the United Nations vis-à-vis countries that make
more substantial contributions, as the financial factor

S/PV. 8150

can be used against the very purpose and objective of
the missions.
Moreover, within the context of peacekeeping, it is
imperative to ensure the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda pursuant to resolution
1325 (2000), thereby reaffirming, ensuring and
encouraging women’s participation in peace processes
through their active participation in prevention,
mediation, negotiation and dialogue in order to achieve
solutions on level playing fields in post-conflict
reconstruction. Priority must also be given to gender
parity in the area of peace operations, pursuant to
resolution 2242 (2015).
Finally, it is worth mentioning that no peacekeeping
mission can succeed if it does not enjoy the support of
the host country. In that regard, continuous and fluid
cooperation and information-sharing between missions
and local authorities is essential. Bolivia reiterates
that the preventive approach based on case-by-case
experiences is essential when defining mandates,
whatever their nature, with strict respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
States, while promoting their national ownership and
without using them to justify intervention.
In conclusion, as this is the last public briefing of
the year — in principle — my delegation would like
to take this opportunity to congratulate the Japanese
delegation on successfully leading the Council’s
work this month. We also warmly commend the six
non-permanent members whose terms are ending in
this important forum, while extending our cordial
congratulations for the significant work that they have
done in pursuit of international peace and security.
Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the presidency of Japan for convening this
briefing, and especially thank Ms. Bintou Keita,
Assistant
Secretary-General
for
Peacekeeping
Operations, for her detailed and clear briefing
this afternoon.
The year 2017 has seen a great deal of debate
concerning the future of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. The Security Council, as well as the
General Assembly, the Fourth Committee, the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping and the recent
Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial Conference held
in Vancouver, which Uruguay had the honour of
co-hosting, give us reason to be optimistic that that

17-4585511/21

S/PV.8150

United Nations peacekeeping operation

work will continue in the coming months in addressing
the issues that were raised in all those forums.
One particular highlight of the past year’s activities
was the high-level debate on peacekeeping operations
held under the presidency of Ethiopia (see S/PV.8051),
at which the Council unanimously adopted resolution
2378 (2017) — a key reform document that sets out areas
where the Security Council can and must do more. An
essential component that resolution, which is also the
focus of today’s meeting, is an emphasis on the need to
continue working to fill the existing gaps in capacities
and force generation to ensure that peacekeeping
operations more effectively and adequately meet
current challenges.
Uruguay believes that the strategic strengthening
of force generation is essential for improving the
effectiveness and efficiency of peacekeeping operations.
The timely availability of appropriately trained and
equipped uniformed and civilian personnel is a key
element for the success of peacekeeping operations.
Likewise, mandates cannot be fully implemented if
missions do not have the capacity required to meet the
new challenges they face. Following in the footsteps
of our colleague François Delattre, I will address
three aspects.
First, regarding the planning and design phase,
including the reconfiguration of peacekeeping
operations, we believe it is crucial for the Security
Council to pay greater attention to identifying the
capacities required to deliver a given mandate.
Planning must be based on clear, attainable and
prioritized objectives with reference parameters and an
exit strategy providing for appropriate drawdown and
handover to a successor entity when those parameters
have been satisfied. To that end, triangular cooperation,
as others have already mentioned, among the Council,
the Secretariat and police- and troop-contributing
countries, is essential. The Secretariat, and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and
the Department of Field Support (DFS) in particular,
play a decisive role in providing advice when it comes
to taking decisions on, among other things, timely
needs in terms of equipment and personnel.
With regard to the procurement of equipment, I
should like to add that this must not depend solely on
a country’s financial resources. In our view, we must
work on alternatives for such procurement, for example,
by developing greater cooperation among police- and
12/21

21/12/2017

troop-contributing countries, the Secretariat and
donor countries. At the same time, many of the new
technologies that missions now require are highly
expensive, underscoring the need to find alternatives
for their procurement. Likewise, when it comes to
decision-making, the Security Council must fully
take into account the opinions of police- and troopcontributing countries since, as the ones who will be
providing services on the ground, they can greatly
facilitate operational planning and thereby ensure that
their personnel have the capacities they need to respond
to changing demands.
Changing demands call for new approaches, and
we note how peacekeeping operations have taken
on a range of new tasks such as, for example, in the
context of peacebuilding, human rights monitoring and
civilian protection. On this last point, we must consider
and expand the range of methods used to protect
civilians. That includes considering the potential of
unarmed methods to complement other peacekeeping
strategies. This diverse range of methods includes
greater involvement with communities, with the direct
participation of all sectors of society greater, and better
coordination with other United Nations entities present
on the ground and non-governmental organizations.
Second is the importance of personnel deployed
receiving appropriate training, especially predeployment
training. It is essential that peace personnel be trained
and prepared to perform the tasks required in their area
of operations. This requires joint efforts on the part
of troop- and police-contributing countries to ensure
better training for their personnel and of the Secretariat
when it comes to conducting relevant evaluations and
verifications. As a country contributing to peacekeeping
operations, Uruguay ascribes direct responsibility
to troop- and police-contributing countries for the
pre-deployment training and preparation of their
personnel. We cannot talk about the efficiency and
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations unless troopand police-contributing countries fully meet their
responsibilities in this regard. We also recognize the
excellent joint efforts of DPKO and DFS in developing,
applying and monitoring standards and advice for
training in peacekeeping, especially in the areas of
human rights, protection of civilians and prevention of
sexual exploitation and abuse.
Thirdly and finally, we must address not only force
generation but also the full functioning of forces once
deployed. This is a topic that my delegation has raised
17-45855

21/12/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operation

continuously and vigorously throughout its two years
on the Security Council because we understand that,
unfortunately, it affects many peacekeeping operations,
representing an issue on which the Security Council
should assume greater responsibility. We are talking
about obstacles on the ground that have a negative impact
on the effectiveness and efficiency of peacekeeping
operations. On one hand, greater attention must be paid
to national restrictions, so-called caveats — whether
explicitly declared or, worse still, undeclared — because
they can hamper the mandate implementation.
On more than one occasion, Uruguayan troops
have had to deal with emergencies in another force’s
area of operations because that other force has, at
the last minute, brought up caveats in order to avoid
complicated violent situations. Such actions are not
only unfair to other forces; they are unacceptable. The
Security Council must demand that host States fully
respect and comply with the terms of status-of-forces
agreements: these constitute the guarantees protecting
the personnel that countries voluntarily contribute to
peacekeeping operations.
We have noted with concern the increasing
frequency of attacks targeting United Nations
personnel and facilities, leading to significant human
and material losses. The most recent such tragedy
was the death of 15 Tanzanian peacekeepers from the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo a few weeks ago.
This trend represents a threat to the activities of the
United Nations.
We are fully aware that there is a fine line between,
on the one hand, a proactive posture seeking to
strengthen respect for a United Nations deployment
and thereby facilitate the performance of its mandate,
and, on the other, the possible interpretation of such
a posture, depending on the circumstances, as support
for one of the parties to a conflict. However, those who
choose to attack United Nations forces must be repelled
with equal or stronger force. Refusing to assume
responsibility is not the right answer, and we must step
up efforts to equip the various components with as
many tools as possible to face changing circumstances,
passive defence measures and strengthened rules of
engagement, and we must exhaust all avenues to hold
those who commit crimes to account.
I wish to emphasize the need for actors and
competent bodies in the field of peacekeeping

S/PV. 8150

operations to work in full synchrony. We must overcome
the rivalry among organs or commissions that burden
the process, since each one has specific competencies
that make a positive contribution. We understand that
the efforts that the Secretary-General devotes to that
issue in his initiative to reform the peace and security
architecture of the Organization. I reiterate Uruguay’s
unflagging and unchanged commitment to United
Nations peacekeeping operations. We shall continue
contributing to their development both in the field with
peacekeepers, as well as in the political debates on the
reform process.
Following the example of my Bolivian colleague,
as this is the final meeting of the Security Council for
this month, according to its programme of work, I wish
to commend you, Sir, for the manner in which you and
your team have led the Council this month. This may
also be the last meeting in which Uruguay participates
as a non-permanent member. I should therefore like to
offer a few very brief expressions of gratitude.
I begin by thanking Council members for having
supported the election of my country two years ago,
in particular those 185 countries that voted in favour
of our candidacy. Secondly, I wish to thank those
countries that have served as members of the Council
these past two years for their tireless support for the
delegation of Uruguay.
In particular, I offer a strong expression of thanks
to each and every member of the Security Council
Affairs Division, who have always — and especially
during our two terms as President — assisted us
with their deep knowledge of the Security Council,
the items on its agenda and its working methods
with great professionalism and, I acknowledge, with
enduring patience.
We also thank the Translation and Interpretation
Services, who have sometimes had to struggle with
our tendency to stray from our prepared statements
and to navigate the swells of our oratory. I also thank
the conference officers for their work circulating
documents and preparing the Chamber.
I have saved the best for last. I thank the entire team
of my delegation here in New York and in the Ministry
in Montevideo. We all know that they are the true, if
hidden sustainers of our work in the Council. It has
been a privilege for me to work with such an excellent
groups of professionals.

17-4585513/21

S/PV.8150

United Nations peacekeeping operation

Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I thank you, Sir, for your
initiative to take up once again in this Chamber the
issue of improving force generation as one for the main
prerequisites for successful peacekeeping. I am also
grateful to Assistant Secretary-General Keita for her
valuable briefing.
Peacekeeping operations continue to be a reliable
and commonly used instrument for curbing and,
more importantly, preventing conflicts and ensuring
sustaining peace. Yet, taking stock of the most recent
discussion of peacekeeping reform in the Council,
as well as the very comprehensive open debate we
held yesterday (see S/PV.8144), it is evident that the
world is not getting any safer. War and aggression
are spreading, and peace and goodwill are in retreat.
As my President said before the Council, in these
dangerous circumstances,
“[o]ur Organization, which was created to secure
peace and stability in the world, cannot afford to
stand aside. It must be proactive” (S/PV.8051, p. 12).
In this regard, it is essential to ensure proper
force generation for any peacekeeping operation to
make it capable of delivering on the mandates devised
by the Council. Therefore, my delegation considers
this task to be an integral part of the comprehensive
reform of United Nations peacekeeping, based on the
recommendations contained in the report of the Highlevel Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see
S/2015/446). I cannot but agree with the SecretaryGeneral that what is needed are the right capabilities,
not the available ones.
Ukraine is proud to have been among the first
States that joined the pledging process at the 2015
Peacekeeping Summit. We have been a participant
in a number of subsequent conferences. My country
joined over 80 Member States that took part in the most
recent Vancouver Defence Ministerial Conference. We
welcome the communiqué adopted at that meeting,
which, we believe, should be factored appropriately into
the activities of the Council and the General Assembly.
In recent years, peacekeeping operations have
become better adapted in terms of equipment
and expertise to the execution of mandated tasks.
Force generation has gained more flexibility and
predictability. At the same time, there is still plenty of
room to make peacekeeping operations more capable of
mandate delivery, especially in the light of oftentimes
14/21

21/12/2017

rapidly changing situations on the ground. Let we share
some suggestions in this regard.
First, as an active troop-and police-contributing
country, Ukraine welcomes the work carried out in
the Council on improving the dialogue among troop
and police contributors, the Council itself and the
Secretariat, as well as with host countries. It is necessary
to continue the work on taking this triangular dialogue
to a new level, especially during the establishment or
renewal of peacekeeping mandates.
Secondly, missions should be provided with clear,
coherent, achievable, sequenced and, at the same time,
resilient mandates, drawn up in accordance with core
tenets of the United Nations peacekeeping and with a
focus on supporting a political solution to the conflict.
In this view, the impartiality of a mission and its
personnel should be a guiding principle.
Thirdly, Ukraine believes that the SecretaryGeneral’s endeavour in restructuring the peace
and security pillar of the Secretariat should result
in strengthening strategic advice to the Council,
including on the elaboration of effective peacekeeping
mandates. It is also important to provide the Council
with detailed and frank reports from the field — to
give the information that is required, even if it is not
what the Council members may wish to hear. Such
reports should also be shared with relevant troop- and
police-contributing countries in a timely manner.
Fourthly, while considering the establishment or
renewal of mandates, the Council should engage more
actively and give all possible support to the Secretariat
in securing the use of appropriate modern technologies
in peacekeeping operations. Strengthening the
intelligence capacities of operations to improve their
situational awareness should also be envisaged. Due
attention must be payed to securing proper funding and
providing sufficient enablers, as needed.
All of these aspects are critically important to
ensuring the security and mobility of peacekeeping
personnel. Any decision on enablers’ draw-down,
including aviation assets, must be taken with a due
weighing of all existing risks on the ground, especially
considering the limited scope of available highperforming resources, as stated by the SecretaryGeneral. The recent tragedy in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo should serve as a bitter reminder to all of
us that peacekeeping operations have to be provided
with sufficient resources, technologies and intelligence
17-45855

21/12/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operation

in order to ensure the safety of their personnel as they
implement their mandate. I pay tribute here to all
peacekeepers who have lost their lives safeguarding
international peace.
Last but not least, we have to provide United
Nations peacekeeping operations with properly trained
and equipped personnel capable and ready to take robust
action for mandate execution. For its part, the Council
has to closely monitor the implementation of resolution
2272 (2016) and continue to support relevant initiatives
of the Secretary-General, including on the eradication
of sexual violence in United Nations peacekeeping.
In closing, I would like to reiterate that Ukraine
has always been a strong and reliable partner of
the Organization in terms of its peacekeeping
activities. We will remain a steadfast supporter and
contributor — even in times when my country itself
requires United Nations peacekeeping assistance owing
to well-known external factors.
Mr. Dovganyuk (Kazakhstan) (spoke in Russian):
I would like to thank the Japanese presidency and
the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Ms. Bintou Keita, for today’s
important briefing.
Over the past 60 years, United Nations peacekeeping
operations have served as one of the most effective
instruments in ensuring and maintaining international
peace and security. At the same time, current United
Nations peacekeeping operations are facing an
unprecedented upsurge in asymmetric threats, which
require a systematized plan to reduce such high risks
and the number of fatalities by adapting existing
approaches or creating new strategies. In that context,
the following measures are required.
First, we need a comprehensive annual review
of United Nations peacekeeping reform in line with
the recommendations set forth by resolution 2378
(2017). We would like to note that the United Nations
Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial, held in Vancouver
in November, provided a good platform for the troopand police-contributing countries to receive updated
information on the progress of the transformation of
United Nations peacekeeping, on the enhancement of
the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations and on
responses to challenges to peace and security.
Second, we need to tighten the requirements
and raise the standards for the selection and training

S/PV. 8150

of peacekeeping military and police troops, their
personnel, armaments, materiel and technical base.
Third, we must intensify the professional training
of peacekeepers on the ground, including in-service
training, especially in high-risk situations of armed and
terrorist attacks.
Fourth, better strategies are needed to react to the
threats posed by illegal armed groups posing a threat to
peacekeepers, civilian personnel and local populations.
Fifth, we must heighten peacekeeper awareness on
the protection of civilians when there is an increase in
the displacement and movements of civilians.
Sixth,
we
need
closer
dialogue
and
ongoing
consultations
between
the
Security
Council, the Secretariat and the troop- and
police-contributing countries.
Seventh, we must increase the number of troopand police-contributing countries in peacekeeping
operations, which could strengthen and increase trust
in them on the part of the people in the areas where the
missions are conducted.
Lastly, it is important that information-sharing
is improved and that the best practices of individual
peacekeeping missions are disseminated to other
missions in a timely manner through the central
apparatus of the United Nations. These best practices
should be taken into account in preparing peacekeepers
for their tasks in peacekeeping operations.
It is clear that force generation alone is not
sufficient. Peacekeeping operations need to be effective
in fulfilling their mandates. It is therefore necessary
for police and military personnel to see themselves
as essential partners contributing to enabling peace
processes and implementing agreements. The
peacekeeping operations must support the work of the
civilian component in realizing the overall mandates
and objectives of the United Nations.
Mr. Awad (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to thank Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for her
briefing and for the efforts made by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations in the light of the increasing
challenges facing peacekeeping operations, both on the
ground and at the conceptual level. I would also like
to thank the Japanese presidency for convening today’s
meeting on the occasion of the publication of the

17-4585515/21

S/PV.8150

United Nations peacekeeping operation

21/12/2017

report of the Secretary-General on measures to fill the
gaps in peacekeeping. This is another opportunity to
operationalize the efforts of developing and reforming
peacekeeping operations.

of forces must be in accordance with clear standards
and
benchmarks
in
peacekeeping-operations
policies and in close consultations with troop- and
police-contributing countries.

Reform and review efforts over the past two years
focused on addressing operational and technical aspects
of peacekeeping missions, notably the efforts to broaden
the base of troop- and police-contributing countries
and force generation. These efforts included developing
the United Nations Peacekeeping Capability Readiness
System and holding conferences on peacekeeping
operations, the latest of which was the United Nations
Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial, held in Vancouver.
It is high time for those efforts to take tangible form
in improved effectiveness of peacekeeping operations
on the ground. In this regard, I would like to highlight
three points.

There is a clear link in that regard between the
availability of training, capacities and equipment,
on the one hand, and enhancing the capability of
forces to protect civilians and ensure their own
safety, on the other hand. In recent months, we
have witnessed an increased frequency in attacks
against units participating in peacekeeping missions
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Central
African Republic and Mali. These incidents have
uncovered shortcomings in the capacities available for
protection — whether in terms of training, the nature
of the equipment or the availability of information,
including for risk-assessment purposes. We believe
that we urgently need to address these shortcomings
in order to enhance the credibility of peacekeeping
missions and protect the lives of personnel, for they are
the true assets of these missions.

First, force generation and capabilities for United
Nations peacekeeping operations are directly linked
to operationalizing the tripartite mechanism for
consultations among the Security Council troopcontributing countries and the Secretariat. This
tripartite mechanism directly contributes to achieving
a comprehensive and clear vision for issuing and
reviewing mandates, in accordance with United Nations
capabilities and capacities, while taking into account
the political and on-the-ground realities in all stages of
the conflict as well as the specific context, especially
when it comes to the issuance of sequence mandating.
This approach guarantees the effectiveness of missions
and prevents unlimited mandate extension where there
is no fixed time frame for withdrawal. It further allows
for the Council to define a comprehensive vision,
thereby enabling it to take decisions on extending,
reviewing and amending mandates in an effective and
realistic manner.
Secondly, reforming and developing peacekeeping
operations includes significant efforts to enhance
aspects related to training, following the chain of
command and control and authorizing those on the
ground to take decisive action in emergency situations.
In this regard, we stress that increasing capacities
and force generation and broadening the base of
troop- and police-contributing countries must not
come at the expense of meeting the highest standards
of performance, the availability of equipment and
training, and complying with the strictest standards
of discipline and conduct, including combating sexual
exploitation and abuse. Evaluating the performance
16/21

Thirdly, when it comes to filling gaps in
capacities and capabilities, I would like to highlight
the contribution of Egypt in specialized units in the
most difficult United Nations missions. Because we
are committed to supporting the efforts of the United
Nations in peacekeeping, we have pledged to provide the
necessary equipment to fill the gap in many missions,
including our contribution of 100 armoured vehicles
to them. In addition to contributing this equipment
and personnel, we have adopted the highest training
standards for our police and military troops. We have
held detailed training sessions prior to deployment,
notably on the issue of sexual exploitation and abuse, in
accordance with United Nations training curriculums.
Egypt is also contributing to training and building
the capacity of future troop-contributing countries.
The Cairo International Centre for Conflict Resolution,
Peacekeeping and Peacebuilding is holding a number
of training sessions for troops from these and other
countries. We have received a financial contribution
from the Government of Japan.
Finally, it is important for the Security Council to
address the matter of force capability and performance
as well as the provision of equipment. However, we
believe that enhancing the role and effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations starts with the mandates
themselves and the review of those mandates in the
17-45855

21/12/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operation

general framework of the primacy of political solutions,
and in making sure that there are sufficient resources
for implementing those mandates on the ground, as
Ms. Keita mentioned in her briefing. The performance
of these missions must be evaluated on the basis of their
contribution to providing the necessary conditions for
a political solution.
In
that
regard,
presidential
statement
S/PRST/2017/27, which we have just adopted, represents
an important contribution to enhancing the capacity of
the Security Council and the Secretariat in ensuring
that political solutions are our primary focus. The
presidential statement calls on the Secretary-General to
include relevant reports when reviewing peacekeeping
operations, that these reports contain analyses based on
the seven guidance elements set forth in the statement,
with a view to evaluating the efficiency of mandates
and the availability of favourable conditions for the
success of peacekeeping operations. Since Ms. Keita
is with us today, I would like to take this opportunity
to stress the importance of this vital dimension and to
express our appreciation for her focus on enhancing
capacities, availability of equipment, training, conduct
and discipline.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
today’s meeting. We have found the briefing by the
Assistant Secretary-General, Ms. Bintou Keita, to
be quite useful. We welcome the efforts made by
the Secretary-General in the area of increasing the
effectiveness of training and the capacity-building
of peacekeepers.
The United Nations is currently undergoing a
period of large-scale transformations. One of the key
areas for reform is the peace and security architecture,
which is the precise context for addressing the issue of
United Nations peacekeeping operations. The ultimate
goal of this process is to increase the effectiveness of
peacekeeping by making sure that the Blue Helmets
are adequately equipped, trained and prepared for the
implementation of Security Council mandates. What
is important here is not just the qualifications and
professional training of the personnel, but also the
possibility of the timely deployment of missions and
their mobility in the field within the framework of
their mandate.
Unfortunately, members of the Council have not
had enough time to study the report of the Secretary-

S/PV. 8150

General. Our capitals will continue to consider it
very carefully. At the same time, we observe that the
document correctly notes that the main responsibility
for the issue of training, which the United Nations
cannot decide on its own, lies with the States themselves,
which is not just a question of the countries developing
and providing training programmes but, rather, first
and foremost, it is a question of the countries providing
contingents in the field. Their role cannot be overstated
because without them it is not possible to implement the
stated goals of the Security Council.
We are convinced of the need for close triangular
cooperation and coordination of efforts on the issue
of training and capacity-building among the Security
Council, the troop- and police-contributing countries
and the United Nations Secretariat. However, what is
no less important are the direct contacts between States
that are developing the training programmes and those
that are participating in them. Of course, it is extremely
important to take into account the contemporary
realities and the demand for peacekeepers, understand
what kind of peacekeepers we need today and determine
the most relevant areas for training.
In this regard, we need to mention language
training — an aspect that the Secretary-General has
singled out as an issue in his report. We acknowledge
that 48 per cent of peacekeepers work in Frenchspeaking environments, and perhaps we need to bear this
in mind. However, the troop- and police-contributing
countries and the host countries must together carefully
weigh whether it is a priority issue. The opinions and
concerns of contingent providers need to be taken into
account because their troops and police officers know
more than anyone what tasks are required in the field
and what kind of skills are necessary to complete them.
In that context, we cannot help but notice that the
Secretary-General’s report makes mention of forums
whose initiators, starting in 2015, were individual
Member States. Our opinion is that those issues — which
are of principal importance for peacekeeping, for the
United Nations system, for all Member States and for the
contingent contributing countries in particular — need
to be discussed at intergovernmental forums within the
United Nations system. However, creating alternative
forums is no guarantee of real improvements in practice.
For example, despite the efforts undertaken outside
the United Nations to staff the mission in Mali, which
have been ongoing over a number of years, the police
component has reached only 88 per cent of the force

17-4585517/21

S/PV.8150

United Nations peacekeeping operation

21/12/2017

ceiling, and the military component has only reached
the even lower level of 85 per cent. We believe that
work in the area of peacekeeping should be conducted
on the basis of discussions and decisions reached in the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, which
comprises more than 150 States members.

in Mali and South Sudan. There are many examples
of the effectiveness of these missions. There are
also, unfortunately, examples of the sacrifices that
individual peacekeepers make, as we were reminded
by the outrageous attack that killed 15 Tanzanian
peacekeepers earlier this month.

The recommendations contained in the report of
the Secretary-General, as far as we understand, lay out
proposals for the organization within the Secretariat of
two mechanisms designed to enhance the effectiveness
of States’ interactions on training and capacitybuilding issues. We will carefully consider these
initiatives. Generally speaking, we hope that linking
intra-State cooperation with the Secretariat will not
create additional obstacles or provoke unnecessary
competition between States that are providing training
programmes. We hope that this will improve the
awareness of troop- and police-contributing countries
about the programmes available to them.

Today we have been briefed on the persistent
gaps that remain in peacekeeping operations. We do
not always have the right capabilities, equipment and
trained personnel to deploy and deliver the demanding
mandates that the Security Council sets. We must do
more to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of
United Nations peacekeeping. This will enable us
to better manage the conflicts where peacekeepers
are deployed and better protect civilians caught up
in conflict, as well as the peacekeepers who take up
this crucial role. To achieve this we must invest in the
United Nations force generation process. There have
been significant improvements to the process, but more
needs to be done.

Russian peacekeepers — men and women — are
serving in 10 peacekeeping operations. We support
greater participation of women in United Nations
peacekeeping. Indeed, women already represent 23 per
cent of our peacekeeping units. The number of women
among military observers is also increasing. Our
country has gained significant experience in training
peacekeepers. Russian centres train not only our
peacekeepers, but also foreign peacekeepers — both
police and formed units, as well as military observers.
We have designed a training system, which includes
both general and specialized training, that peacekeepers
undergo just before their deployment.
Language training is also being adapted to existing
needs. Work is under way to create additional centres
to educate and train peacekeepers. In order to broaden
our contribution to the training of foreign experts for
United Nations missions, we are also considering the
possibility of using our General Staff Academy of
the Russian Federation’s Armed Forces in the city of
Naro-Fominsk. We stand ready to continue offering
all possible assistance needed to strengthen the
peacekeeping capacity of the United Nations as a whole.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Thank you, Mr
President, for convening today’s important meeting. I
would also like to thank Ms. Keita for her briefing.
United Nations peacekeeping operations play
a critical role in containing and reducing conflict,
often in the most challenging circumstances, such as
18/21

When the Council last discussed force generation
(see S/PV.8064), the United Kingdom set out three
steps which, if taken, would improve the effectiveness
of peacekeeping missions: deployment innovation,
improved mission performance, and better long-term
planning and strategic force generation. Today, I want
to update the Council on the United Kingdom’s actions
to support these three areas.
Last year we trained more than 11,000 troops from
some 30 countries to prepare them for deployments to
United Nations missions, including the United Nations
Mission in the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS),
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic and the
African Union Mission in Somalia. Support has ranged
from instructor and leadership training through to
assistance with the planning, conduct and delivery
of national predeployment training for troop- and
police-contributing countries.
In addition, we continue to support mandatory
e-learning predeployment training for all troops
to prepare them to respond to and prevent sexual
exploitation and abuse. The Women Peace and Security
Chiefs of Defence Network, which we launched alongside
Canada and Bangladesh in November, is a critical tool
to strengthen training and capacity-building on gender
17-45855

21/12/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operation

S/PV. 8150

throughout peacekeeping and at all levels. We have
also provided over $800,000 in extrabudgetary funding
to the Departments of Peacekeeping Operations and
Field Support.

Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing today’s briefing
and Assistant Secretary-General Keita for her
insightful remarks.

The United Kingdom now has over 700 personnel
deployed on eight United Nations missions operating
in seven countries. These include 380 troops in South
Sudan, 40 in Somalia and 280 in Cyprus. We have
embraced smart pledging, which was raised by my
Minister of State for Defence at the Peacekeeping
Defence Ministerial Conference in Vancouver. This
innovation will enable us to better meet our obligations
through a coordinated response with partners. For
example, through our deployment to UNMISS, we are
working with Viet Nam, the United States of America
and Australia to provide a field hospital in Bentiu,
South Sudan, which ensures the provision of medical
care for peacekeepers.

How to make peacekeeping more effective and
efficient is one of the major questions to be addressed.
It not only encompasses the issues of gaps in force
generation and capabilities, which were recently
addressed at the Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial
Conference in Vancouver, but is also part of the broader
reform of the United Nations system. This is because
peacekeeping is still a very important tool that the
United Nations can use to address the contemporary
challenges to international peace and security, as we
discussed yesterday in the open debate on complex
challenges in this area (see S/PV.8144).

But coordination needs to go further. First, we
must collect performance data and use this to better
understand and focus our limited resources to where
training and capacity-building are most needed. We
must coordinate our collective efforts more broadly.
Cooperation should be expanded to cover leadership,
gender integration, protection and victim support.
Secondly, we must see more partnerships and more
smart pledges. We need to develop mechanisms that
match up countries that can provide equipment and
technology, specialist skills and personnel or logistical
support. Smart pledges will help plug persistent gaps.
Finally, we must consider the non-military
components of peacekeeping. We must support
capacity-building work carried out by individual police
officers and specialized police teams. This approach
bolsters recovery and creates long-term stability. We
must also consider how we can generate the civilian
component, so that missions do not just keep the
peace, but build and sustain it as well. Wider work on
management reform has a role to play. Crucial civilian
posts must not remain unfilled.
We all recognize the positive impact peacekeepers
have worldwide. We ask them to take on enormous
challenges to protect the most vulnerable. We must do
our utmost to improve the systems that support them.
We owe this to the brave women and men who serve
under the blue banner.

Italy is doing its part as a provider of global
security. We are one of the most generous financial
contributors to the peacekeeping budget and we are
the largest contributor of Blue Helmets in the Group
of Western European and other States. Currently, we
have more than 1,000 units deployed in United Nations
peacekeeping missions in Lebanon, Cyprus and
Mali and in the military observer group in India and
Pakistan. Moreover, our defence and police forces are
also providing assistance and protection in other areas
of the globe — from Somalia to Afghanistan, from Iraq
to Libya and the Mediterranean, the Arab Gulf, the
Balkans, Eastern Europe and, as of a few weeks ago, in
the Niger in the Sahel region.
As Assistant Secretary-General Keita said with
respect to the capability gaps, there is an urgent need
for air assets to improve the mobility of troops, for
medical assets to provide assistance and fast medical
evacuation, including to civilians, if needed, and for
units for explosive-ordinance disposal to remove mines
and improvised explosive devices. Italy has already
pledged to support enhancing these capabilities in the
next year, which we confirmed in Vancouver.
Technology is key in order to increase the safety
and security of peacekeepers. We think that the use of
drones in the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
effectively and efficiently improved the gathering of
information, which provided institutional awareness
that has been crucial for the protection of civilians and
the safety of Italian workers.

17-4585519/21

S/PV.8150

United Nations peacekeeping operation

Training is also vital to improving capability and
ensuring that the mandate can be effectively delivered
on the ground. Since 2005, the Centre of Excellence for
Stability Police Units, located in Vicenza, managed by
our carabinieri together with the United States, offers
qualified training for United Nations peacekeeping
through a specific training module on the rule of
law, international humanitarian law, protection of
civilians, protection of cultural heritage, environmental
management and prevention of sexual and genderbased violence in conflicts. It also focuses in particular
on training-of- trainers courses, especially for military
personnel from West Africa and the Sahel region.
These training programmes have developed
standard and common operational procedures to be
applied during robust police activities. We are convinced
that future police cooperation will be increasingly
based on specialized police units that are focused on
stabilization, rule of law, justice and the protection
of civilians, in line with the reform of the peace and
security architecture envisaged by the SecretaryGeneral, which emphasizes the need to focus more on
prevention, mediation and peacebuilding. That was also
the aim of the Security Council resolution 2382 (2017)
on policing and peacekeeping that was adopted during
our presidency last month.
Another major gap in peacekeeping operations is
the presence and role of women. The participation of
women at all levels is key to improving the effectiveness
and performance of missions. Their role is important
in all peace and security efforts. It is also crucial to
train peacekeepers to protect people, key values and
principles so as to ensure the credibility and reputation
of the United Nations. In this context, I would highlight
the fact that Italy has joined the Circle of Leadership on
the prevention of and response to sexual exploitation
and abuse in United Nations operations and has signed
the voluntary compact to eliminate this scourge. We
have also contributed to the Trust Fund in Support of
Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse.
We should not forget logistics. The capacity for
operations to deliver and fulfil their mandates is
closely related to the swiftness of deployment and
the operational effectiveness of field missions. The
United Nations Global Service Centre’s Logistics Base,
located in Brindisi since 1994, is a crucial hub for the
provision of logistical support to peacekeeping missions
around the world. We should also pay attention to the
management of the environmental footprint of field
20/21

21/12/2017

missions throughout their life cycles. A lighter footprint
would allow for cost efficiency and improved safety and
security for troops and for civilians of host countries
and eventually for the better delivery of mandates.
On this very last aspect, let me thank all our
colleagues for the issuance today of the press statement
we proposed on environmental management in relation
to peacekeeping operations. For the first time, a member
of the Security Council recognized the importance of
comprehensively addressing the relationship between
peacekeeping operations and the environments in
which they are deployed. This is a win-win goal that
has the potential to improve mandate delivery. Italy
will continue to support it in all the relevant bodies of
the United Nations.
Finally, I received a communication that we will
meet tomorrow at 1 p.m. to approve a draft resolution,
so technically this is not our last meeting. But tomorrow
will be even closer to the holidays than today is so I
prefer to thank everybody now. It has been an honour and
a privilege to work with everyone, both professionally
and in a personal sense. Unlike Ambassador Rosselli
Frieri, I cannot give Council members an appointment
in 2034 so I will give members an appointment when
the reform of the Security Council has taken place.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Keita for her
briefing. Japan appreciates the efforts by the Secretariat
to compile the recommendations contained in the letter
of the Secretary-General.
This year the Council has had several meetings on
peacekeeping, including the open debate on reform of
United Nations peacekeeping operations (S/PV.8051),
in which resolution 2378 (2017) was adopted,
under Ethiopia’s presidency. It has been repeatedly
emphasized that there are persistent force generation,
capacities and capabilities gaps. Japan believes that
training and capacity-building are important tools
to fill the gaps. In particular, training and capacitybuilding need to be well linked to actual deployments
of troop- and police-contributing countries. To ensure
that training and capacity-building happens, successful
matchmaking by the Secretariat between providers and
recipients is essential.
Not only the Secretariat but also missions on the
ground can play a role in ensuring the linkage between
17-45855

21/12/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operation

training and capacity-building and deployments.
Missions can contribute to identifying training and
capacity-building requirements from their experience
on the ground and report them to New York. A
mission review provides a good opportunity for
recommendations from the field. The Council should
consider including in the mandate of a mission review
an evaluation what the Secretariat and missions can do
to address the specific gaps of the mission under review.
The ongoing United Nations reform should result
in a more effective working relationship between
the Secretariat Headquarters and the missions.
Through United Nations reform, fragmentation
within the Secretariat should be eliminated, and
nimble communication between the Secretariat and
the missions should be enhanced. There should be
increased synergy in the area of training and capacitybuilding between New York and the missions.
The United Nations is not the only actor that is
called to address the capabilities gaps. Filling the gaps
must be a collective effort by the wider community of
Member States. Many good examples were shared in the
2017 United Nations Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial
Conference held in Vancouver. The Security Council
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations and the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations can
also be utilized. I propose that the Working Group
and the Special Committee organize a joint session

S/PV. 8150

to take stock of existing efforts and pledges, identify
challenges and share ideas for improvements.
Tangible contributions and assistance by Member
States are also vital. Japan welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s letter recommending the expansion of the
Triangular Partnership Project to include additional
geographical regions and additional enabling
capabilities. This month Japan decided to provide
further support to the United Nations Signals Academy.
Japan will further enhance training and capacitybuilding support in countries of the Indo-Pacific region
which spreads from the Asia-Pacific to Africa.
I sincerely hope that views and proposals raised
by Council members today will lead to discussions
and concrete actions in 2018. That is how we will be
able to institutionalize a virtuous loop of training and
capacity-building and deployment within the United
Nations system. Japan will continue to be committed to
this collective endeavour to fill the gap by contributing
in discussions in New York and providing tangible
support to troop- and police-contributing countries.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 5.50 p.m.

17-4585521/21
