UNITED
NATIONS

A
General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/ES-10/1
22 April 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

Tenth emergency special session

CONVENING OF THE SESSION
Note by the Secretary-General

1.
In a letter dated 31 March 1997 addressed to the Secretary-General (see
annex), the Permanent Representative of Qatar to the United Nations requested an
emergency special session of the General Assembly to discuss an item entitled
"Illegal Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem and the rest of the Occupied
Palestinian Territory".
2.
Upon receipt of the aforementioned letter, in a note dated 1 April 1997,
the Secretary-General transmitted the text to Member States requesting them,
bearing in mind his responsibilities under rule 9 (b) of the rules of procedure
of the General Assembly, to inform him whether they concurred in the request for
the convening of an emergency special session.
3.
In a note dated 22 April 1997, the Secretary-General informed Member States
that the majority of Members had concurred in Qatar's request and that,
accordingly, the tenth emergency special session would convene at United Nations
Headquarters on Thursday, 24 April 1997, at 10 a.m.
4.

The provisional agenda of the session will be issued as document A/ES-10/2.

97-10875 (E)

220497

/...

A/ES-10/1
English
Page 2

ANNEX
[Original:

Arabic]

Letter dated 31 March 1997 from the Permanent Representative of
Qatar to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General

The Group of States members of the League of Arab States has discussed the
dangerous situation resulting from the illegal Israeli actions in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, in particular the commencement of
the construction of the Jabal Abu Ghneim settlement to the south of occupied
East Jerusalem, and other measures regarding Jerusalem and the building of
settlements.
The Arab States have considered the failure of the Security Council to
exercise its role in maintaining international peace and security owing to the
use of the veto by a permanent member of the Council on two successive occasions
in less than two weeks.
Given their belief that the illegal Israeli measures in question represent
a threat to international peace and security as undermining the Middle East
peace process and are in violation of international law and the relevant General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions, and in the light of Israel's
persistence in these measures and of the failure of the Security Council to
exercise its primary responsibility under the Charter of the United Nations, the
States members of the League of Arab States have decided that it is necessary to
convene an emergency special session of the General Assembly, pursuant to its
resolution 377 A (V) of 3 November 1950, entitled "Uniting for peace", to
consider "Illegal Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem and the rest of the
Occupied Palestinian Territory".
Accordingly, and in my capacity as Permanent Representative of the State of
Qatar to the United Nations, I request that an emergency special session of the
General Assembly be convened pursuant to resolution 377 A (V), entitled "Uniting
for peace", in order to consider this important matter.
I should be grateful if you would initiate the necessary procedures for the
convening of this emergency special session.

(Signed) Nasser Bin Hamad AL-KHALIFA
Permanent Representative of Qatar
to the United Nations
Chairman of the Arab Group

-----
