S/PV.9178

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9178th meeting

Wednesday, 2 November 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Agyeman. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ghana)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Gallagher
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Kuzmin
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-66903 (E)
*2266903*

S/PV.9178

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: I should like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council,
to His Excellency Ambassador Michel Xavier Biang,
Permanent Representative of Gabon, for his service as
President of the Council for the month of October 2022.
I am sure I speak for all members of the Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Biang and
his team for the great diplomatic skill with which they
conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Filippo Grandi, United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Grandi.
Mr. Grandi: I thank the Security Council for
hosting me, and I thank you, Mr. President, for your
country’s commitment to refugee protection, inclusion
and solutions. Ghana is indeed an example to be
followed. I take this opportunity to wish you the very
best during your presidency this month.
For one moment, please look at the multiplicity
of global challenges, which members know very
well — growing conflicts, the climate emergency,
pandemics, energy and food crises — through the eyes
of the more than 103 million refugees and displaced
people, who are among the most impacted by all of
them. I am sure that members will feel, with desperate
urgency, the need for the international community to
cooperate in order to reverse the current trajectory
and find solutions. Most regrettably, however, through
those very eyes, members will also observe its failure
to do so.
Let me offer some thoughts from that perspective.
2/23

02/11/2022

The Russian invasion of Ukraine has driven the
fastest and largest displacement witnessed in decades.
Some 14 million people have been forced from their
homes since 24 February. Ukrainians are about to
face one of the world’s harshest winters, in extremely
difficult circumstances. Humanitarian organizations
have dramatically scaled up their response, but much
more must be done, starting with an end to this senseless
war. Unfortunately, we see the opposite. And the
destruction caused by strikes at civilian infrastructure,
which happens as we speak, is quickly making the
humanitarian response look like a drop in an ocean
of needs.
Increasingly, the focus of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) is
on helping displaced people in Ukraine, working under
the Government’s able leadership. Of the neighbouring
countries, Moldova continues to need special attention,
given its vulnerability. Meanwhile in the European
Union, we have seen an open, well-managed and,
above all, shared refugee response that has proven
wrong many of the statements frequently repeated by
some politicians — that Europe is full, that relocation
is impossible and that there is no public support for
refugees. And given the likely protracted nature of
the military situation, we are maintaining a high level
of preparedness for further population movements,
both inside and outside the country, while taking into
account different possible scenarios and the scope and
limitations of humanitarian assistance.
But I do not need to remind the Council that it is
not only Ukraine where conflict has driven people from
their homes. In the past 12 months alone, UNHCR has
responded to 37 emergencies around the world. Yet the
other crises are failing to capture the same international
attention, outrage, resources or action.
UNHCR is trying to be present wherever there
is forced displacement. We are with the people of
Ethiopia — more than 850,000 of whom were displaced
in the first half of this year. The recent surge in the
conflict is having an even more devastating impact on
civilians. Please be united in urging a positive outcome
to the talks between the parties taking place in South
Africa, as their failure would no doubt bring more
death, destruction and displacement and further restrict
our already limited ability to reach those in need, in
Tigray and other regions.
22-66903

02/11/2022

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

We are in Myanmar, where an estimated 500,000
people were displaced in the first six months of this
year, with humanitarian access remaining a huge
challenge, and where, I must recall, conditions for
the return of almost 1 million Rohingya refugees in
Bangladesh, where options for them are limited, remain
a very distant possibility.
We are in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
where brutal attacks, including revolting accounts of
sexual violence against women, has added more than
200,000 people to the 5.5 million already displaced
in the country. On Sunday, the Secretary-General
expressed deep concern about the surge in hostilities
between the Congolese army and the Mouvement du
23 Mars. I worked as a field officer in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo 25 years ago. It is hard to believe
that the horrors I witnessed back then are repeating
themselves, with displacement once again being both
a consequence of conflict and a complicating factor
in the web of local and international tensions. Surely
we can do better in trying to bring peace to that
beleaguered region.
Those crises, and many more, including the
countless protracted situations like those of Afghan
and Syrian refugees, and some of the multiple, complex
population flows in the Americas, are not only fading
from media attention, but they are being failed by global
inaction. And displacement is becoming increasingly
complex. New factors are forcing people to flee,
intersecting with traditional drivers of displacement,
especially the climate emergency.
I am aware that the link between climate and
security has been much-debated. From my perspective
I simply wish to highlight a few practical points
showing the intersection between climate change and
displacement, which in many situations includes a clear
connection with conflict as well.
We know that climate change is ravaging resources
that have sustained communities for generations.
That creates tensions, often of intercommunal
nature, especially in already fragile contexts where
Governments do not have the assets, or even control
of territory, to support adaptation and resilience
strategies and programmes. I fear that, without more
attention and much greater financing for prevention,
adaptation and development and governance support,
tensions, frustrations and competition will grow and

S/PV.9178

spark wider conflict, with deadly consequences,
including displacement.
And what is a starker example of what we call loss
and damage than being displaced and dispossessed
from one’s home?
Last week in Somalia I met emaciated men, women
and children who had walked for days to get help.
Mothers whose children had died en route. People who
had outlived conflict just to have their last remaining
coping mechanisms — their crops and their cattle — die
before their eyes. There and elsewhere, conflict is
also an obstacle to relief, as humanitarians are often
prevented from helping people in their places of origin
by insecurity and fighting. Those affected are therefore
forced to move, sometimes when they are too weak
to make the journey. And sometimes across borders
as well.
I met Somali refugees pushed into already droughtaffected areas of Kenya, which, despite its own
challenges, has provided extraordinary hospitality to
refugees for generations. As I discussed with President
Ruto last week, Kenya is making a landmark shift from
encampment of refugees to inclusion — a transition
that I hope all will robustly support.
The confluence of climate change and conflict
has created very protracted displacement. Therefore,
inclusion and, where possible, integration, both in
refugee contexts and situations of internal displacement,
are important peacebuilding measures that require
greater international recognition and support.
There are many hotspots affected by this spiral. I
am extremely worried about the situation throughout
the Sahel, for example, where the convergence of
climate change, poverty and weak governance with the
action of armed groups, and the often-brutal reaction of
Governments, have already displaced 3 million people,
including — increasingly — to coastal states like yours,
Mr President, as well as to North Africa and Europe.
It is therefore clear that responses to climate
change must take into account both its link to conflict
and the displacement it causes, dimensions that I hope
will be in clearer focus than in the past at the upcoming
twenty-seventh and twenty-eighth Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change.
On our side, we have stepped up our legal support
to States, increased our operational response for those

22-669033/23

S/PV.9178

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

02/11/2022

displaced by climate and conflict — such as in the Horn
of Africa, the Sahel and Mozambique — increased
efforts to reduce the environmental damage caused
by massive displacement —such as in the Niger and
Bangladesh — and used artificial intelligence and
predictive analytics to try and at least prepare for
displacement of this nature.

need. Furthermore, everyone must uphold international
humanitarian law and contribute to preserving the
civilian character of refugee settings, which is an
increasing challenge in many parts of the world. Armed
elements must be separated from refugees and those
displaced, and those needing protection must not be
conflated with combatants.

But this is clearly not enough. I have focused on
the climate emergency and its relationship with conflict
and displacement to convey the enormous complexity
of refugee crises today. I am sometimes worried that
such complexity is lost in the frequently simplistic
debate over population flows. Let me therefore conclude
my remarks by drawing the Council’s attention to
four areas.

Another perspective on safeguarding humanitarian
action is that we should remember that, according to
the International Committee of the Red Cross, up to
80 million people live in areas under the control of
non-State actors. They are often vulnerable or displaced.
Many are caught up in highly politicized conflicts.
Others live in countries under sanctions. But no matter
how polarized the context, humanitarians must be able
to operate everywhere that lives must be saved. At
times, that may involve uncomfortable interactions with
those who control the territory. I raise that because we
are often forced to negotiate humanitarian carveouts,
as they are called, on a case-by-case basis. I therefore
welcome the current efforts in the Security Council to
ensure greater predictability in such matters.

First, we need more resources. Humanitarian aid
is under enormous pressure. Despite a record level
of income, including $1 billion from private donors,
UNHCR faces a major funding gap this year in some
of its crucial operations. Food aid for refugees, as
a case in point, has been cut in many operations for
lack of funding — despite the help of the United States
and other States present here — at a time where food
insecurity is growing, including as a result of the
war in Ukraine. Hence the crucial importance of the
continuation of the Black Sea Grain Initiative. But this
is also about safeguarding development cooperation
as an essential tool to make communities resilient and
immune to the shocks of cyclical crises, breaking the
terrible spiral of disaster, conflict and displacement.
Secondly, seriously strengthening peacebuilding is
key — for example, by reinforcing, much better than is
usually done, the capacity of the police, the judiciary,
local Government and overall rule of law in fragile
countries. We at UNHCR have a good vantage point
on this because peacebuilding is crucial to resolving
displacement — by allowing refugees to return home,
for example — and of course, from the Council’s
perspective — by preventing the recurrence of conflict.
But peacebuilding will fail unless development actors
take more risk and boldly invest even when conditions
remain fragile — Burundi being a case in point.
Thirdly, humanitarian action must be better
safeguarded, from different viewpoints. One is
straightforward security. Threats to humanitarians are
increasing, with deadly consequences, as we have seen
in the past few days in Ethiopia. Parties to conflicts
must protect our work and enable access to people in
4/23

Fourthly and lastly, it is needless to say, but
allow me to reiterate that we need the international
community, starting with the members of the Security
Council, to overcome its divisions and disagreements,
at least when it discusses humanitarian issues, and
hopefully when it addresses, or strives to address, the
root causes that are displacing people around the world.
That is because what I saw in Somalia last week was
a condemnation of us all and of a world of inequality,
where extraordinary levels of suffering are receiving
scandalously low levels of attention and resources. It
was a condemnation of a world where those that have
contributed the least to global challenges are suffering
the most from their consequences, and of a world where
the dramatic rifts that we witness every day here in the
Security Council’s own debates are leading us all to
the brink.
The suffering, loss and despair of 103 million
uprooted people and many more, which my colleagues
and I witness every day, are not the fantasy of an
idealistic humanitarian worker. They are very real.
Allow them to be a humble, but compelling call
to action.
The President: I thank Mr. Grandi for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
22-66903

02/11/2022

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on Ghana’s assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of November.
You have our support. I also thank Mr. Filippo Grandi,
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, for
his briefing this morning.
The continued increase in the number of refugees
globally as a result of protracted armed conflict,
economic crises and the effects of climate change is
of great concern. We note that 83 per cent of refugees
globally are hosted by developing countries, with the
least developed countries providing asylum to 7 million
people, representing 27 per cent of the global total
of refugees.
Protracted conflicts, the climate crisis, global
inequality and a trade and investment order that is
not development-friendly are leading to increasing
migration. Developing countries, which are struggling
to manage multiple crises, are shouldering the largest
responsibility in the hosting of migrants and refugees.
From our experience in Kenya, the hosting of large
numbers of refugees for more than three decades in
socioeconomically and ecologically fragile settings
represents formidable challenges. Those include acute
environmental stress and conflicts between refugees
and host communities over dwindling resources. In
addition, opportunistic terrorist groups have used
refugee camps as staging grounds for recruitment and
radicalization, as well as their operations.
In High Commissioner Grandi’s recent five-day
visit to the region, which he just mentioned, he witnessed
first-hand the situation of refugees in Kenya and that of
internally displaced persons in Somalia. In Kenya, he
visited the Kakuma and Dadaab camps, where 20,000
refugees arrived this year alone. He saw how the worst
drought in 40 years in the Horn of Africa has affected
refugees and host communities in Kenya. In Somalia,
he witnessed how the ravaging drought was displacing
hundreds of thousands and was compounding an
already devastating humanitarian situation.
Kenya has upheld, and will continue to uphold, its
obligations to host and protect refugees, in accordance
with the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of
Refugees. In view of the refugee crisis in our region
and globally, alongside other Member States, we
will continue to advocate for continued burden- and
responsibility-sharing, in line with the Global Compact

S/PV.9178

on Refugees. We wish to underscore four points in
that regard.
First, the international community has consistently
not responded adequately to the appeals made by
developing countries and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
for the funding of refugee relief efforts. As refugees
and internally displaced persons, who are the least
responsible for global warming, suffer its worst effects
in the Horn of Africa and elsewhere, the world must
not turn aside. We appeal for sufficient funding to
enable UNHCR and other humanitarian agencies on the
ground to provide life-saving support to those in need.
Secondly, funding aside, the wealthiest countries,
with their high-employment economies, can do a great
deal more with regard to the resettling of refugees.
While financing is one pillar of responsibility, hosting
is the other. Apart from providing financial support to
UNHCR, wealthy countries should therefore provide
opportunities for the resettling of refugees.
Thirdly, Kenya previously expressed grave concern
over the worrisome trend in recent years by which
people of African descent travelling to Europe via the
Mediterranean suffer extreme violations of their human
rights, with thousands losing their lives. In addition,
early this year, we witnessed a surge of refugees from
Ukraine owing to the war. We observed, with great
concern, credible reports of the discriminatory and
racist treatment of refugees of African descent fleeing
Ukraine for safety in Europe. We thank the agencies
and people of goodwill who came to their rescue. We
strongly recommend that all States, recognizing their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
refugee conventions, systematically seek to purge racial
discrimination and ethnocentrism from their refugee
and migration control systems.
Fourthly, the most effective and sustainable way
of dealing with the refugee problem is to tackle its
root causes. Those include climate change and forced
displacement, leading to unmanaged migration and
trafficking. Without determined investment in climate
change mitigation and adaptation, the trends will only
worsen. The twenty-seventh session of the Conference of
the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change will provide an opportunity to
get on the right path by developed countries meeting
their past commitments, and not seeking to block the

22-669035/23

S/PV.9178

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

development path of countries in the global South in the
mistaken belief that that is a solution to climate change.
In conclusion, I reiterate the imperative for the
international community to support refugees, host
countries, countries of origin and all other relevant
stakeholders in the protection, assistance and eventual
return of refugees to their home countries. Kenya will
continue to work closely with the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees in that regard.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Let me start by thanking Gabon for its
excellent presidency last month. While I thought you
had set a record, Mr. President, I understand you did
not. But it felt like a record, and we really appreciate the
spirit of inclusion that Gabon brought to the Security
Council. We know we kept you busy, but you met
the challenge.
Let me also welcome Ghana’s presidency this
month — it starts today with an important topic.
I thank United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees Grandi for his briefing. I appreciate his
focusing on the increasing refugee crises and the needs
that he presented to us today.
In that regard, the United States and Ireland are
hopeful that members of the Council will support a
proposal that we have submitted to create a standardized
humanitarian carveout for actors who are under sanction
regimes so that entities like the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
will benefit. For the United States, its support for the
humanitarian work of UNHCR and its partners is
unshakeable. The United States continues to proudly be
the world’s leading donor to UNHCR, and we call on
our fellow Member States to step up and further fund
it in this time of desperate need. We especially call on
those countries that have a record of creating refugee
crises to do more. If you caused it, you should pay for it.
Right now, UNHCR truly needs our help. Members
heard the appeal from the High Commissioner. The
number of refugees and forcibly displaced people grew
dramatically this year, from 90 million to more than
103 million — I repeat, 103 million.
The main reason of course is Russia’s war in
Ukraine. Russia has driven more than 14 million
people from their homes, as we heard from the High
Commissioner this morning. It has exacerbated the
global food security crisis. When we combine that with
6/23

02/11/2022

ongoing conflicts and unprecedented climatic events,
it is no wonder farmers and families are fleeing their
lands and homes. Russia is weaponizing winter. Its
attacks against Ukraine’s energy infrastructure will be
life-threatening for the Ukrainian people, especially
during the cold winter months.
The United States is working to ensure that its
humanitarian partners are adequately resourced to
help the Government with winterization efforts.
We commend our European allies and partners for
their generosity in hosting approximately 7 million
displaced Ukrainian citizens and others fleeing Russian
aggression. But I also want to commend Kenya. We
have seen the long-term commitment that Kenya has
made to hosting refugees. I think the number is close
to — if not more than — 500,000 refugees right now
in Kenya. I started working on refugee issues in Kenya
as a refugee coordinator in 1994, and many of those
refugees are still in Kenya today. I therefore once again
thank Kenya for being a great host to refugees.
Concerning Ukraine, we are supporting Ukrainians
at home and abroad. In April, we launched Uniting for
Ukraine, a process for Ukrainians and their immediate
relatives to seek humanitarian parole in the United
States. Through that programme and other legal
pathways, the United States has provided refuge for
more than 190,000 Ukrainians.
A few months ago, I had the privilege of speaking to
some of them in Chicago. I met a woman and her teenage
son who had fled Kharkiv. They spoke in harrowing
detail of hiding in the basement of their apartment
during shelling, the struggle to find food and fears
for their relatives and their neighbours’ survival. But
they also told me that, since their arrival in the United
States, they had found hope. They have been welcomed
warmly in their new community, and they are grateful
to all the friends, contacts and organizations that have
helped them settle and begin to heal.
Around the world, refugees deserve that same
love, attention, care and support. In Somalia, an
unprecedented drought has displaced nearly 1 million
people this year. Famine is likely unless the international
community, including the United Nations system, steps
up. The United States acted early to address that crisis,
providing more than $850 million this year in assistance
to Somalia as part of its efforts to address the Horn
of Africa drought. We call on other donors to increase
their contributions as well.
22-66903

02/11/2022

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

The United Nations humanitarian agencies family
should act now and scale up its response. We do not want
to have any regrets about the situation. The droughtaffected and conflict-affected communities in Ethiopia
and Kenya also face catastrophic food insecurity and
impossible choices to cope with scarcity. Parents starve
so that their children may eat. As of August, there are
almost 5 million acutely malnourished children, more
than 1.4 million of them severely malnourished, in
Ethiopia, Kenya and Somalia.
The recent resumption of violence in northern
Ethiopia has exacerbated one of the world’s worst
humanitarian crises. Humanitarians have had to pull
back and suspend operations and have reported a severe
shortage of cash, fuel and essential relief commodities
for the more than 9 million Ethiopians in need. The
supply of ready-to-use therapeutic food is completely
depleted, leaving the most vulnerable children suffering
from the most severe form of malnutrition without that
essential lifeline. The United States has provided more
than $688 million in support for the northern Ethiopia
humanitarian response over the past fiscal year. But
needs are extreme, and they are still growing.

S/PV.9178

nearly $2.7 billion in assistance for the Venezuelan
regional crisis in the past five years, and we will
continue to take the issue seriously.
While each of those situations around the world is
unique, they share common themes. Hunger, conflict
and climate are displacing people who are already
vulnerable. To that end, we welcome UNHCR’s
ambitious new initiative to improve accountability for
crisis-affected individuals and communities. It rightly
emphasizes the need to bring successful, innovative
accountability approaches to scale, especially new
digital tools for enhancing community feedback. The
United States looks forward to the success of the
initiative and learning more about how States can
support it.
In the meantime, we are committed to the vision
of the Global Compact for Migration. We are also
committed to helping refugees everywhere, because
refugees are the definition of bravery. They are
extraordinary and they deserve our unending support.

We urge the international community to join us in
maintaining support for Syrians and the communities
that host them. We also urge the Council to put politics
aside, as we heard from the High Commissioner, and do
the right thing by extending the United Nations crossborder aid mandate in January, when it will expire.
Humanitarian needs in Syria are greater today than
ever. The United Nations and its partners cannot meet
those needs without continued cross-border access.

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to congratulate Gabon and the Gabonese
delegation on their very successful presidency of the
Council for the month of October, and to wish Ghana
good luck in November. I thank Mr. Grandi for his
briefing today and above all for his remarkable work
at the helm of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). He reminded
us that this year we have reached the sad record of
100 million people displaced around the world. The
causes of that displacement are many and varied — they
include an increasing number of conflicts, growing
global food insecurity and malnutrition, and climate
change. Displaced women and girls also suffer from
specific challenges that we need to address, including
access to sexual and reproductive health care and
exposure to higher risks of sexual violence. In that
context of crisis, UNHCR’s mandate remains more
essential than ever. I therefore commend the remarkable
work, courage and dedication of all UNHCR staff.

Venezuelan refugees and migrants also need our
continued support. Nearly 6 million Venezuelans have
fled to more than a dozen countries in the region.
Colombia, which currently hosts more than 2.4 million
Venezuelan refugees and migrants, has approved more
than 1.6 million applications for temporary protected
status. We commend Colombia and others in the region
for doing their part. For our part, we have provided

Since the beginning of Russia’s illegal aggression
against Ukraine, Europe has witnessed the largest
displacement of people in the world since the Second
World War, with 7.5 million refugees and 6.5 million
internally displaced persons. France is sparing no
effort in response to that tragedy. We have pledged
€200 million in humanitarian aid; we are hosting
more than 100,000 Ukrainians; and we are providing

For the desperate plight of the Syrian people, we
are grateful to Türkiye, Lebanon, Jordan, Iraq and
Egypt for continuing to provide safe haven to nearly
6 million refugees from Syria. We are alarmed by
credible reports that refugees returning to Syria face
torture, arbitrary detention and forced disappearance.
The truth is that conditions inside Syria are not safe for
large-scale refugee returns.

22-669037/23

S/PV.9178

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

schooling for more than 20,000 children who have fled
the war. France will continue to support UNHCR’s
work in support of the millions of displaced Ukrainians,
especially when it comes to protecting them from the
combined effects of war and the cold winter.
Support for Ukraine in no way diminishes our
attention to other humanitarian crises. France has
mobilized fully to respond to other humanitarian
emergencies, particularly in the Sahel and the Middle
East. As of 2021, we have doubled our voluntary
contributions to UNHCR and are now its eighth
largest donor. Similarly, France is assuming its share
of responsibility by resettling refugees on its territory
and welcoming people in need of protection. Providing
assistance to people forced into exile is a duty. We
must do everything we can to help countries that are
on the front lines of large-scale displacement. It is only
through an approach based on solidarity that we will
succeed in improving the care of refugees and displaced
persons. In that context, threats to food security and
nutrition also impose a duty of solidarity. France is
mobilized through the Food and Agriculture Resilience
Mission initiative, the Save Crops Operation and the
European solidarity lanes. We will also co-sponsor the
next Global Refugee Forum in late 2023, which should
improve our cooperation in receiving refugees and
strengthening asylum systems all over the world.
Lastly, we will not compromise on the fundamental
principles related to the return of refugees. The regime
in Syria is selectively sorting its returning refugees
and thereby continuing its policy of demographic
engineering by alternative means, something that it
has been carefully working on since the conflict began.
That is why I must reiterate that the conditions for
dignified, safe and voluntary return have not been met,
and that the regime alone can remove the obstacles to
that return. It is essential that UNHCR be able to ensure
the effective monitoring of Syrian refugee returnees, as
well as the conditions for their return.
In conclusion, it is up to the Council to create the
conditions for the lasting settlement of crises in order
to address the root causes of population displacement.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Let me start by
congratulating Gabon on its excellent presidency for
the past month. We also wish your delegation, Sir, all
the best for the month of November and want to assure
you of the Brazilian delegation’s full cooperation.
Brazil would also like to thank the High Commissioner
8/23

02/11/2022

for Refugees for his presentation. Brazil is proud of its
partnership with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), which extends
to the national, regional and global levels. Humanitarian
response and the promotion of human rights are among
the seven priorities established by Brazil for its term on
the Security Council.
In a year marked by conflict and increased food
insecurity, it is worrisome to note that the number of
people forcibly displaced rose to more than 100 million,
not to mention those considered to be stateless or of
undetermined nationality. Owing to underreporting,
those numbers are probably significantly higher. That
alone should serve as a wake-up call for stronger action
to promote peace and address all the causes of forced
displacement. The lingering social and economic
effects of the coronavirus disease make it even more
urgent to adopt far-reaching responses at the local,
national, regional and global levels, as the pandemic
continues to have a devastating impact on refugees and
other vulnerable groups.
Cooperation and solidarity are key to sustained
and comprehensive humanitarian responses, and the
principle of shared responsibility lies at their centre.
We also understand that where people’s reasons
for seeking refuge are concerned, the international
community must look at the cross-cutting drivers that
are often the result of manifold structural factors rather
than a single trend alone. While we agree that the
effects of climate change exacerbate all humanitarian
emergencies, we understand that it should be integrated
into humanitarian discussions in such a way that it does
not overshadow the importance of prioritizing political
solutions to contemporary conflicts, which continue
to be the main drivers of displacement. We also
underscore the urgency of providing climate financing,
technology transfer and capacity-building for countries
in need within the framework of the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change and the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change.
Brazil has been granting protection through its
humanitarian visa policy to people affected by the
conflicts in Afghanistan and Ukraine — a policy
that also benefits Haitians and people affected by the
conflict in Syria. Brazil is especially grateful for the
High Commission’s support to Operação Acolhida,
or Operation Welcome, a multi-sectoral Government
task force in charge of the integration, reception and
voluntary internal relocation of Venezuelans at our
22-66903

02/11/2022

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

northern border. Since 2018, approximately 800,000
Venezuelan migrants, refugees and asylum seekers
have received some sort of assistance through the
operation. Upon arrival, indigenous people, elderly
people, women, children and people with disabilities
are given special attention. The approximately 400,000
Venezuelans who have decided to stay in Brazil have
full access to all public services, the labour market and
social benefits on an equal basis with our nationals. I
hope that Council members have had a chance to visit
our exhibition on Operation Welcome held at United
Nations Headquarters in recent weeks.
All parties to armed conflict should facilitate
safe and unimpeded passage for relief actions that
are humanitarian and impartial and conducted with
no adverse distinction, in line with international
humanitarian law. It is worrisome that some parties to
conflicts have imposed bureaucratic measures to hinder
humanitarian operations.
The Council has a significant responsibility for
ensuring the protection of civilians in armed conflict, as
evidenced by its adoption of two important resolutions
adopted last year: resolution 2573 (2021), on objects
indispensable to the survival of civilian populations
in armed conflict, and resolution 2601 (2021), on the
protection of schools and education in armed conflict.
Yet strengthening that architecture has not been
enough to reduce the heavy civilian toll of armed
conflict. The current challenges are well known and
include hostilities against medical and humanitarian
personnel, the increased vulnerabilities faced by
women, children, refugees, internally displaced persons
and persons with disabilities, and the vicious cycle of
armed conflict and hunger.
Among the ongoing challenges the Council faces,
allow me to address one in particular: the reports
concerning the unintended consequences of United
Nations sanctions on humanitarian assistance. Brazil
encourages the Council to continue its work to adjust the
sanctions framework in order to effectively minimize
the suffering of the civilian population. Sanctions can
be legitimate and effective when they are multilaterally
created, strategically targeted and designed to have
minimal impact on the civilian population.
Like many coercive measures, however, they will
have unintended consequences, but humanitarian space
must always be preserved. That is why we welcome
the initiative led by the United States and Ireland and

S/PV.9178

strongly encourage the Council to agree on an effective
and comprehensive humanitarian carveout across all
United Nations sanctions regimes.
As we advance the preparations for convening the
next Global Refugee Forum, the High Commissioner
should bear in mind that we must join our efforts to
accelerate deliveries that reflect the principle of shared
responsibilities as the central axis of an increasingly
coordinated and unified response. Brazil remains fully
committed to contributing to that effort.
In conclusion, I would like to ask the High
Commissioner two questions. My first question, in the
context of the reportedly growing politicization of the
topic of humanitarian assistance is: What have been the
main challenges in that regard for those in the field and
how could the Council better assist their work? Secondly,
I would like to echo the remarks of my colleague from
Kenya on the transfer of funds for climate change and
also follow up the High Commissioner’s briefing: How
can his Office help to speed up the transfer of resources
from developed to developing countries in order to
combat climate change and build resilience?
Mr. Gallagher (Ireland): Let me join others in
commending Gabon on its presidency of the Security
Council last month — and now it finds itself in the
most comfortable chair in the Chamber. I also would
like to wish you, Mr. President, the best of luck for the
month ahead.
I would like to thank the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees for once again delivering
a sobering briefing. But the dedication of his team
and the staff of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to
alleviating the suffering of refugee populations gives
us hope. It demonstrates our collective will to address
displacement, even if we are failing to demonstrate an
equal will to address the root causes.
As the High Commissioner said, hunger, climate
events and the economic crisis are all driving
displacement, but as he told the Executive Committee
in Geneva last month, conflict remains the biggest
driver of forced displacement. I therefore think that
we around this table need to be frank and clear. The
High Commissioner is doing his job — we are not doing
ours. We in the Security Council are failing to live up
to our mandate to prevent and resolve conflict and the
forced displacement and related suffering of millions is
the consequence.

22-669039/23

S/PV.9178

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

The numbers speak for themselves. We heard today
that more than 100 million people are displaced: in
Myanmar, 1.3 million people are internally displaced
and 1 million Rohingya refugees are outside the
country; in Venezuela, more than 7 million people have
been forced to escape hunger, violence and deprivation;
in Ethiopia, 4.2 million people have been displaced,
many as a result of the ongoing conflict in the northern
part of the country; in Afghanistan, 7 million people
have fled, many of them from the Taliban violence
and repression; and in Syria, 6.6 million refugees have
been forced to flee the conflict, with nearly 7 million
more people internally displaced and in need of urgent
humanitarian assistance. Each of those situations on our
agenda — or that should be on our agenda — represent
a failure to prevent or address conflict.
Worse still, nine months ago, one United Nations
State Member — a member of the Council — chose
to wage war on another. Russia’s war of aggression on
Ukraine spurred the greatest displacement of people on
the European continent since the Second World War. It
also accelerated a global food insecurity crisis, further
driving displacement and suffering across Africa, the
Middle East and beyond. Some 6.2 million people are
now internally displaced in Ukraine and 7.7 million
Ukrainians are refugees.
Ireland has welcomed and given shelter to tens of
thousands of Ukrainians. In doing the same, many of
us here have experienced large-scale refugee inflows
for the first time. It has been a sobering and humbling
experience, one that I hope will translate into greater
solidarity with long-term and large-scale refugee
hosting countries such as Kenya, as well as Bangladesh,
Lebanon, Türkiye, Colombia, Uganda, Germany
and Pakistan.
As we heard, a changing climate is shifting
the calculation for refugees and displaced persons.
Future returns, always difficult, may now be next to
impossible. The link between climate and displacement
is irrefutable. Climate crises threaten lives and
livelihoods and contribute to instability and conflict.
Ireland asserts that, in order to fully understand
conflict drivers and consequences such as displacement,
the Security Council has a responsibility to understand
the impacts of climate change on security. We already
see the evidence across our agenda — startlingly
so in the Horn of Africa, where millions bear the
disproportionate consequences of conflict, hunger and
10/23

02/11/2022

climate change. Greater humanitarian aid is needed for
the Horn of Africa, but it will not be enough. We must
redouble the Council’s attention to instability, conflict
and the pursuit of peace.
We cannot address the needs of millions of
displaced persons without humanitarian access. Those
blocking aid delivery must stop and facilitate immediate
unhindered access. There can be no impunity for
those who target humanitarian actors or seek to use
starvation as a weapon of war. The Council must
ensure accountability for violations of international
humanitarian law.
Gang violence has internally displaced 115,000
people in Haiti, adding to those already displaced by the
earthquake. Many Haitians are undertaking precarious
journeys to seek refugee protection. They should not be
turned away or sent back. Last month, the Council used
one of its tools to establish a new sanctions regime for
Haiti through the adoption of resolution 2653 (2022),
which includes an important carveout to ensure that
the vital work of UNHCR and other humanitarians is
unhindered by sanctions. That is an important principle
for any sanctions regime.
And as the representative of the United States
mentioned, that is why Ireland has worked with the
United States to put forward a proposal to mainstream
a humanitarian carveout across all sanctions
regimes — and I took note of the High Commissioner’s
comments in that regard. The Council has a responsibility
to use the tools available when required, but they must
be effective and without unintended consequences for
humanitarian efforts.
The High Commissioner and his colleagues are
doing their job. What more can we do? First, as the
High Commissioner asked at the beginning of today’s
meeting, we must do better. We must redouble our
efforts to support inclusive political solutions that
can end violence, prevent displacement, facilitate
humanitarian access and allow safe return, and we must
do so without fear or favour. Secondly, we must hear
directly from refugees and displaced people — those
bearing the brunt of our inaction and inadequacy, and
those whose eyes the High Commissioner asked us to
look through when we consider the issue. We must
also fulfil our mandate and end the persistent conflicts
driving displacement in the countries and regions on
our agenda.
22-66903

02/11/2022

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

In conclusion, I want to reiterate Ireland’s steadfast
support for the High Commissioner and UNHCR.
Ireland’s funding to UNHCR continues to grow, and our
core funding is at its highest level ever. We will continue
to advocate for those who seek shelter as refugees and
internally displaced persons, and we will work with the
High Commissioner to provide humanitarian support.
We know that his work would be so much easier if we
in the Council did ours better.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): It is a
pleasure to see you leading our work, Mr. President.
I want to congratulate Ghana on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council in November, wish
you every success and pledge our brotherly support.
I thank High Commissioner Filippo Grandi for his
informative briefing.
The plight of refugees, returnees and displaced
persons in the world is very worrying. The Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) has declared 42 new emergencies in 30
countries since 2021 and has reported that nearly
100 million people are currently displaced around the
world. The war in Ukraine has added millions to the
numbers of displaced — approximately 8 million in
Ukraine and more than 5.2 million refugees throughout
Europe. Every year, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees reports an increase in
forced displacement.
As Mr. Grandi said just now, climate change is
increasingly the cause of displacement in a number
of regions of the world, particularly the Sahel and the
Horn of Africa. According to the Red Cross, by 2050,
200 million people may be in need of international
humanitarian assistance every year due to the effects
of climate change, including its socioeconomic impact.
The international community does not do enough
to share the cost of international protection for those
seeking asylum. The unprecedented number of people
forcibly displaced is unsustainable. Funding for
humanitarian action around the world is not enough
to meet the various challenges facing the international
community, such as food insecurity, epidemics, access
to drinking water, the safety of women, especially in
refugee camps, and access to education for the young.
We must initiate genuine cooperation in order to ensure
that these responsibilities are equally shared without
further delay. It is a duty to our collective conscience
and an absolute priority.

S/PV.9178

The war in Ukraine has given new relevance and
validity to the key principles of the Convention relating
to the Status of Refugees, specifically the right to seek
asylum under international law and the prohibition on
returning refugees to persecution and danger. In that
regard, this is where we should commend Ukraine’s
neighbouring countries for their remarkable effort to
show solidarity by unhesitatingly receiving a majority
of asylum-seekers fleeing the war. Regrettably, many
countries around the world maintain policies designed
to deter asylum applications. Such restrictive and shortsighted policies force women, men and children to
undertake dangerous journeys by land or sea, risking
their lives and fuelling a lucrative trade for smugglers
involved in trafficking in human beings. The indecency
of such policies aimed at deterring the destitute is what
to a great extent has helped to make the Mediterranean
a vast cemetery of shame for the restless souls of young
Africans, killed by gross indifference.
The world is in the grip of a crisis of solidarity that
calls for an international response to the distress of
those who find themselves exiled or in refugee camps.
We must step up our urgent response on the political,
security, financial, logistical and humanitarian fronts.
That response should not be based on accidents of
geography. We must genuinely share the responsibility
for protecting people who have fled their homes in
search of safety. We must agree on a fair and predictable
system that can protect those forced to leave everything
behind because of violence and persecution.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate and emphasize
that the right to asylum is the most emblematic human
right. Receiving and protecting asylum-seekers
therefore amounts to respecting human rights. Refusing
to receive or even discriminating against asylumseekers amounts to violating human rights. Let me say
it again. Refusing to receive or even discriminating
against asylum-seekers is a violation of human rights.
We reiterate our support for High Commissioner Grandi
for his tireless efforts on the ground.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We congratulate Ghana on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council this month and
thank Gabon for its successful presidency in October.
We welcome Mr. Filippo Grandi, United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, and thank him for
his briefing.

22-6690311/23

S/PV.9178

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

Assistance to refugees is an essential component
of comprehensive efforts aimed at maintaining
international peace, security and stability. Russia
continues to take measures to maintain high standards
and further develop mechanisms for providing
assistance to persons seeking protection, in accordance
with its international legal obligations and the objectives
of the Global Compact on Refugees. We believe it is
very important to improve our cooperation with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), as the main international body for
addressing issues in the area of forced migration. We
see UNHCR’s work as particularly important in major
humanitarian crises and consider it a crucial part of
comprehensive measures to resolve such crises.
The expanding geography of conflicts, poverty
and economic inequality continues to force people out
of their countries of origin. However, the reasons for
these problems often lie in the irresponsible policies
of Western States, which have acquired a taste for
imposing their dictates and conducting geopolitical
experiments on weaker countries. They have plundered
the resources of African States, strangled their economic
independence, destroyed the statehood of Libya by
military force, occupied part of Syria and abandoned
Afghanistan to its fate while seizing or indeed stealing
its national assets. All those countries and regions are
hotbeds of mass migration.
We would like to draw attention to the importance
of the continuing efforts to facilitate the voluntary
return of Syrian refugees. Russia’s initiative to promote
the voluntary repatriation of Syrian forced migrants
remains relevant. We consider ensuring favourable
conditions for the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons (IDPs) to their places of permanent
residence an absolute priority and an important
step towards achieving long-term stabilization in
Syria. We call on UNHCR to continue to support the
implementation of the initiative for the voluntary return
of Syrian refugees to their homeland.
We note the efforts of UNHCR to address the
problems of Ukrainian IDPs and refugees. A number
of our colleagues today emphasized in particular
the situation of refugees from Ukraine. As Council
members know, the Ukrainian crisis entered its hot
phase primarily owing to the unwillingness of the Kyiv
authorities, who were encouraged by Western sponsors,
to implement the Minsk agreements. For eight years,
the incessant shelling of the peaceful cities of Donbas
12/23

02/11/2022

by the Ukrainian armed forces led to a mass exodus of
the residents of those territories to Russia. That process
accelerated after the Kyiv regime abruptly intensified
its shelling of Donbas on the eve of our special military
operation.
More than 4.5 million people, including 688,000
children, have found refuge in Russia. All those people
came to our country voluntarily, saving their lives and
the lives of their loved ones from the Kyiv regime.
The Russian side is making every effort to receive and
accommodate those individuals and provide them with
comprehensive assistance, including in areas related to
employment, the placement of children in kindergartens
and educational institutions and the provision of social
payments and benefits. People arriving from those
territories receive free health care and a free medical
examination and medicine. Procedures have been
simplified for them to obtain proper legal status on the
territory of the Russian Federation.
They are also granted the right to work in the
Russian Federation without obtaining work permits or
patents and can apply for one-time lump-sum financial
assistance and monthly payments. Therefore, our
migration and social mechanisms have made it possible
to fully resolve issues related to the reception and
welfare of forcibly displaced persons from the Donetsk
and Luhansk People’s Republics and Ukraine and
facilitate their further integration.
Employees of the UNHCR Office in Moscow
regularly visit the temporary accommodation centres
for those forcibly displaced in various Russian regions
and note the effectiveness of our efforts to ensure decent
living conditions for those persons in my country.
For its part, Russia will continue to provide the
UNHCR with comprehensive support.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I would like to thank
Gabon for its work in assuming the Security Council
presidency for the month of October. I wish you,
Mr. President, all the best for November.
I would like to thank the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Filippo Grandi, for
his briefing today and for his leadership.
It is sad to hear about the increasing number
of people fleeing their homes because of conflicts,
violence, food insecurity, discrimination, inequality,
economic and social crises, poverty and climate change,
as detailed by the High Commissioner.
22-66903

02/11/2022

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

S/PV.9178

As we heard, the war in Ukraine alone has affected
more than 14 million people. After more than eight
months of the conflict, the displacement continues and
lives and civilian infrastructure are being destroyed.
The Russian war in Ukraine has taken emergency
responses to new levels and is the largest and fastestcreated displacement crisis in Europe since the Second
World War.

early recovery, in line with Security Council resolutions.
Albania supports the efforts of UNHCR in that regard.

Responding to and funding the new emergencies,
such as in Ukraine, needs to be addressed in addition, to
and not instead of, other situations. We should not forget
the millions of Syrian refugees and displaced persons,
about the same number as displaced Ukrainians.
Afghans already constitute one of the largest refugee
crises. We should also not forget the millions of people
displaced worldwide, including in Myanmar, Burkina
Faso, Ethiopia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
South Sudan, Somalia, Yemen and elsewhere. We
should maintain the focus on all crises and search for
solutions by supporting countries of origin and host
countries and help people rebuilding their lives if they
make the choice to return.

Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council this month and to assure you
of our full support in managing the Council’s work.
I also thank Gabon for its successful and productive
presidency last month and thank Mr. Grandi for his
briefing and the important work that he and his team
have carried out globally.

Unfortunately, the Security Council has been
unable to prevent displacement crises, reduce further
risks and maintain peace and security. That is why it is
important to be united in giving the right signals and to
overcome the divisions.
We commend the efforts of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
in scaling up responses to the increasing protection
needs of displaced persons and refugees and ensuring
international protection through humanitarian response
and strategic actions.
Albania commends the refugee-hosting countries
worldwide that welcome millions of people and
continue to demonstrate solidarity and provide them
with assistance and services. We have done the same as
well for Afghans escaping persecution by the Taliban.
In that context, it is important to hear the voices
of refugees, United Nations agencies and humanitarian
partners; to implement the principles of the Convention
relating to the Status of Refugees and the legal and
policy tools available for effective international
protection; to support and fund the work of United
Nations agencies and humanitarian partners; and
to strengthen humanitarian access to those in need,
including displaced persons and returnees, as well as

In conclusion, we support the implementation of
the Global Compact on Refugees in order to ensure a
whole-of-society approach, in solidarity with refugees
and affected countries, and we support the initiative
of the United States and Ireland on mainstreaming the
humanitarian carveout across sanctions regimes.

Today our world faces a significant number of
difficult challenges, including climate change, food
insecurity and armed conflicts, which cause forced
displacement and directly affect those who are
displaced; in addition, those challenges are further
compounded by the ongoing challenges of recovery
from the coronavirus disease pandemic, economic
instability and growing polarization.
It is not just the number of challenges that is cause
for our increasing concern but also their intensity and
the difficulty of overcoming them. This year, for the first
time on record, the world reached a grave milestone,
with 100 million people forced to seek security and
safety away from their homes and obliged to deal with
difficult living conditions. We stress the need for all
refugees to have equal access to basic services to meet
their needs, such as their needs for food, water and
health services, as well as protection from all forms of
violence, including sexual and gender-based violence
and exploitation.
We continue to follow with concern the many
complex humanitarian situations, including in
Afghanistan, Myanmar and Ukraine. The United
Arab Emirates continues to provide relief assistance
to affected people worldwide, including by providing
support for Syrian and Rohingya refugees, as well as
internally displaced persons (IDPs) in Ethiopia.
We note that the Security Council is currently
looking into adopting humanitarian exceptions
regarding sanction regimes, and we strongly support

22-6690313/23

S/PV.9178

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

that as a member of the Council. We will seek to
implement that on the ground so that refugees and all
those in need of assistance can receive the necessary
humanitarian assistance.
Addressing the root causes and contributing factors
of forced displacement must remain our overarching
approach in order to prevent it from occurring in the
first place. In order to end conflicts peacefully, political
solutions, dialogue and de-escalation must remain the
building blocks of our efforts. That approach is also
more efficient and cost-effective, as it ensures that the
most vulnerable are able to remain safe in their homes.
At the same time, we believe in the potential
of education to address the root causes of forced
displacement. As noted by High Commissioner Grandi
at the RewirED Summit held in the United Arab
Emirates in 2021, it is important to find new solutions
in order to ensure education to those forcibly displaced,
develop their skills and promote their capabilities to
build a better future for them and lessen the risk of
leaving them behind.
The United Arab Emirates has consequently sought
to invest in innovative education means, including the
Digital School launched this year to train educators
and provide distance learning for children, including
children in a number of refugee camps in Africa, the
Middle East and Latin America.
However, we all know that climate change increases
the pressures resulting from forced displacement,
perhaps to alarming rates. According to a World
Bank forecast, there could be up to 216 million people
displaced by climate change globally by 2050. That
requires effective strategies capable of adapting to
changes to lessen the consequences of that phenomenon
on forced displacement. The extent to which the
international community will seriously and effectively
respond to those issues depends on the attention that
the Security Council devotes to them.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates remains
committed to the protection of refugees and IDPs,
including through its provision of humanitarian aid and
emergency relief to the most vulnerable, with a focus on
women and children. We will continue to work closely
with our international partners, including the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, I congratulate Ghana on assuming the presidency
14/23

02/11/2022

of the Security Council for the month of November.
Mr. President, I believe the Council will achieve every
success under your leadership. I would also like to take
this opportunity to congratulate Gabon for successively
presiding over the Council during the month of October.
I thank Mr. Grandi for his briefing. Under the
leadership of the High Commissioner, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) has overcome many challenges and done a
great deal of work to alleviate the plight of refugees in
many countries and regions. China commends this and
will, as always, support the UNHCR and the work of
the High Commissioner.
At present, the international situation continues to
be turbulent. The coronavirus disease pandemic is not
over yet, and global food, energy and financial markets
fluctuate with great frequency. All of this exacerbates
the severity and complexity of the refugee problem
around the world.
The total number of refugees and displaced
persons worldwide exceeded 100 million for the first
time in 2022. This is a record high. The growing
humanitarian needs of this group of people, the severe
lack of humanitarian funding for them and the fact
that humanitarian agencies such as the UNHCR have
been forced to lower relief standards are all of grave
concern. The international community should continue
to carry forward the humanitarian spirit, step up efforts
to mobilize resources, strengthen multilateral and
bilateral cooperation and strive to ensure that each and
every refugee is protected.
Developing countries have hosted 83 per cent of
the world’s refugees, and developed countries should
earnestly fulfil their aid commitments and help ease
the pressure sustained by developing countries. It is
necessary to adhere to the non-politicization principle
in handling refugee affairs, resolutely put an end
to using refugee status as a cover for terrorists and
criminals, and safeguard the credibility of the refugee
protection system.
Armed conflicts are closely related to the issue
of refugees. The Security Council should play an
active role in alleviating the plight of refugees. It
is necessary for the Council to properly fulfil the
primary responsibility of maintaining international
peace and security, promote the political settlement
of hotspot issues and provide a peaceful environment
for addressing the refugee problem. It is necessary to
22-66903

02/11/2022

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

support peacekeeping missions in providing assistance
to such humanitarian agencies as the UNHCR in line
with their mandates and within their capabilities.
It is necessary to strengthen cooperation with such
institutions as the Peacebuilding Commission, actively
promote post-conflict rebuilding in conflict-affected
areas and create favourable conditions for refugees to
return to their homes.
Regaining peace, returning home and rebuilding
a homeland is the simple wish of every refugee. For
many, however, this simple dream is far from being
lived in reality. Refugees and displaced persons have
continued to increase as a result of the crisis in Ukraine.
The coming long winter will further aggravate their
plight. China commends the countries neighbouring
Ukraine in hosting millions of refugees and calls on
the international community to increase humanitarian
assistance to relevant refugee groups so as to ensure that
they are properly resettled. Peace is the fundamental
solution to the problem of Ukrainian refugees. The
international community should focus on promoting
peace talks so that all relevant parties will resume such
talks and end the fighting at an early date and achieve
an earlier political solution to the crisis.
The question of Palestine has dragged on for a
long time. Millions of Palestinian refugees have been
displaced and deprived of their future, with their
homes occupied, their rights trampled on and their
security threatened. The international community
must continue to provide funding to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, increase assistance to Palestinian refugees,
take concrete actions to promote a comprehensive, just
and lasting solution to the Palestinian question, and put
an end to the suffering of Palestinian refugees as soon
as possible.
The Syrian crisis has resulted in nearly 7 million
Syrians crossing the border to become refugees. This has
had a huge impact on the countries neighbouring Syria,
including Lebanon and Jordan. This is the bitter fruit of
external military intervention and imposed democratic
transformation. The international community should
reflect deeply on this to avoid the recurrence of such
tragedies. At present, Lebanon and other countries
neighbouring Syria are struggling to host and resettle
refugees. The international community should continue
to actively promote the political settlement of the Syrian
issue, improve the humanitarian situation throughout
Syria and promote an early return of Syrian refugees.

S/PV.9178

The war in Afghanistan has displaced 11 million
Afghans, with millions of Afghan refugees in the
neighbouring countries of Pakistan and Iran alone. The
international community should maintain constructive
engagement with the Afghan interim administration,
actively support the peaceful rebuilding and
development of Afghanistan and create conditions
for the return of refugees. At the same time, in order
to increase assistance to Afghanistan, it is urgent to
address the country’s frozen overseas assets as soon
as possible and use them to help the Afghans out of
their plight.
With regard to those who entered Bangladesh
from the Rakhine state of Myanmar to avoid chaos,
we support Myanmar and Bangladesh in resolving
the problem through friendly consultation. Since the
beginning of the year, Myanmar and Bangladesh have
communicated many times on repatriation. They are
moving towards the goal of initial repatriation within the
year. The international community should acknowledge
and encourage this and support the UNHCR and other
international relief agencies in continuing to provide
humanitarian assistance. China will also continue to
make an active effort to this end.
Lastly, I would like to emphasize that Africa is
the continent with the most concentrated and striking
refugee situations. China highly appreciates the
kindness, tolerance, solidarity and resilience shown
over a long period of time by refugee-hosting African
countries. China calls on the UNHCR to continue to
give priority to Africa, mobilize resources, provide
support to African countries and lend a helping hand
to African refugees at a time when they need the help
the most.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I also extend our
congratulations to Gabon for its successful presidency
of the Security Council in the month of October, and
I would like to convey our congratulations and best
wishes to the delegation of Ghana for its presidency
during the month of November.
At the outset, I thank the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Filippo Grandi, for
his briefing.
Historically, India’s approach to the refugee issue
has always been driven by the ideals of compassion and
empathy. Those ideals are in the spirit of our cultural
ethos and our belief that the world is one family. India
has always welcomed communities facing persecution

22-6690315/23

S/PV.9178

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

in foreign lands. Zoroastrians and Jews, when faced
with persecution centuries ago, found a ready home in
India. Now, both are an integral part of India’s proud
pluralist culture and heritage.
India also hosted more than 10 million refugees
from Bangladesh, then East Pakistan, when genocidal
terror was unleashed on them. India’s humanitarian
response to the refugee influx from Bangladesh
was one of the most sophisticated and empathetic in
contemporary history.
Today a large number of refugees continue to stay
in India. Our programmes to assist them are managed
entirely from our own resources. The Constitution of
India guarantees all the basic rights to all persons,
not just our citizens. India remains committed to
facilitating the dignified, safe and sustainable return of
those foreign nationals to their homelands, in line with
the national laws of, and our mutual agreement with,
the country concerned.
India has also assisted Palestinian refugees through
partnering with the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA). India continues to support UNRWA’s role
in human development and the delivery of humanitarian
services. We increased our annual pledge to the
Agency from $1.25 million to $5 million in 2018 and
have contributed $20 million over the past four years,
including $5 million this year.
In his briefing today, the High Commissioner
updated the Council on the refugee crisis across the
world and the associated challenges. We note with
concern the surge in the number of refugees and
internally displaced persons (IDPs) under the mandate
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR). That number now stands
at more than 90 million people. The magnitude of
the problem is indeed worrisome. India appreciates
the efforts made by UNHCR in helping refugees in
various countries.

02/11/2022

Secondly, we need to focus on preventing people
from being forced to leave their homelands. Towards that
end, preventing armed conflicts, countering terrorism
and building and sustaining peace through facilitating
sustainable development and good governance remain
critical. We cannot have States following policies
of exacerbating conflicts on the one hand, and then
refusing to tackle the refugee influx on the other.
Thirdly, the refugee issue is a global challenge,
and no country alone can resolve it. We must continue
to foster a global perspective that promotes the
collaboration and participation of all Member States
and relevant stakeholders in line with the relevant
international law. India supports the central role of the
United Nations in dealing with the refugee issue.
Fourthly, we firmly believe that the principles of
humanity, impartiality and neutrality must be upheld
in dealing with refugee matters. That is crucial if we
are to maintain the credibility of the international
refugee protection mechanism. Member States and
UNHCR must remain committed to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
avoid the politicization of the humanitarian work. We
also encourage UNHCR to continue to help build,
strengthen and use national capacities for protection
and humanitarian action. We also understand the
importance of working with local responders in order
to ensure the localization of solutions and ownership of
the process.
Fifthly, the refugees have also been affected by
the global economic slowdown. Humanitarian aid has
therefore become more important than ever. Member
States should provide indiscriminate and equitable
services to refugees and take them into due account
in national response strategies. Empathy is of core
importance in that context.

In that regard, let me offer the following
five observations:

In closing, India remains committed to providing
the relevant humanitarian assistance to refugees. We
also believe that this humanitarian endeavour must be
consistent with welfare objectives and national security.
We strongly believe that determined action, solidarity
and multilateralism are needed more than ever in order
to address the refugee issue.

First, the primary duty and responsibility of
protecting and assisting IDPs falls to the States
concerned. International action must remain within the
bounds of the concept of sovereignty and, therefore,
should only be at the request of the country concerned.

Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, Mr. President, I wish you all the
best during your presidency, and reiterate the support
of my delegation. I also wish to recognize Gabon’s
excellent work during its presidency last month.

16/23

22-66903

02/11/2022

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

I thank the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, Mr. Filippo Grandi, for his documented,
timely and proactive briefing.
So far this year, we have witnessed an increase in
forced displacement around the world. We have all heard
it before — no region is exempt from this problem. We
are very concerned that more than 103 million people
have been forced to flee their homes, either within
the borders of their countries, as internally displaced
persons, or abroad, in search of international protection.
As High Commissioner Grandi explained today,
while the contexts are diverse, violence, poverty, the
lack of opportunities, political instability and climate
change all contribute to exacerbating current trends.
The conflict in Ukraine has been one of the main
drivers behind the global increase in the number of
displaced people this year. More than a third of the
country’s population has been forced to flee their homes
because of the war — 7.5 million Ukrainians have
sought safety in other countries and almost 7 million
are internally displaced.
In addition to recent problems, such as the war in
Ukraine or the conflict in northern Ethiopia, we are also
witnessing new waves of displacement in regions with
protracted conflicts. The resurgence of the Movement
du 23 mars in the east of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo or the intensification of the activity
of extremist groups in the Sahel have forced entire
communities to move and have led to a deterioration of
the humanitarian situation.

S/PV.9178

that force people to seek refuge or move within their
countries. But only a comprehensive understanding
of these phenomena will enable the international
community to find solutions based on cooperation and
solidarity that place the specific needs of refugees and
internally displaced persons at the centre.
In that regard, we highlight the significant efforts
of the High Commissioner, and we reiterate our
support to him. We also reiterate our call to gradually,
but consistently, include mental-health services and
psychosocial support for refugees and displaced persons
in regional and national responses. That is an area that
requires greater attention
I conclude with a brief reference to our region.
In 2021, Mexico received the third-highest number
of new applications for refugee status in the world,
particularly from people from Central America, Haiti
and Venezuela. True to its tradition in that respect,
and with the support of the High Commissioner and
his team, 72 per cent of the applications received a
positive response. In Mexico, we have incorporated the
commitments under the Global Compact on Refugees
into our national programmes, as we believe the
Compact to be a key instrument for dealing with those
applying for refugee status in line with a human rights
approach. My country hopes that the Global Refugee
Forum, which will take place next year, will be a good
opportunity to explore comprehensive solutions based
on recent experience to ensure the rights of all refugees
and internally displaced persons.

In addition to armed conflict, food insecurity and
the negative effects of climate change are increasingly
placing pressures on people by affecting their
livelihoods and leading to competition for increasingly
scarce resources. That has been the case, for example,
in South Sudan owing to flooding and in Somalia
owing to drought, phenomena that have contributed to
aggravating intercommunal violence.

Ms. Juul (Norway): Let me take this opportunity
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming your
role for the month of November. I would again like to
thank our colleagues from Gabon for guiding us so ably
through October.

It is a priority to recognize that women and girls are
disproportionately and differently affected by conflict
and the various factors that generate displacement. That
is clear in the case of Afghanistan, where the measures
that restrict the rights of women and girls also have an
impact on the decision to try to move to other regions
or to leave the country.

As we vividly heard from the High Commissioner,
armed conflicts, violence and persecution are forcing
an unprecedented number of people to flee and seek
safety and protection. We are particularly concerned
about the high number of children and young people
being forcibly displaced, many of them alone. They
are at risk of recruitment to armed groups. They must
be protected against human trafficking and sexual
and gender-based violence. We must ensure that their

Mexico is convinced of the need to develop
diagnoses that take into account the diversity of factors

Let me first thank High Commissioner Grandi most
sincerely for his very important briefing to the Security
Council today and for his leadership.

22-6690317/23

S/PV.9178

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

right to education is upheld. They need a protective
environment and hope for the future.
There are several negative trends that must be
reversed. Armed conflict and persecution remain
the main drivers of displacement. Across conflicts,
warfare in urban areas is killing and injuring civilians,
destroying homes, schools and hospitals and depriving
people of access to basic services and a means of
survival. Russia’s war against Ukraine is a horrifying
example of that. Such challenges are then compounded
by climate change and environmental degradation,
which, in themselves, also drive instability, conflict
and displacement, as we heard from the High
Commissioner’s recent visit to Somalia and Kenya.
Meanwhile, food insecurity is also on the rise, as
both a consequence and a driver of conflict, leading
to further displacement and affecting many host
communities. We see that in the Sahel and the Horn of
Africa, as well as other regions. We cannot stand idly
by in the face of such challenges.
First, we need stronger political will and leadership
to address the root causes and prevent conflict and
displacement. The Security Council has a mandate to
prevent conflict, and we must support the SecretaryGeneral in his mediation efforts. But prevention is
also about good governance, inclusive and sustainable
development and building resilience against climate
change, food insecurity and poverty.
Secondly, on the importance of protection, parties
to armed conflict must protect civilians and, to the
extent possible, reduce the risks that drive displacement.
Protection must also be at the core of the humanitarian
response. That requires safe, rapid and unhindered
humanitarian access, and the sustained presence of
humanitarian actors over time. All States and other
relevant parties must do their utmost to protect and
assist displaced persons and comply with refugee law,
human rights and, where applicable, international
humanitarian law in doing so.
Thirdly, we must seek durable solutions that
benefit both the displaced and their host communities.
That demands complementary approaches that link
humanitarian assistance with development, climate
action, peacebuilding and human rights work. The
participation of, and accountability to, affected
communities and displaced persons themselves
are crucial.
18/23

02/11/2022

Norway supports the Global Compact on Refugees
as a road map to inclusive and durable solutions for
the protection of refugees. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s Action Agenda on Internal Displacement and
the appointment of a Special Adviser. Together with the
Special Rapporteur on the human rights of internally
displaced persons, they will be key in supporting
affected States in finding durable solutions.
The global community must show solidarity with the
displaced and their host communities through broader
burden- and responsibility-sharing. We need to engage
more countries, international financial institutions and
the private sector. Flexible, unearmarked funding is key
to meeting the changing and growing needs. The High
Commissioner’s role and mandate remain as relevant
as ever. We reiterate Norway’s strong support for the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Let me join other
speakers in congratulating Gabon on its excellent
presidency in October. I wish Ghana all the best for the
month of November. I thank High Commissioner Grandi
for his briefing, and I offer congratulations on the
recent extension of his term by the General Assembly.
The United Kingdom commends the tireless efforts
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, as well as other humanitarian agencies,
non-governmental organization and host nations, for all
that it does to support those forced to flee their homes.
Climate change, conflicts and the long-term fallout
from the coronavirus disease pandemic have led to
shocking and unprecedented levels of displacement,
as we heard today. There are more than 300 million
people in need of humanitarian assistance and more
than 100 million forcibly displaced.
With that context in mind, we echo the horror
expressed by others at President Putin’s latest atrocities
in Ukraine, which are substantially adding to the
humanitarian caseload. Strikes on civilian targets ahead
of winter serve no other purpose than to spread terror.
As we heard from numerous statements this morning,
that unprovoked aggression has already displaced more
than14 million people and left almost 18 million in
need of humanitarian assistance. It is also causing food
insecurity across the planet.
The crisis in Ukraine is but one example of the
need to address the drivers of displacement. The United
22-66903

02/11/2022

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

Nations, with the support of Member States, needs to
focus on solutions to crises. From Ethiopia to Syria and
Myanmar, we owe it to the millions of refugees and
displaced persons to find practical, long-term political
solutions to prolonged crises.
Furthermore, the Council needs to continue to ensure
that actors on the ground meet their responsibilities.
That means adherence to international humanitarian
law, ensuring that refugee returns are voluntary, safe
and dignified and allowing humanitarians to safely
carry out their work unhindered. And in that context,
the United Kingdom supports the initiative of the United
States and Ireland to secure a horizontal sanctions
exemption for humanitarian workers.
Lastly, the United Kingdom is taking life-saving
action. Our international development strategy sets
out our long-standing commitment to life-saving
humanitarian work. We intend to contribute more than
$3 billion to humanitarian needs globally over the next
three years. As we look ahead to the Global Refugee
Forum next year, the Council should place the plight
of refugees and the forcibly displaced at the centre of
its decision-making. Without long-term solutions, the
humanitarian caseload will only continue to escalate.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ghana.
At the outset, I would like to thank the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Filippo
Grandi, for his insightful and compelling briefing,
which provides a clear but sobering picture of the global
refugee situation. I also thank him for his very kind
words about my country and its continuing contribution
as a host country for refugees, particularly for our
region and beyond.
Our shared determination to develop the global
architecture designed to address the world refugee
situation makes the role of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees critical to
saving lives, protecting rights and building a better
future for refugees, forcibly displaced communities and
stateless persons. While acknowledging the important
measures in place at the national and regional levels
for addressing the global refugee situation, we remain
concerned about the continued rise in the numbers of
global refugees. As of May, 100 million individuals
were forcibly displaced worldwide, and that includes an
increase of 10.7 million displaced people as compared
to the end of the previous year. The war in Ukraine has

S/PV.9178

been a major driver, but, in many parts of the continent
of Africa, the situation remains dire, with more than
26 per cent, or more than 18 million, of the world’s
refugees hosted in the region.
The High Commissioner’s recent visit to the Horn
of Africa revealed the seriousness of the situation.
In Somalia this year alone, for instance, the number
of people internally displaced primarily by drought
is nearing 1 million, with another 500,000 displaced
owing to conflict and insecurity. It is therefore critical
for the international community, including the Security
Council, to unite and spare no effort in assisting the
countries concerned to break the cycle of conflict
and climate crises. Ghana would like to make a few
points that we believe should underpin global efforts in
addressing the global refugee crisis, especially in the
context of Africa.
First, we believe that the instruments in place at
the international level, including the 1951 Convention
relating to the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol,
remain the most viable and sustainable tools for
addressing the situation of refugees. We encourage
Member States to make good on their commitment to
implementing them, including the Global Compact for
Refugees, adopted in 2018.
Secondly, the increasing rate of refugees in Africa
requires deeper cooperation between the United
Nations and regional arrangements to deal with the
situation effectively. In that regard, we welcome
stronger cooperation between the United Nations and
continental initiatives, such as the African Union
(AU) Convention for the Protection and Assistance of
Internally Displaced Persons in Africa, which came into
force in 2012. The focus of the AU’s 2019 theme, “Year
of refugees, returnees, and internally displaced persons:
towards durable solutions to forced displacement in
Africa”, demonstrates Africa’s commitment at the
highest level to addressing this menace, including in
relation to the regrettable situation that we see daily on
the Mediterranean Sea.
Thirdly, it is vital to pay attention to addressing the
drivers of instability, which are an aggravating factor
in the refugee situation. The heightened insecurity
in most parts of the continent resulting from the
increasing incidence of terrorist attacks and from
climate change and the pandemic, among other things,
is also worsening the displacement of huge populations
and requires urgent attention. We therefore welcome

22-6690319/23

S/PV.9178

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

the ongoing efforts to address the conflicts and political
situation on the continent and urge for sustained action.
Fourthly, other aggravating factors, including the
coronavirus disease pandemic and climate change, are
a major worry, especially because more than 70 per
cent of refugees come from highly climate-vulnerable
countries, while 80 per cent of people displaced by
conflict live in countries that are highly vulnerable
to climate change. The insecurity created by climate
change, especially on the continent of Africa, requires
a stronger commitment on the part of the international
community, including through harnessing available
instruments such as the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change and the AU Climate
Change and Resilient Development Strategy and
Action Plan (2022-2032). That will help to weaken
environmental threats to the African continent and their
impact on social and political instability. We welcome
the strengthening of the Council’s collaborative
arrangements, with the relevant United Nations entities
doing commendable work through peacebuilding
interventions aimed at addressing climate-related
security threats.
Lastly, as the High Commissioner and a number of
delegations have already indicated, it is important for
humanitarian funding to be increased to help meet the
increasing humanitarian needs resulting from the rise
in internal displacements and refugees globally. It is
important for us all to take advantage of the upcoming
Global Refugee Forum in 2023 to make a difference
through a display of unwavering political will that
can ensure that real and timely support is provided to
stakeholders, including host-country authorities, to
enable them to adequately address the refugee situation.
In conclusion, Ghana believes that the effective
implementation of the Global Compact for Refugees
is germane to tackling the refugee situation, and
we encourage Member States to make good on their
commitment to its implementation.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Grandi to respond to the
some of the comments and specific questions that have
been raised by delegations.
Mr. Grandi: I thank you, Sir, for the statement
that you have just made in your national capacity,
which was virtually a summary of the main points that
20/23

02/11/2022

were discussed here this morning, and for your very
wise advice. I would like to also thank all the members
of the Security Council who expressed support for
my organization, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), and our
partners and staff. That is very much appreciated.
While I should have perhaps been clearer, I can assure
everyone that despite all the challenges that we face
together and our concern about the fact that political
solutions are not forthcoming, we will continue to do
our work. As the representative of Norway said so
clearly, we will maintain protection at the heart of what
we do on many of the front lines that the Council deals
with from the political perspective.
With regard to something that was mentioned by
several members — of whom the representative of
Brazil was the first — I want to stress that I mentioned
climate change to highlight the complexity of today’s
movement and the importance of considering such
factors in the current general discussion on the climate
emergency, with the approach of the twenty-seventh
and twenty-eighth meetings of the Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change in November and next year. Given the
importance of those forums, I would encourage that the
connection to displacement and conflict be considered
in them. But as I have said in many forums, it is conflict
that mostly continues to drive displacement, and of
course that is why it is a tradition for me to come to the
Council at least once a year to share my views with its
members, because their work is closely linked to ours.
We somehow pick up the pieces when the Council cannot
reach political solutions. However, we appreciate the
enormous difficulties involved in that, and we continue
to encourage the Council in those efforts.
One question today asked what the Council can do
to best assist us. The best way is to continue to work
on such political solutions. That is something that we
ourselves cannot do, but we expect the Council to strive
to achieve them so that our work is made easier. As
many are aware, every year we celebrate World Refugee
Day on 20 June, and I always make a symbolic trip on
that occasion. This year I went to Côte d’Ivoire, because
that country, which produced almost half a million
refugees during the difficult years of its own civil
war — you, Sir, will be well aware of that, given that
yours was one of the host countries — has now changed
its trajectory and returned to peace and stability, with
90 per cent of refugees having returned. Those who
22-66903

02/11/2022

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

have not returned will be integrated into neighbouring
host countries, including Ghana. Therefore, I wanted
to stress that, when positive political action is taken,
solutions to displacement can be found. It is not always
a negative trajectory, it can be positive, too.
The representative of Gabon mentioned, and
many other members echoed, that we must not
apply criteria — and our response should not
change — according to geographical area, or the place
from which people come. I would stress that all people
fleeing armed conflict, as well as discrimination and
persecution, are equal in our view and must be treated
equally. We will continue to insist on that, because it
very important, but unfortunately it is not always the
case. There is inequality even in the manner in which
the victims of the worst situations are treated. That is
something that we will continue to remind all parties
to avoid.
Some Council members mentioned — and I said so
myself — that the response to the Ukrainian refugee
crisis, particularly in the European Union but also in
other countries, has been quite exemplary. I would
like to echo the Canadian representative here in New
York who, when I presented my report to the Third
Committee of the General Assembly yesterday, took
the floor to state that the reception and treatment of
Ukrainian refugees should not be an exception, but the
norm. It should be the model upon which we build when
it comes to hosting refugees and basis for comparison.
I think a very high standard has been set, which I hope
will set a precedent.
The United States, as well as many others — in
fact, almost all members — mentioned the importance
of continuing to support not only UNHCR, but also the
humanitarian agencies, non-governmental organizations
and others involved in providing humanitarian
responses, with adequate funding. I mentioned in my
opening remarks that it is also extremely important not
only to continue to sustain global humanitarian efforts,
but to ensure that there is no backtracking or reduction
in development assistance, because the link between
the two is fundamental.
That is something I saw clearly in Somalia last week.
Of course, we must ensure that the suffering Somali
people receive food, medical care and shelter — all of
those — through humanitarian interventions. However,
if we do not simultaneously build their resilience
and their immunity to the shocks of climate change,

S/PV.9178

conflict and other hardships, we will continue in a
spiral of humanitarian assistance that is unsustainable
in the long term.
I must be frank and say that this year, with 37
emergencies, when I visit places and tell my colleagues
that we are not doing enough, which I sometimes do,
they ask me how we can possibly do more. We can no
longer even find enough people to respond to those
emergencies, because we are spread so thinly across the
world in trying to counter those situations. Indeed, in
my opening remarks, I said that we can be counted on.
We will continue to lead and participate in humanitarian
responses, but we are spread very thinly at the moment.
If the situation does not improve in some places, I do
not know how much thinner we can be spread and
continue to be effective.
That is just to sound the alarm, so to speak. What
if we do not receive funding? This year, we do have a
funding gap. I have been in this role for almost seven
years, and this is the first year that I am expressing
alarm at the funding gap. We have managed in previous
years — we were never fully funded, but we managed.
This year, in some operations, especially in Africa
and in the Middle East, we are struggling with funding.
Even in areas for which it would seem obvious that we
should receive funds, such as the Horn of Africa, the
Sahel and the response to the Syrian refugee crisis,
which many members have mentioned, we are falling
short. That means that we will have to make cuts. How
am I to tell host countries that have been struggling
under the weight of millions of refugees that we cannot
provide the same level of cash assistance as in previous
years? Unfortunately, that is going to happen this year,
unless we receive urgent additional funding now and,
of course, into 2023.
I am fully aware that everyone is struggling and that
budgets in donor countries are tight in the wake of the
coronavirus disease response and the various impacts
of the crisis in Ukraine. Nonetheless, I must tell it as it
is and, unfortunately, the cost is very, very high.
I thank those members who mentioned access.
Access is a very difficult issue in situations of active
conflict. I have mentioned access in parts of Ethiopia,
but the issue applies to many other places. I would like
to stress that it is particularly difficult in areas that are
theatres of conflict. In Ethiopia, we work in many parts
of the country. Ethiopia is a large refugee host country
and has been a host country for decades, and we work

22-6690321/23

S/PV.9178

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

very well in those areas in which there is no conflict.
In those areas where there is conflict, access becomes
difficult. That is why I have made a plea for peace talks
to succeed quickly, so that we can resume the improved
access that we had only a few weeks ago. Therefore,
access is possible when there is goodwill, and that is
important for the people who are affected by conflict.
I thank the many Council members who mentioned
the initiative led by the United States and Ireland on
the carveout. What we need is clarity and flexibility
so that we can also operate in difficult political
circumstances. We need to be everywhere. It does not
mean that we recognize anybody. That is not our job.
A humanitarian agency does not have any function of
recognition; its function is to help the people. If we
cannot be there, the people cannot be helped, and being
there means having to be interlocutors with whoever
controls that territory. That is a fundamental aspect of
humanitarian action. If we have to negotiate too much
because — understandably — in that particular situation
there are sanctions, then it becomes cumbersome and
difficult, and we waste valuable time. Therefore, if the
Security Council can help us in that key area, and here
I speak on behalf of all my humanitarian colleagues,
then that will be invaluable. It is an urgent matter, so I
make a plea for that.
I believe the representative of Mexico mentioned
mental health. This year, our Executive Committee,
which is not technically our governing body but is the
main forum in which we interact with States, adopted
a resolution on mental health. We all recognize that,
with the very traumatic nature of conflict today, that is
a very important aspect of our response.
Before I conclude, I would like to mention a few
specific areas that were also cited by some members.
The United States mentioned the need to step up efforts
in Somalia, and I strongly agree. I think that includes
us as well, and this is one area in which, as I told my
colleagues, we need to do more. I think it is a collective
responsibility that we all share.
The situation in Somalia is still very bad, although
it has improved slightly in terms of humanitarian
assistance. President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, with
whom I had a very long conversation, has also made it
one of his priorities to bring under control the security
situation, including the Al-Shabaab insurgency. I think
it is very important, on the part of the Council, to support
him in those efforts. On our part, we must step up
22/23

02/11/2022

humanitarian assistance in parallel as, hopefully, more
territory becomes accessible to humanitarian workers.
Some Council members mentioned the situation
in Syria. I did elaborate further on that yesterday, in
the Third Committee. I am also worried about the
humanitarian situation inside Syria, and I agree that we
need to step up our efforts.
Resolution 2642 (2022) gives us space for early
recovery projects, and I think that we need to do
more of that. And I can assure the representative
of Russia, as well as others, that we will continue to
talk constructively with the Government of Syria to
try to remove the obstacles that prevent people from
returning. I was in Syria myself not so long ago, a few
weeks ago, and those are very complex but important
discussions that we will continue to have in order to
create those conditions, because we must recognize that
the burden on the neighbouring countries — especially
Lebanon, Jordan and Türkiye — is very substantive.
But of course, as many of those here have said today,
returns must remain voluntary.
There was an important mention, I believe by
Ireland, of the situation in Haiti. I would like to echo
that: we are concerned about the situation and will be
appealing in the next few days to all States receiving
Haitians to not to return people to a country that is
extremely fragile. I know that the Secretary-General
also has put forward some proposals for the situation in
Haiti. It is at the moment a very complex and worrying
situation, but from our point of view it definitely needs
the Council’s attention.
We will continue to work wherever Ukrainian
refugees are present, and they are present in many
parts of the world. I am on my way to Japan in the next
few days, and I am going to meet a Ukrainian refugee
community in Japan — so, really, there is quite a wide
spectrum of host countries. We will also continue to
work with the Russian Federation with respect to the
Ukrainian refugees who are present on its territory — the
representative of Russia mentioned that. I would like
to highlight that we have a rather small operation in
Russia, so we have very limited access, but we are
available to continue to cooperate and to increase the
access that we have to people, regardless of the country
in which they find themselves.
I would like to express my support to the
representative of China, who mentioned many
important points, including the one about genuinely
22-66903

02/11/2022

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

continuing to try to create conditions for the return
of Rohingya refugees from Myanmar, which requires
the cooperation of Bangladesh and Myanmar. That
is undoubtedly a priority file for us. I would like to
point out that while dialogue between the countries
is of course very important, as the representative of
China stressed, that alone will not guarantee the return
of refugees.
The conditions and discrimination that still prevail
where they come from must be lifted if we want people
to go back. Otherwise, as the people who want to go
back always tell us, they will not do so until they no
longer fear reprisals, violence or the other situations
they endured just a few years ago — as everybody
remembers. I am worried about the situation, because
I think that with the political evolution in Myanmar
itself, things have become more difficult. I was a little
bit more optimistic before the military takeover last
year, but we should not give up, and we should continue
to insist on addressing that particular issue.
I would also like to thank the representative of
India for his question, the matter of which is outside
of my Office’s mandate. Palestinian refugees fall
under the mandate of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), at least in the areas in which it operates.
But if he will allow me, I would like to support his
call for support to UNWRA. As he knows, I was the

S/PV.9178

Commissioner-General of the Agency before becoming
High Commissioner, and I think that its work in support
of Palestinian refugees in the Middle East is very
important and deserves full and sustainable support,
even under the very difficult present circumstances.
I think that I have covered all the points. I would
like to conclude my remarks by thanking members
of the Council for having mentioned the global
compact on refugees, which remains an important
toolbox adopted four years ago, the tools of which are
available to everyone here, as well as other countries,
to improve the response to refugee crises and crises of
displacement. I would also like to thank the Council
for having mentioned that the Global Refugee Forum,
the first of which we held in Geneva in 2019, will be
convened again at the end of next year. Colombia,
France, Japan, Jordan, the Niger and Uganda will be
the co-conveners, together with UNHCR, and it will be
co-hosted by Switzerland and UNHCR. We hope that
everyone here, as well as other countries, will invest
in the preparation of the Forum and participate at an
adequate level — it is a ministerial meeting — because
it will be an important moment to reflect on all that
we have discussed today and to look to the future with
renewed determination, despite all the challenges.
The President: I thank Mr. Grandi for the
clarifications he has provided.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

22-6690323/23
