TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

‘th
MEETING: 28 MARCH 1969

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda(S/Agenda/1468) I , , . , , a . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , 1
Adoptionoftheagenda

Ia ,.,,,,l,,.l,

+..ll.IIo..

. . . . . . . . . .,.

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 26 March 19G9 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressedto the Presidentof the Security Council (S/9 113) . . . . . . . . . , . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 27 March’ 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Israel
addressedto the Presidentof the Security Council (S/91 14) . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV.1468

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN

HUNDRED

AND SIXTY-EIG

eld in New York on Friday, 28 March 1969, at 10’.30 am.
President: Mr. Kriroly CSATORDAY (Hungary).
Present:
The representatives of the following States:
AIgeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l468)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 26 March 1969 from! the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/9 113).
3. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 27 March 1969 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/91 14).
Adoption of the agenda

This is of course just one of the violent manifestations of
the explosive situation prevailing in the Middle East.
3. This aggression by Israel against Jordan is, however,
part of a strategy which has been carefully worked out by

the Tel Aviv authorities to destroy the economic resources
of the Arab countries and to compel them to accept a
settlement foisted upon them. The fact that, twenty years
ago, Israel intruded in a region of the Arab world is
confirmed by facts and principles which are inspired by
colonialist ideology.
4. The magnitude of the damage recently inflicted on the
property of the Jordanian people, which was the fruit of
several generations of work, and the terror and oppression,
are aggravating a situation which is already precarious and
fraught with danger. Today as yesterday, Israel is profiting
with impunity from experiences and methods which we
thought to be no longer current but which it continues to
develop to the nth degree. These methods reveal the
expansionist ambitions of Israel. The international community cannot remain impassive in the face of a process
which is proving to be more aggressive than all the
colonialist systems from which Israel took its cue.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 26 March 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/91 13)
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 27 March 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Israel addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/91 14)

1. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): In accordance with the decision taken at earlier meetings of the
Council, I propose to invite the representatives of Jordan,
Israel and Saudi Arabia to take seats at the Council table in
order to participate in the debate, without the right to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. El-Farra
(Jordan) and Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) took seats at the
Council table.

2. Mr. AZZOUT (Algeria) (translated from French): At
the request of Jordan, the Security Council has again been
convened to consider the question of the blatant aggression
perpetrated by the Tel Aviv authorities against the village of
Ein Hazar, where scores of innocent people met their death.

5. The daily bombing of the territory of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan is part of the escalation theory
practised in other regions of the world and is designed
above all to cover up the failure of an occupation policy
and to justify something which, by its very nature,
constitutes permanent aggression.
6. For over twenty years the Israeli aggressor has been
oppressing, plundering and massacring a people unjustly
deprived of its right to self-determination and national
existence. This is the origin of the tragedy and of the crises
which rack the Middle East and periodically produce
tensions likely to threaten international peace and security.
7. Today a people which has long been ignored is rising up
against its aggressorand is resolutely demanding justice and
recognition of its rights.
8. It is this resistance to a twenty-year old occupation and
Israel’s inability to overcome it which have led Israel to
ceaseto seek the source of its failures within the territories
that it occupies illegally, but to attribute them to the
support coming from outside, without which, we are told,
the “pacification” processwould be almost completed.
9. In fact, the whole world is witnessing the implementation of a strategy designed to secure military occupation
of the territory of sovereign countries, States Members of

unequivocally for the aggression committed against Jordan,
To that end, it must work out the steps which are
necessary, in accordance with the Charter, to put an end to
the daily aggression of Israel.

the United Nations, and to break down all resistance by the
Palestinian movement and the Arab peoples. The struggle of
the Palestinian people has assumed international dimensions
and cannot therefore be disregarded as a political fact and
an irreversible phenomenon of the liberation struggle.

18. Mr. JAKOBSON (Finland): Once again an act of
violence has prompted the Security Council to meet to
consider the situation in the Middle East. The represen”
tative of Jordan told us that Israeli jet planes have attacked
a defenceless civilian area, causing death and destruction,
The representative of Israel, charging the Government of
Jordan with responsibility for the activities of the
Palestinian commandos, claims that this was an act of
legitimate self-defence. For the Security Council, which has
the responsibility for maintaining peace and security in the
area, motives and intentions count for less than the act
itself. The Council cannot accept as valid any arguments
put forward to justify unilateral military action that
constitutes a breach of the cease-fire arrangements established in the area.

10. The repeated attacks on Palestine’s neighbouring Arab
countries are due to the fact that this reality, which is
essential to an understanding of the Middle East problem, is
deliberately ignored and provides Israel with a convenient
pretext for putting into operation what it hypocritically
christens the policy of “active defence”.
11. It seems to the Algerian delegation that Israel’s
systematic practice of its aggressive policy calls for
decisions by the Security Council, decisions which should
be designed first of all to put an end to the occupation of
Arab territories.
12. Whether in the case of the Middle East, of Southern
Rhodesia or of Namibia, it is only a firm determination on
the part of the Security Council to ensure the implementation of its own decisions that will enable the repeated
aggressions by those well versed in the use of force to be
brought to an end and will spare us the necessity of meeting
regularly to try to find solutions to this problem, for which
no solution can be found.

19. Yet, neither this nor the many other incidents the
Security Council has previously dealt with can be
considered in isolation. They must be seen as part of the
unbroken cycle of violence that is undermining and eroding
the cease-fire arrangements. The fighting continues intermittently not only along the cease-fire lines, as for instance
between Israel and the United Arab Republic along the
Suez Canal in recent days, but also on a different level,
inside the countries involved, in a deadly dialogue of
violence and reprisal, adding constantly to the tragic losses
suffered by the civilian populations throughout the Middle
East area.

13. The only solution worthy of the name lies in the
application of the general principles of law and of the
United Nations Charter.
14. Time and again, we have drawn the Councii’s attention
to Israel’s probable intentions with regard to the territories
east of Jordan. We have pointed to the active complicity
that Israel enjoys. It is to be, feared that Israel might show
that it has additional designs on other territories besides
those which were seized during the war of 5 June.

20. The Security Council, in our view, must reject the use
of force whenever and in whatever shape it occurs. It
cannot ignore an act of violence, It must insist that all the
parties to the conflict strictly observe the cease-fire and
refrain from any action likely to increase tension in the
area.

15. Following a plan that has now become accepted,
certain Powers are obviously more concerned to restore
peace in the Middle East on the basis, of course, of an
allegedly realistic point of view which would leave Israel in
possession of the greater part of its conquests than to see
the Council effectively fulfil its mission, namely, to find a
solution for the Middle East problem which would take
into account all the interests involved, and particularly the
restoration of their rights to the Palestinian people.

21. A cease-fire by its very nature is a temporary
arrangement. The Security Council resolutions of June
1967, calling upon the parties to stop the fighting, said this
was “a first step” [resolutions 233 and234 (1967)]. It was
intended to be the first step toward making peace. But the
next step still remains to be taken. One thing clearly
emerges from all the conflicting claims we have heard here,
and that is that the only effective way to put an end to the
use of force and to the continued violence in the Mi.ddle
East is to take that next step and remove the state of
insecurity that has existed in the area not only since June
1967 but for much longer. The latest incident with which
we are dealing today only servesto underline this fact.

16. The Members of the United Nations and the Organization itself can certainly not be guided by an cttitude based
on a permanent compromise to the advantage of the
powerful, for the United Nations was in fact created in
response to the need to protect the weakest nations against
the greed of the strongest.

22. The Security Council resolution of 22 November 1967
(242 (1967)] sets out the principles on which a just and
lasting peace can be established. The Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ambassador Gunnar Jarring, is
continuing his contacts with the States concerned in order
to promote agreement and assist efforts to achieve a
peaceful and accepted settlement. At the same time, as we
all know, the major Powers, four permanent members of
the Security Council, are moving toward joint talks on the

17. With regard to the case now before the Security
Council, to countenance such acts of aggression on the part
of the Tel Aviv authorities, after they have clearly defined
their strategy of so-called “active defence”, which consists
in establishing armed aggression against sovereign States as a
political
programme, would amount to authorizing the
escalation which has already reached alarming heights. It is
the duty of the Security Council to condemn Israel
2

subject of the Middle East. This development should be
welcomed, we believe, by the international community as a
whole, for it gives rise to hope that we may see progress
toward creating stable and permanent conditions of peace
for all the States in the Middle East area.

incident, is the knowledge that hopeful new peace
initiatives are in train. Four-Power talks are expected to
commence before long and the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative, Ambassador Jarring, is again in the field,
pressing the parties to clarify their terms for settlement.
The Council must condemn any action which damages the
prospects of successof these peace initiatives. Furthermore,
we are entitled to demand, in the strongest terms, sincere
co-operation by both sides. Amongst many discouraging
words yesterday we heard some phrases which may give us
hope. “We want peace”, said Ambassador El-Farra. “It is
high time for peace between Israel and Jordan”, said
Ambassador Tekoah. And I need hardly say that my”
country would not have agreed to take part in the
forthcoming four-Power talks if we did not believe that all
the Powers concerned were sincerely committed to a
continuing and constructive searchfor a just peace.

23. The question before us should, in our view, be
considered in this wider international context. It would be
unfortunate indeed if we now were to proceed in a manner
that might make the forthcoming negotiations more
difficult. The overriding interest of the Security Council
must be to promote unity among its members, and
particularly among the four major Powers, in the search for
a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
24. Sir Leslie GLASS (United Kingdom): Brutal force was
used at Salt on 26 March in a clear breach of the cease&e.
The end result of the Israeli attack was a pitiful toll of
innocent victims of both sexes and all ages. My delegation
deplores profoundly this indiscriminate attack.

30. What are we to do now in the Council? I can
understand fully the powerful emotion of the Jordanian
people as they bury their dead countrymen and country;
women, but I would beg Ambassador El-Fana to keep his
eye on the basic long-term national interest of his country
which must lie in a just peace, and I would ask him to
reflect on the need at this vital juncture to preserve the
unanimity of the Council. A serious public split now, just
when we are entering on an important new stage of the
joint search for peace, would be a setback to the interests
of the Jordanian people, as well as to those of all the
peoples in the Middle East and indeed the world.

25. Mr. President, for nearly two years we in the Council
have had brought to our notice in one form or another an
appalling list of violent acts committed in the Middle East.
The victims of Salt were far from being the first innocent
civilians, Arabs or Israelis, to suffer maiming and death, and
they will not be the last. Bombing, shelling, laying of
mines-these
are now almost daily occurrences. The
violence of this bitter feud has even spread to peaceful
international civilian airports, My delegation condemns all
acts of violence and breaches of the cease-fire by both sides.

3 1. Mr. President, the policy of my country is the same as
that expressed by Ambassador Malik as the policy of the
Soviet Union. If I may use his words, “We sincerely want to
find a peaceful settlement together with all those who want
a speedy political settlement, without resort to force,
without propagandn, without imposing anything.“1

26. Three things are clear. One is that while it is right and
proper for the parties to bring to the notice of the Council
serious individual
incidents and to ash us to focus our
attention on them, we are only tinkering with the problem
if we concentrate on individual incidents. Each side invokes
passionate justification for the use of violence by their side
and the legitimacy of reprisal, Whatever the rights and
wrongs of the case, violence inevitably leads to counterviolence. There is no end to this argument except by getting
to the root of the situation itself.

32. Mr. BERARD (France) (translatedfrom French): l’lle
present meetings of the Security Council have been
convened at the request of Jordan, following the bombing
of the Jordanian village of Ein Hazar by Israel jet fighters.
Reports that seem to be quite impartiai indicate that
eighteen civilians were killed and twenty-five wounded,
several of them seriously. The targets hit were primarily
residential and civilian establishments. Other letters sent to
the President of the Council show that this was not an
isolated bombing attack. Other attacks have been carried
out during the last few weeks and they too have claimed
many victims. Serious damage has been done to villages and
to crops.

27. Secondly, it is clear that the time has come when
action to settle the problem cannot longer be delayed. The
incident now before us and the many other incidents
brought to our notice by letter and in the speeches of the
representatives of Jordan and of Israel show a highly
dangerous and critical situation. In the world of today with
horrific weapons of mass destruction lurking in mankind’s
arsenal for misuse if the Middle East conflagration spreads,
the dangerous situation in that area cannot be allowed to go
on asitis.
28. Thirdly, the outside world cannot afford to stand by
and treat this as a local quarrel, The parties have had long
enough to try and resolve it on their own. It is right and
proper that there should now be new initiatives for Peace
involving in particular four permanent members of this
Council with particular responsibility for international
peace and security.

33. From the purely humanitarian point of view, such
deliberate operations, carried out without any warning, call
for outright condemnation. They victimize the innocent.
They spread the ravagesof war and destruction in a country
which has already suffered cruelly. Jordan has been
deprived of a substantial part of its territory since June
1967 and is experiencing the greatest difficulty in ensuring
the subsistence both of its population and of the hundreds
of thousands of refugees to which it has given shelter and
which live on its soil in highly precarious conditions,

29. Mr. President, in the minds of all Council members
today, when they consider how to deal with this Particular

1 Cited from the interpretation given at the 1467th meeting. See
para. 128.

3

39. Faced with the deterioration in the situation, the
gravity of which, after these new incidents, cannot escape
any of us, and in order to make headway towards a
peaceful settlement, towards the just and lasting peace
desired by all, the French Government has suggested that
four permanent members of the Security Council should
combine their efforts to seek a way of implementing the
resolution of 22 November 1967 which will be acceptable
to the parties.

&spite
United Nations assistance. Raids like that on Ein
Hazar disrupt their lives even more.

34, If we are to believe statements made by Israel, these
repeated air raids represent a new tactic of carrying out
preventive attacks on dwelling places and villages where
there are thought to be fedayeen. But that reasoning could
never justify such operations as these, which constitute a
new stage in the escalation of military action about whidl
we have every reason to be disturbed.

40. ‘My delegation feels it its duty to voice once again and
most emphatically the concern caused by the present
developments and the obvious escalation in the military
action. They confirm it in its conviction that the deterioration cannot be allowed to continue, that the four Powers
must, as soon as possible, show themselves equal tso the
special responsibilities which their position in the Council
confers on them and that all nations of goodwill should join
together to support all those who are working towa.rds a
peaceful settlement of the Middle East crisis.

35. In his counter-charge, the representative of Israel
emphasized the fact that they were countermeasures to
commando activities, blows and attacks which had been
considerably stepped up of late and which, also caused
civilian casualities. He accused the Arab Governments of
supporting or condoning fedayeen activities. We have
repeatedly stated here that we condemn all violations of the
cease-fire and demand its strict observation. We wish to
repeat this once again today. In our view, the artillery duels
which have taken place recently along the Suez Canal are
equally regrettable.

41. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): Once again the Security
Council finds itself confronted with the tragic situation
caused by another grave attack by Israel on civilian targets
in Arab States. According to impartial descriptions in the
press, this attack has been one of particular severity. Even if
the air attack on rest-houses and winter resorts in Ein Hazar
had been an isolated incident, it would have called for
condemnation. But that it is part of a systematic pattern of
acts by Israel, to exploit its complete air superiority in the
region and inflict so much indiscriminate destruction, is
clear from the abundant evidence before us.

36. Even if the air raids which Israel is now carrying out
are aimed at crushing terrorist activities and eventually
eliminating them, are they not in fact having the opposite
effect? Far from bringing about any lessening of the
attacks and blows, they can only increase the animosity
among the people who suffered them and strengthen the
reaction of which the fedtzyeen are a manifestation. They
can only deepen the gulf separating the Arabs and the
Israelis, and rule out, or at least delay, the possibility of a
settlement which the Government of Israel itself is seeking.

42. Let me mention some of these attacks which were
reported to the Security Council. I limit myself to those
which were not the subject of debate in this forum. On
1 December 1968 Israeli armed forces using aircraft
attacked centres of civilian population in the northern part
of the Jordan valley .2 Two days later, on 3 December
1968, Israeli forces heavily shelled the city of Irbid and
bombed some villages in Jordan, killing fifteen civilians and
seriously wounding seventeen others, most of them elderly
people, women and children. Large-scale destructictn of
property was also caused.3 On 24 February 1969 Israel
launched air attacks on the suburbs of Damascus. At
Al-Hameh, Zebdani and Maysaloun, civilian casualties
amounted to fifteen dead and forty wounded. Women and
children’ were again the main victims fsee S/9028]. On 16
and again on 17 March, Israeli aircraft launched attacks
using rockets and even napalm, according to report,s, on
Jordanian villages and areas (see S/9113].

3’1. What we are in fact witnessing is the intensification
and strengthening of the infernal and hopeless cycle of acts
and reprisals, to the danger of which the French delegation
haa often drawn attention. It is with the greatest concern
that today my delegation notes an increasing deterioration
in the situation, which only servesto justify its fears.
38. During the months of May and June 1967, the French
Government did everything in its power among the various
States concerned to prevent the outbreak of an armed
conflict. Unfortunately, its efforts were unsuccessful. In the
months which followed, it did all it could to limit the
consequences of the conflict and to bring about conditions
conducive to appeasement. At meeting after meeting of the
Council, the French delegation pointed out that as long as
there was no settlement, as long as the occupation lasted,
there was the danger that the incidents would continue and
#inevitably increase in number. That is why, on every
possible occasion after the unanimous adoption of resolution 242 of 22 November 1967, my delegation has called
for the rapid implementation of the resolution. Unfortunately our efforts in that direction have produced no result.
The mission entrusted to Mr. Jarring-to whose intelligence,
energy and loyalty we wish once again to pay a tribute-has
not so far had the desired results. On various occasions he
has been faced with the argument that the best way to
achieve a settlement was through direct negotiations
between the parties. It seemed, however, that in the present
circumstances it would not be possible to conduct such
negotiations and that it was therefore not realistic to hope
for such a course of action.

43. I need hardly recount here the repeated large-scale
attacks by Israel on civilian installations and other targets in
the Suez Canal sector. The enormous loss caused by these
massive attacks to the economic life of the people of the
United Arab Republic is well known, The Security Council
will recall that when military actions of this kind on the
Part of Israel in March, August and December of last year
were discussed in the Council, Israel pleaded the right of
2 See Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-Third
Year, Supplement for October, November and December 1968,
document S/891 1.
3 Ibid., document S/8916.

4

reprisal, Mindful of the basic principle of the Charter of the
United Nations in regard to the use of force, the Council
rejected
that plea. It could not but consider that the theory
advanced by Israel, if accepted, would destroy the rules of
law embodied in the Charter.

of four permanent members of the Security Council to
promote
a just solution of the Middle East conflict.
/
4
49. Confronted with this situation, the Security Council
cannot disregard its own obligations under the Charter. It
must keep in view the clear provisions of the resolutions to
which I referred a moment ago. It must not absolve Israel
from the restraints imposed on States by the rules of
international conduct. It must remain mindful of the
necessity of injecting an element of restraint and responsibility into the conduct of Governments,

44. Resolutions 248,256 and 262 of 1968 condemned the
military attacks ,by Israel. Paragraph 3, of resolution
248 (1968), explicitly declared that:
L‘* . . such actions of military reprisal and other grave
violations of the cease-fire cannot be tolerated and that
the Security Council would have to consider further and
more effective steps as envisaged in the Charter to ensure
against repetition of such acts.”

50. Above all, the Council has to remain faithful to its
commitments in the earlier resolutions. The very nature of
Israel’s proclaimed policy of active defence makes it
incumbent on the Council to take a stronger stand than it
took in regard to earlier acts.

45. If this was the Council’s stand in regard to actions
which, according to the Israeli argument, were taken in
retaliation against specific acts directed against it, it is
obvious that a much more forceful stand by the Security
Council is called for in a case where even such a pretext
cannot be advanced.

51. With these considerations in mind, the least the
Council can do is to make a pronouncement containing the
following two elements: first, it should condemn this attack
as a flagrant violation of the United Nations Charter and
the cease-fire resolutions; second, it should issue a final
warning to Israel that the repetition of such attacks would
result in the adoption by the Security Council of the
necessarymeasures under the Charter.

46. The significant feature of the attack which occurred
on Wednesday is not merely that it was one of the worst air
raids on Jordan since the 1967 war but that Israeli jets
selected as their target a place where, according to the
testimony of survivors, there were no military installations
and where no, anti-aircraft fire had been directed against
Israeli planes. That this was not a fortuitous occurrence is
clear from the fact that the Israeli Government has recently
proclaimed the doctrine of “active defence”. The nature of
this so-called doctrine can be understood from a dispatch
from Jerusalem, datelined 16 March, in regard to another
recent Israeli air attack on Jordan which was published in
The New York Times of 17 March. The relevant extract
from this dispatch reads:

52. Such a pronouncement will serve to arrest a further
deterioration of the situation if it is supported by the
permanent members in the discharge of their special
responsibilities. The great Powers certainly can ensure that
such a pronouncement is heeded. They have the resourcea
and the means; what is required is the will.
53. We fully realize that the dictates of realism, balance
and restraint cannot be disregarded. But it is not balance to
equate the grave violations of the cease-fire committed by
Israel with the actions of Arab resistance organizations. It is
not balance to forget that popular resistance is the
inevitable result of, and response to, alien occupation. It is
not balance to impose on the Governments of Arab States
the impossible task of suppressingthe legitimate struggle of
the people of Palestine for a return in freedom to their own
homeland. For twenty years they have waited; nothing has
been done to redress the wrongs inflicted on them. Is it
surprising that in the present situation they should be
acting as they do?

“This morning’s raids were the first in which no effort
was made by Israeli officials to cite specific Arab border
or infiltration activity as a basis for the attack.
“The new policy goes beyond the earlier concept of
conducting what were generally considered to be reprisal
raids for Arab actions.”
47. In regard to Wednesday’s attack, the Israeli version is
that the ,target was a suspected commando base. Two
questions arise here. In the first place: can men and women
and chikhen be killed and property destroyed merely on
the basis of suspicion ?’ Secondly, how can one tell a
fedaveen from anyone else? It can thus be seen that the
Israeli doctrine of self-defence is nothing but the assertion
of an unlimited right to attack the territories of Arab States
md inflict cruel punishment for their offence of having
&en refuge to the uprooted people of Palestine. Such a
doctrine completely disregards the rules of civiliz,ed behaviour. Nor is it likely to prevent the increase in strength and
activities of the resistance movement.

54. My delegation is firmly convinced that the element of
balance required in the present situation can be provided
only by a scrupulous regard for the principles of the United
Nations Charter and the pertinent resolutions of the
Security Council. The condonation, by omission to act, of
Israel’s attacks on Arab States, the disregard of the
principle of the inadmissibility of territorial conquest, the
relegation to oblivion in the name of realism of frontiers
changed and people subjugated by military occupation, the
assumption that solemn international agreements can be
considered to have lapsed because one party has unilaterally
violated them-all these are the direct antithesis of the
principles of the United Nations Charter.

48. The added significance of the timing of the latest
major attack has already been commented upon by some of
cur colleagues in this debate. This attack came precisely at
the time when some hope was being aroused by the efforts

55. In the present situation, they not only militate against
the legal and moral norms of the Charter; they also
5

62. Those views become dubious when they disregard the 1
fact that the targets of the terror operations are innocent ;
men, women and children, and when they fail to recognize :
terror warfare for what it really is: murder for the sake of
murder. True, we do live in a period when Bonnie and ;
Clyde are sometimes glamourized, but this cannot change i
the fact that Bonnie and Clyde are criminals.
r
i
63. Yesterday [1446th meeting, para. 1071, I referred to a ’
resolution adopted at the Seventh International Conference
of the Associations of Resistance and Deportation in April
1968. I should now like to bring before the Security
Council another decision adopted by the International
Qrganization of Resistance and Deportation Associa.tionsin
January of this year. The resolution reads:

undermine the very basis of any realistic quest for a
peaceful settlement. Resolution 242 (1967) emphasizes the
inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by war, and
calls for the withdrawal of Israeli armed forces from
territories occupied in the 1967 conflict.
56. We should like to reiterate once again in this forum
that the task of promoting a solution of the Middle East
conflict has little chance of successif this basic principle is
in any way compromised.
57. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
58. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): My delegation has listened with
attention to the statements made by members of the
Security Council,, The views of Governments, Members of
our Organization, are always of interest. Their effect and
validity, however, are irrevocably dependent on their
relationship to the fundamental concepts of international
law, the United Nations Charter, equity and justice. Thus
the political views of certain Governments cannot affect the
basic right of self-defence.

“The Seventh International Conference of the Associations of Resistance and Deportation has already taken a
stand regarding the Arab commandos who claim to be
acting as the resistance did in the territories occupied by *
the Nazi armies during the Second World War. Yet, the I
resistance never deliberately attacked the lives of innocent women, men and children; no member of the
resistance would ever tolerate that the character land the
aims of his struggle should be so hideously distorted-a
struggle in which took part thousands of men and women
who now live in Israel, where they found a haven, and in
a desire to achieve nothing but peace and tranquility,

59. Israel has been in a state of self-defence since 1948. It
will remain so until the Arab Governments agree to end the
war waged against Israel and conclude peace. The methods
of self-defence employed by Israel cannot be prescribed by
the aggressor States or by their supporters. The criminal
cannot complain that the victim of his attack has seized his
arm and holds it in firm grip until there is certainty that he
will not attack again.

“The International Union of Resistance and Deportation hereby reiterates the condemnation of terrorism in
the Middle East, as was expressed first by the Seventh
International Conference of the Associations of Resistance and Deportation. No one can compare the spirit of
resistance with terrorist activities and odious and blind
crimes intended to provoke fear and insecurity, to give
rise to violence, when all possibilities are openly offered
for an open discussion, or try to compare with the
resistance against Nazism the fanatics surrounded by
former Nazi criminals who merely prolong the Hitler
genocide and thereby offer an insult which is felt deeply .
not only by the citizens of Israel, who courageously fight for +heir right to life, but by all those who resisted and :
who remain true to themselves.”

60. The story of the denial of the rights of nations to the
Jewish people is a long one. Jewish sovereignty wasrestored
only twenty-one years ago, but it is time to understand that
the Jewish State will not acquiesce in any attempt to curtail
its rights or to apply to it precepts different from those
applicable to others. If there are generally accepted
concepts on what aggression means, those concepts must be
applied to the war waged by the Arab States against Israel
for two decades. If terrorism against another State is
generally recognized as aggression, then Arab terror warfare
against Israel is aggression, whether in 1949, or 1956, or
1969. If it is clear to all that the attacked has the right to
defend himself, then Israel must maintain its right to
defend itself against open, relentless Arab belligerency. If a
cease-fire implies reciprocal, scrupulous observance by both
sides, Israel cannot but insist on such observance on the
part of the Arab Governments. If war normally ends by
peace agreements negotiated between parties to the
conflict, if all Members of the United Nations have the right
to live in peace and security, Israel will not accept deals
which aim at denying it this right.
61. The effect and validity of the views expressed by
Member Governments in this Council are also related to the
regard those views accord to facts. Those views become of
dubious value when, for instance, they ignore the basic fact
that the Arab terror warfare is not a result of the June 1967
hostilities, but has been employed by the Arab States as a
method of war for years: in the fifties and sixties, whenever
war by regular armies was considered by the Arab Govemmerits too risky.
6

64. A resolution in a similar spirit was adopted recently by
the French Action Committee of Resistance, a body which
represents the French resistance groups against Nazi
occupation. I would respectfully suggest that those representatives who find it possible to draw a comparison
between the heroic European resistance movements snd
thugs who kill innocent civilians should allow the resistance
movements to speak for themselves.

!
1
5
:

65. Finally, one cannot but question views offered by
members of the Security Council who a priori identify
themselves with positions inimical to Israel irrespective of
the merits of those positions. One cannot but question
views of States which, in defiance of the United Nations,
deny Israel’s right to independence and security or States
which have found it possible to impose unilateral measures
against Israel contrary to the Charter of the United Nations.
There is one way and one way only to attain a peaceful
solution of the Middle East conflict: ensure the faithful

’
:
:

I
i

:
l

i

observance of the cease-fire and proceed towards agreement
between the parties concluded by the parties on a just and
lasting peace. Israel will pursue this road. It hopes that
Jordan and the other Arab States will do likewise.

February 1955. Here again we had a condemnation
sponsored by the three big Powers, France, the United
States and the United Kingdom. And all those decisions
were all adopted unanimously,

66. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I give the
floor to the representative of Jordan,

72. The jurisprudence of the Security Council that was
referred to yesterday shows that Israel was condemned by
the Security Council for the fourth time on 19 January
1956 for another attack by the army .of Israel-against Syria
this time. That resolution [1fl (I956)] expressed grave
concern at the failure of the Government of Israel to
comply with its obligations and warned that the Security
Council “. , . will have to consider what further measures
under the Charter are required to maintain or restore the
peace”. The same three Western Powers sponsored this
resolution which was unanimously adopted by the whole
membership of the Security Council,

67. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): Yesterday [1466tk meetirrg/ we heard Mr. Tekoah speak about twenty centuries,
twenty years of peace, security and what-not. Yesterday we
heard Mr. Tekoah lecture the Council about the jutisprudence of the United Nations. Today, after hearing the
condemnation of the Israeli act which came from every
member around this table who spoke, Mr. Tekoah has again
, attacked the Security Council and has told the Council,
“We will continue our stand” and that the views of the
Council’s members cannot affect the basic Israeli right of
self-defence-self-defence not as declared by the j&isprudence of the United Nations, which he championed
yesterday, but as defined by him:

73. The Security Council also condemned Israel in 1962
It reaffirmed resolution
III (1956) from which I have just quoted ,an extract, and
which not only condemned Israeli military
action,
“whether or not”-in
the, words of the resolution“undertaken by way of retaliation,” and again warned
Israel that it would have to consider further measures under
the Charter to restore peace.

[see resolution 171 (1962)].

68. This is not ‘the first time that Mr. Tekoah has attacked
the Council. During the debate of last December in
connexion with the attack on the Beirut airport, it was
Mr. Tekoah who called the Security Council “morally,
politically and juridically bankrupt” (1462nd meeting]. It
was Mr. Tekoah’s people, leaders and Government which
attacked the Security Council in different ways and in
different slanderous statements. I will not take up much of
your time to quot.e them as I am sure that we are all
familiar with the behaviour of Israel towards this august
body. What I do want to bring to the attention of the
Council is that those statements made by Mr. Tekoah
should not divert the attention of the Security Council
from the dictates of the Charter and from the jurisprudence
of the Security Council. The Security Council has taken
many decisions deploring the acts of Israel, condemning its
behaviour, censuringthe Government of Israel and warning
it, and I think that it is about time that this body sawto it
that Israel put an end to this complete arrogance, to this
utter defiance, to this intoxication with the arrogance of
power.

74. In the case of Es Samu, the Security Council condemned Israel on 25 November 1966. Here again the
Security Council censured “Israel for this large-scale military action in violation of the United Nations Charter and
of the General Armistice Agreement between Israel and
Jordan”/resolution 228 (1966)].
75. The other condemnations of last year are still fresh in
the memories of all of us. I need not mention the attack on
the Beirut airport nor refer to the attack on Karameh nor
the attack on Shuna. The condemnations in those casestoo
are part and parcel of the jurisprudence of the Security
Council.
76. Mr. Tekoah referred again this morning to resistance. I
am glad that the Security Council is making a distinction
between a crime committed by the Israeli armed forces and
a reaction to the occupation that is taking place in the west
bank of Jordan, in the Gaza Strip, in Golan and in Sinai,
This distinction is very important, because it also reflects
the jurisprudence of the Security Council and the stand
taken by the members of the Security Council on every
previous case of a similar nature.

69. The Security Council took a decision in 1951 condemning a violation of the cease-tire and a violation of the
Armistice Agreement. That resolution was sponsored by
France, the United Kingdom and the United States, three
of the big Powers sitting around this table.
70. On 24 November 1953 the Security Council condemned Israel on the question of Qibya asbeing:

77. I listened carefully to the statement made this
morning by my friend and colleague, Sir Leslie Glass, in
which he asked me very kindly to assist in maintaining and
preserving the unity of the Council, because that would also
be in the interest of my Government. I am paraphrasing
what he said. I am grateful to Sir Leslie Glass for his advice,
which I shall take and which will certainly guide my stand,
because it is always good to take the advice of friends. And
my colleagues around this table are the friends of the
victim, the friends of Jordan. I am for the unity of the
Council. Of course, unity is needed and unity can only stem
from the. jurisprudence of the Council. That is the criterion
for the unity of the Council. The representative of the

“ . . . inconsistent with Israel’s obligations under the
[General] Armistice Agreement . . . and the Charter”
[resohtion 101 (1953/I.

The Security Council strongly censured Israel for that
action. Again this resolution was presented by three big
Powers, France, the United States and the United Kingdom.
71. The Security Council condemned Israel on 29 March
1955. It said that this was an act committed by Israeli
regular armed forces against the Gaza people on 28
7

that was conveyed, an appeal inviting the peo:ple in
occupied Europe to resist Hitler and Hitlerism. The appeal
was sent from outside to the occupied people urging them
to resist, It states:

United Kingdom has in the past given us the criterion for
dealing with a situation of this kind. I shall quote what the
representative of the United Kingdom said with reference
to a similar situation at the 635th meeting of the Security
Council :

“Dear brothers! Dear sisters!
“Her Majesty’s Government has, in any case, already
stated that in its view there was no possible justification
for such action”-the
Israeli attack on a village in
Jordan-“and,
through Her Majesty’s Ambassador in Tel
Aviv, it has informed the Israel Government of its horror
at this apparently calculated attack.”

“We remember you,
“We think of you,
“We are with you with our hearts,

A similar attack had taken place earlier and what I quoted
was the stand of the representative of the United Kingdom.
The quotation continues:

“In this serious hour, do not despair! We are coming
soon.
“We shall return to you under the banners of victory,

“The further information that has come to hand and
the increased toll of life can only confirm my Government in condemning it and reinforce its opinion that it
has constituted a threat to the security of the entire
area.” [635th meeting, para. 49.1

“Await each day the victory.
“Do not spend the time idly, suffering, quietly and
asleep. ’
“Holy hatred and pure reason will show you the right
way.”

78. The United Kingdom told Israel, first, that there was
no justification whatsoever for its attack and that it should
not’ raise the question of reprisal or retaliation, and,
secondly, that the attack did threaten peace in the whole
area. Then the United Kingdom at that time rendered
advice to Israel, stating:

I underline “holy hatred”-hatred of the occupier is holy. It
is holy in Europe and it should be holy everywhere, because !
no one likes occupation and occupiers.
“Strike!

“The unfortunate thing is that this kind of wholesale
and indiscriminate reprisal should be indulged in at all.

Strike the enemy in the rear, without pity,

I

“Destroy the houses, trains, stations and trucks!
“The trouble about such a reprisal raid as that at
Qibya”-a village in Jordan which is now occupied by the
Israelis-“is that it will. probably only result in a growth in
the number of persons who decide to cross into Israel to
revenge themselves by taking life for life.” [Ibid.,
paras. 50 and 53. J

“Bum the grain, the forests and the warehouses!
“Blow up the tanks! Tear down the wires! ”
I can continue with this long message sent by some leaders
of the allied forces to the people telling them to reisist, It
concludes:

79. That was the advice of the United Kingdom to Israel.
Thus, the United Kingdom said that that reprisal raid may
bring upon Israel the very thing which it had hoped to stop.

“We shall overcome all difficulties.

80. There is a distinction between a violation of the
Armistice Agreement and the Charter and the cease-fire and
previous resolutions, and acts taken by people under
occupation resisting the occupier. I should now like to tum
to occupation and resistance.

“The hour of revenge is coming!
“Dear brothers!

I

Dear sisters!

“We remember you. We think of you.”

81. Mr. Tekoah raised the question that resistance in
Europe was separate and different. He tries to make a
distinction between liberation movements in Europe and
liberation movements in Africa, Asia or some other places.
Occupation is occupation everywhere. It has no colour,
Domination is domination everywhere. It has no colour.
Liberation from domination is part and parcel of the
reaction which is expected from every people subjected to
foreign domination. Why should we make a distinction
between resistance in Europe and resistance in Palestine, or
in Angola, or in Rhodesia or in South Africa? It is the
same. Colour is not involved here, What did the allies do
during the war? Mr. Tekoah spoke about resistance in
Europe and said there was a difference. Here is a message

82. If this body is to live as the light of hope for ma:nkind,
this body must have one criterion for all. The intimidation
by Mr. Tekoah and the attacks on this body ‘!;hould
strengthen its will to take the right action.
83. Of course we want the big Powers to succeed in their
efforts for peace. I have said that we are for peace. We
stand for peace, peace with justice. But for efforts to
succeed, they have to check the deliberately planned Israeli
crimes designed to frustrate and dynamite the efforts of the
Big Four, We wish to see the Big Four succeed in their
efforts, but we should check the reasons that may affect
their efforts. My good colleague and friend Ambassador
Shahi of Pakistan brilliantly put his finger on the problem:
8

;
I
i
’
;
I

the Big I’cJWM~ have the resources and the means; they can
make their weight felt amI play an effective role. More than
any meeting, what is needed is effective action right here
which will prepare the ground for fruitful results to come
from the forthcoming meeting of the Big Four.
84. The PREWXNT

89. AS for the liberation of the Promised Land by the
chosen people, I shall confine myself to qoting what
Mrs. Golda Meir, the present Prime Minister of Israel, has
written. In a letter written on 24 August 1921 from
Palestine to her brother-in-law jn America she said:
“If we dig in here”-she was speaking of Palestine“England will come to our aid. The English will not
choose the Arabs to colonize Palestine; they will choose

(transluted porn French): 1 give the

floor to the representative of Israel, in exercise of his right
of reply,

US.“5

85. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): K should like to make only one
brief observation, to call terror warfare “resistance” or
“liberation movement” is mockery. When did it become a
liberation movement? When the fednyeen were organ&d
by Egypt and sent to kill innocent Israeli citizens in
violation of the Armistice Agreement in the 1950s? Or
now, when they are being sent to kill innocent Israeli
civilians in violation of the cease-fire? The name ‘%beration movement” is a mockery. This is not a liberation
movement; this is an anti-liberation movement, this is an
attempt to annul the liberation which the people of Israel
have won. Israel was the first people to raise the standard of
national independence and the end of colonialism after
World War II. The terrorist organizations are anti-liberation
organizations, they are anti-sovereignty organizations. They
seek by intimidation
to limit the right to sovereignty and
independence and security of the Jewish State.

90. We think and believe that, in this second half of the
twentieth century, when the United Nations has been
established and when universality is beginning to have a
meaning, people cannot allow themselves to be classified
into primitive races and superior races, according to the
words of Dr. Ribot, who was, moreover, a contemporary of
Theodor Herzl and who defined psychology at that time as
being “the science of the white, adult and civilized man”.
9 1. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom French): The representative of Israel has the floor to exercise his right of
reply.
92. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): It seems that the entire tragedy
of the Middle East conflict has been compressed into the
brief statement we have just heard from the representative
of Algeria. There are sixteen sovereign Arab States, stretching from the Atlantic to the Persian Gulf; but the Jewish
people should have no right to its own sovereign State. All
nations in the world have a right to resist foreign
occupation and domination and to live in liberty and
independence; not the Jewish people, according to the
Algerian representative. All peoples of the world have a
right to self-determination, but not the Jewish people.

86. The PRESYDENT (translated from French): I give the

floor to the representative
exercise the right of reply.

of Algeria, who wishes to

87. Mr. AZZOUT (Algeria) (translated jkom French): I
think that Mr. Tekoah holds fast to the entire Zionist
philosophy, which was well defined by its creator, Theodor
Herzl, in The Jewish State. I shall confine myself to quoting
an excerpt which was used by Mr. Maxime Robinson in one
of his articles entitled “Israel, a Colonial Fact”, page 41. In
that passage,Herzl said:

93. It is high time for the Arab Governments and the Arab
leaders who have brought so much tragedy to the Middle
East, so much catastrophe to their own nations and their
own States, to realize the fallacy, the immorality, of these
views and to recognize and grant to the Jewish people the
same rights they claim for themselves and their own
nations.

“If His Majesty the Sultan were to give us Palestine, we
could in return undertake to regulate the whole finances
of ‘Turkey, We should”-and this is the most important
passage--“there form a portion of a rampart of Europe
against Asia, an outpost of civilization as opposed to
barbarism. We should as a neutral State remain in contact
with all Europe, which would have to guarantee our
existence.“”

94. Mr. MALIK

(Union

of Soviet Socialist Republics)
my remarks to a
single sentence, in the light of the debate taking place here
between the representatives of the Arab States and Israel.
Nobody denies the right of Israel tc exist, but nobody can
recognize that Israel has any right to aggression.

(translated from Russian): I shall limit

88. If we understand correctly, resistance is a privilege
recognized exclusively for Europeans, and outside Europe,
the rest of mankind, the barbarians, have no right to resist.
The representative of Tel Aviv, faithful to this philosophy,
asks us the same question daily: “What resistants? “. He
thinks only of the European resistance movements, as if
there had never been any resistance anywhere else in the
world, as if the Viet-Namese people had not been resisting
for twenty-five years, as if the Algerian people had not
resisted for eight years, as if the South African people had
not been resisting for decades, as if the peoples of Angola
and Mozambique had not been resisting for years!

(transzatedfrom French).’ The representative of Israel has the floor to exercise the right of
reply.
96. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I think the time has passed
when Members of the United Nations accept the truth that
comes from the Kremlin as infallible. I think the time has
passedwheri even Communist parties accept that truth as
infallible. Therefore, I shall allow the Chairman of the Israel
Communist Party to respond to the last statement made by
the representative of the USSR.

95. The PRESIDENT

5 Quotation
1966, p. 6.

4 Theodor Hcrzl The JewishState, English translation published
by the American Zionist Emergency Council, 1946, p. 96.
9

from Marie Serkin, Golda Me&

Paris, Gallimard,

97. On 5 November
munist Party said:

1968, the Chairman of Israel’s Com-

i

ment quoted by the Israeli representative is the statement
not of an Israeli Communist but of an ultra-chauvinist who
supports aggression.

“We shall not be taught about the nature of the six-days
war by the invaders of Czechoslovakia. We shall not learn
about morality and Communist conscience from leadership which developed an anti-Semitic campaign against
Jewish old-time members of the Communist Party and
against the remnant of Jewry in that country. We shall
not learn anti-racialism and brotherhood of peoples from
leaders who for years have been engaged in inciting the
Arabs against Israel.”

1
r’
*
/

99. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I have no
further speakers on my list for this morning. As a result Iof
informal consultations with the members of the Council, it
has been decided that, in order to allow more time for
private consultations, the next meeting will be held at 3.30
p.m. this afternoon.

98. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): Comrade President, the state-

The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m.

10
Litho in United Nations, New York

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or cq?livalent in other currencies)

82025-November

1972-2,050

'

f
