United Nations

A/RES/67/89*

General Assembly

Distr.: General
14 January 2013

Sixty-seventh session
Agenda item 77

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 14 December 2012
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/67/465)]

67/89. Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its forty-fifth session
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966, by which it
established the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law with a
mandate to further the progressive harmonization and unification of the law of
international trade and in that respect to bear in mind the interests of all peoples, in
particular those of developing countries, in the extensive development of
international trade,
Reaffirming its belief that the progressive modernization and harmonization of
international trade law, in reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow of
international trade, especially those affecting developing countries, would
contribute significantly to universal economic cooperation among all States on a
basis of equality, equity, common interest and respect for the rule of law, to the
elimination of discrimination in international trade and, thereby, to peace, stability
and the well-being of all peoples,
Having considered the report of the Commission, 1
Reiterating its concern that activities undertaken by other bodies in the field of
international trade law without adequate coordination with the Commission might
lead to undesirable duplication of efforts and would not be in keeping with the aim
of promoting efficiency, consistency and coherence in the unification and
harmonization of international trade law,
Reaffirming the mandate of the Commission, as the core legal body within the
United Nations system in the field of international trade law, to coordinate legal
activities in this field, in particular to avoid duplication of efforts, including among
organizations formulating rules of international trade, and to promote efficiency,
consistency and coherence in the modernization and harmonization of international
_______________
* Reissued for technical reasons on 15 July 2013.
1
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/67/17).

12-48394*

*1248394*

Please recycle

A/RES/67/89

trade law, and to continue, through its secretariat, to maintain close cooperation with
other international organs and organizations, including regional organizations,
active in the field of international trade law,
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the United Nations
1.
Commission on International Trade Law;1
2.
Commends the Commission for the finalization and adoption of the
Guide to Enactment of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
Model Law on Public Procurement 2 and the recommendations to assist arbitral
institutions and other interested bodies with regard to arbitration under its
Arbitration Rules as revised in 2010; 3
3.
Takes note with interest of the progress made by the Commission in its
work in the areas of arbitration and conciliation, online dispute resolution,
electronic commerce, insolvency law and security interests; 4
4.
Notes the discussions undertaken by the Commission as regards its
possible future work in the areas of public procurement and related areas, including
public-private partnerships, microfinance and international contract law, and
endorses the Commission’s agreement to hold one or more colloquiums on
microfinance and related matters, possibly in different regions, as well as a
colloquium to identify the scope of possible work and primary issues to be
addressed in the area of public-private partnerships; 5
5.
Notes with appreciation the projects of the Commission aimed at
promoting the uniform and effective application of the Convention on the
Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, done at New York on
10 June 1958, 6 including the preparation of a guide on the Convention; 7
6.
Notes the decision of the Commission to commend the use of the 2010
edition of the International Institute for the Unification of Private Law Principles of
International Commercial Contracts, as appropriate, for their intended purposes, and
of Incoterms 2010, as appropriate, in international sales transactions; 8
7.
Endorses the efforts and initiatives of the Commission, as the core legal
body within the United Nations system in the field of international trade law, aimed
at increasing coordination of and cooperation on legal activities of international and
regional organizations active in the field of international trade law and at promoting
the rule of law at the national and international levels in this field, and in this regard
appeals to relevant international and regional organizations to coordinate their legal
activities with those of the Commission, to avoid duplication of efforts and to
promote efficiency, consistency and coherence in the modernization and
harmonization of international trade law;
Notes with appreciation the significant progress made in the coordination
8.
and cooperation activities of the Commission in the field of security interests, in
_______________
2

Ibid., chap. III.
Ibid., chap. IV and annex I.
4
Ibid., chaps. V–IX.
5
Ibid., chaps. X–XII.
6
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 330, No. 4739.
7
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/67/17),
chap. XIII.
8
Ibid., chap. XIV.
3

2

A/RES/67/89

particular the publication of “UNCITRAL, Hague Conference and Unidroit texts on
security interests”, prepared with the contribution of the Permanent Bureau of the
Hague Conference and the secretariat of the International Institute for the
Unification of Private Law, and the ongoing preparation of a joint set of principles
on effective secured transaction regimes in cooperation with the World Bank and
outside experts; 9
9.
Notes the agreement of the Commission that a coordinated approach to
the matter of the law applicable to the proprietary effects of assignments of
receivables is in the interest of all States and its request to the Secretariat to
cooperate closely with the European Commission with a view to ensuring a
coordinated approach to the matter, 10 taking into account the approach followed in
the United Nations Convention on the Assignment of Receivables in International
Trade 11 and the UNCITRAL Legislative Guide on Secured Transactions; 12
10. Reaffirms the importance, in particular for developing countries, of the
work of the Commission concerned with technical cooperation and assistance in the
field of international trade law reform and development, and in this connection:
(a) Welcomes the initiatives of the Commission towards expanding, through
its secretariat, its technical cooperation and assistance programme, and in that
respect encourages the Secretary-General to seek partnerships with State and
non-State actors to increase awareness about the work of the Commission and
facilitate the effective implementation of legal standards resulting from its work;
(b) Expresses its appreciation to the Commission for carrying out technical
cooperation and assistance activities and for providing assistance with legislative
drafting in the field of international trade law, and draws the attention of the
Secretary-General to the limited resources that are made available in this field;
(c) Expresses its appreciation to the Governments whose contributions
enabled the technical cooperation and assistance activities to take place, and appeals
to Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations system, organizations,
institutions and individuals to make voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law Trust Fund for Symposia and, where
appropriate, for the financing of special projects, and otherwise to assist the
secretariat of the Commission in carrying out technical cooperation and assistance
activities, in particular in developing countries;
(d) Reiterates its appeal to the United Nations Development Programme and
other bodies responsible for development assistance, such as the World Bank and
regional development banks, as well as to Governments in their bilateral aid
programmes, to support the technical cooperation and assistance programme of the
Commission and to cooperate and coordinate their activities with those of the
Commission in the light of the relevance and importance of the work and
programmes of the Commission for the promotion of the rule of law at the national
and international levels and for the implementation of the United Nations
development agenda, including the achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals;

_______________
9

Ibid., chap. XVIII, paras. 165–168.
Ibid., para. 168.
11
Resolution 56/81, annex.
12
United Nations publication, Sales No. E.09.V.12.
10

3

A/RES/67/89

11. Takes note with interest of the note by the Secretariat setting out a
number of issues for consideration by the Commission in setting the parameters for
a strategic plan for the Commission, 13 and endorses the Commission’s agreement to
consider and provide guidance on, inter alia, the strategic considerations at its
forty-sixth session; 14
12. Calls upon Member States, non-member States, observer organizations
and the Secretariat to apply the rules of procedure and methods of work of the
Commission, taking into account the summary of conclusions as reproduced in
annex III to the report on the work of its forty-third session, 15 with a view to
ensuring the high quality of the work of the Commission and international
acceptability of its instruments, and in this regard recalls its previous resolutions
related to this matter;
13. Welcomes the opening, on 10 January 2012, of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law Regional Centre for Asia and the Pacific, in
the Republic of Korea, as a novel yet important first step for the Commission in
reaching out and providing technical assistance to developing countries in the
region, notes with satisfaction expressions of interest from other States, including
Kenya and Singapore, in hosting regional centres of the Commission and the request
by the Commission to the Secretariat to further pursue administrative arrangements
with the Governments of Kenya and Singapore for the establishment of such
centres, and requests the Secretary-General to keep the General Assembly informed
of developments regarding the establishment of regional centres, in particular, their
funding and budgetary situation; 16
14. Appeals to Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations
system, organizations, institutions and individuals to make voluntary contributions
to the Trust Fund established to provide travel assistance to developing countries
that are members of the Commission, at their request and in consultation with the
Secretary-General, in order to enable renewal of the provision of that assistance and
to increase expert representation from developing countries at sessions of the
Commission and its working groups, necessary to build local expertise and
capacities in the field of international trade law in those countries to facilitate the
development of international trade and the promotion of foreign investment;
15. Decides, in order to ensure full participation of all Member States in the
sessions of the Commission and its working groups, to continue, in the competent
Main Committee during the sixty-seventh session of the General Assembly, its
consideration of granting travel assistance to the least developed countries that are
members of the Commission, at their request and in consultation with the SecretaryGeneral;
16. Endorses the conviction of the Commission that the implementation and
effective use of modern private law standards in international trade are essential for
advancing good governance, sustained economic development and the eradication of
poverty and hunger and that the promotion of the rule of law in commercial
relations should be an integral part of the broader agenda of the United Nations to
promote the rule of law at the national and international levels, including through

_______________
13

A/CN.9/752 and Add.1.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/67/17),
chap. XXI.
15
Ibid., Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/65/17).
16
Ibid., Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/67/17), chap. XIX.
14

4

A/RES/67/89

the Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group, supported by the Rule of Law
Unit in the Executive Office of the Secretary-General;
17. Takes note with appreciation, in this regard, of the rule of law briefing by
the Rule of Law Unit, held at the forty-fifth session of the Commission, 17 which
allowed the Commission to contribute its views to the high-level meeting of the
General Assembly on the topic of the rule of law at the national and international
levels, held on 24 September 2012;
18. Notes the actions taken by the Commission after the briefing on the rule
of law, in particular the messages of the Commission to the high-level meeting
addressed to States and the United Nations, including recommended steps that
should contribute to building the local capacity of States to continually engage in
commercial law reforms at the country level and in a coordinated fashion in the
rule-formulating activities of regional and international bodies; 18
19. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General, in conformity with
resolutions of the General Assembly on documentation-related matters, 19 which, in
particular, emphasize that any invitation to limit, where appropriate, the length of
documents should not adversely affect either the quality of the presentation or the
substance of the documents, to bear in mind the particular characteristics of the
mandate and functions of the Commission in the progressive development and
codification of international trade law when implementing page limits with respect
to the documentation of the Commission; 20
20. Requests the Secretary-General to continue providing summary records
of the meetings of the Commission, including committees of the whole established
by the Commission for the duration of its annual session, relating to the formulation
of normative texts, takes note of the Commission’s confirmation that good-quality
summary records remain the best available option for preserving complete and
accurate travaux préparatoires of the Commission’s work in the most user-friendly
and reliable way, welcomes the Commission’s willingness to consider at the same
time modern solutions that might address existing problems with the issuance of
summary records and add useful features in the use of the Commission’s records,
and endorses the agreement of the Commission to assess at its forty-seventh session,
in 2014, the experience of using digital recordings and, on the basis of that
assessment, take a decision regarding the possible replacement of summary records
by digital recording; 21
21. Welcomes the review by the Commission of the proposed biennial
programme plan for subprogramme 5 (Progressive harmonization, modernization
and unification of the law of international trade) of programme 6 (Legal affairs) of
the proposed strategic framework for the period 2014–2015, 22 takes note that the
Commission expressed concern that the resources allotted to the Secretariat under
subprogramme 5 were insufficient for it to meet the increased demand from
developing countries and countries with economies in transition for technical
_______________
17

Ibid., chap. XX.
Ibid., paras. 211–227.
19
Resolutions 52/214, sect. B, 57/283 B, sect. III, and 58/250, sect. III.
20
Resolutions 59/39, para. 9, and 65/21, para. 18; see also Official Records of the General Assembly,
Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/59/17), paras. 124–128.
21
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/67/17),
paras. 241–249.
22
A/67/6 (Prog. 6).
18

5

A/RES/67/89

assistance with law reform in the field of commercial law, also takes note that the
Commission urged the Secretary-General to take steps to ensure that the
comparatively small amount of additional resources necessary to meet a demand so
crucial to development are made available promptly, 23 and recalls paragraph 48 of
its resolution 66/246 of 24 December 2011 regarding the rotation scheme of
meetings between Vienna and New York;
22. Notes the concern expressed by the Commission over the lack of
sufficient resources in its secretariat for responding to the growing need for the
uniform interpretation of Commission texts, which is considered indispensable for
their effective implementation, and also notes that the Commission encouraged the
Secretariat to explore various means of addressing this concern, inter alia, by
building partnerships with interested institutions and establishing within the
Commission’s secretariat a pillar concentrating on the promotion of ways and means
of interpreting uniformly Commission texts, in particular by sustaining and
expanding the system for the collection and dissemination of case law on
Commission texts (the CLOUT system); 24
23. Stresses the importance of promoting the use of texts emanating from the
work of the Commission for the global unification and harmonization of
international trade law, and to this end urges States that have not yet done so to
consider signing, ratifying or acceding to conventions, enacting model laws and
encouraging the use of other relevant texts;
24. Welcomes the preparation of digests of case law relating to the texts of
the Commission, notes with appreciation the continuing increase in the number of
abstracts available through the CLOUT system, and welcomes the publication of the
UNCITRAL Digest of Case Law on the United Nations Convention on Contracts for
the International Sale of Goods, 2012 edition, and the UNCITRAL 2012 Digest of
Case Law on the Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration, as well as the
agreement of the Commission that a digest of case law on the Model Law on CrossBorder Insolvency be prepared, subject to the availability of resources in the
Secretariat. 25
56th plenary meeting
14 December 2012

_______________
23

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/67/17),
paras. 250 and 251.
24
Ibid., para. 252.
25
Ibid., para. 156.

6
