UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1999/1
7 January 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3963rd meeting of the Security Council, held on 7 January 1999 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Sierra Leone", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council expresses its grave concern at the attacks by
armed rebels of the former junta and Revolutionary United Front in the
capital of Sierra Leone, and at the resulting suffering and loss of life.
It condemns the unacceptable attempt by the rebels to overthrow by violence
the democratically-elected government of Sierra Leone. The Council also
condemns the rebels’ continued campaign to terrorize the population of
Sierra Leone and especially the atrocities committed against women and
children. The Council demands that the rebels lay down their arms
immediately and cease all violence. The Council reiterates once more its
firm support for the legitimate and democratically-elected government of
President Kabbah.
"The Security Council strongly condemns all those who have afforded
support, including through the supply of arms and mercenaries, to the
rebels in Sierra Leone. In this context, it expresses its grave concern at
reports that such support to the rebels is being afforded in particular
from the territory of Liberia. It reaffirms the obligation on all Member
States to comply strictly with existing arms embargoes. In that context,
the Security Council urges the Committee created pursuant to resolution
985 (1995) and the Committee created pursuant to resolution 1132 (1997) to
pursue active measures to investigate violations of the embargoes and to
report to the Council, with recommendations as appropriate.
"The Security Council stresses the importance of dialogue and national
reconciliation for the restoration of lasting peace and stability to Sierra
Leone. The Council welcomes the efforts to resolve the conflict being
undertaken by the Government of President Kabbah, and further endorses the
approach set out in the final communiqué of the meeting in Abidjan of the
Committee of Six on Sierra Leone of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) of 28 December 1998 (S/1998/1236). It welcomes the offers
made by leaders in the region aimed at resolving the conflict and in that
context urges them, including the ECOWAS Committee of Six, to facilitate
99-00416 (E)

070199

/...

S/PRST/1999/1
English
Page 2

the peace process. It also calls on the Secretary-General to do all he can
to assist in these efforts, including through his Special Representative.
"The Security Council also expresses its concern at the serious
humanitarian consequences of the escalating fighting in Sierra Leone. It
calls on all States and international organizations to provide appropriate
humanitarian assistance and on all parties in Sierra Leone to afford
humanitarian access. The Council notes that United Nations agencies are
working with the increasing numbers of refugees in neighbouring countries
and calls on all States to ensure that the humanitarian agencies are
adequately resourced to meet the additional demand.
"The Security Council commends the forces of the Military Observer
Group of West African States in Sierra Leone for the courage and
determination they have demonstrated over the last year in their efforts to
maintain security in Sierra Leone. It also commends the key contribution
of UNOMSIL and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
efforts to restore stability in the country. The Council urges all States
urgently to provide resources, including logistical and other support, to
help maintain an effective peacekeeping presence in Sierra Leone.
"The Security Council expresses its intention to continue to monitor
the situation closely, and to consider urgently any further action which
may be necessary."

-----
