S/PV.8523

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8523rd meeting

Wednesday, 8 May 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Djani. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Indonesia)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Bakayoko
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Almunayekh
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Kuzmin
Mr. Mabhongo
Mrs. Dickson
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-13477 (E)
*1913477*

S/PV.8523

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda.
Ms. Bensouda: I welcome this opportunity to
engage with the Security Council once again as I
present my seventeenth report on the situation in Libya.
Before I do so, allow me to congratulate Indonesia on
assuming the presidency of the Council for the month
of May and thank it for presiding over this meeting.
As I address the Council today, to my great regret,
the fighting in Libya continues unabated. Over the
past six months, violence escalated and armed clashes
occurred in several areas of Libya, including Derna in
the east, Murzuq in the south, and Tripoli in the west.
As always, my Office continues to closely monitor the
ongoing conflict, while gathering information from
diverse sources and assessing whether crimes within
the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court
may have been committed.
My Office is of course paying close attention
to the ongoing armed conflict in and around Tripoli
since early April this year. Reports indicate that the
fighting has already cost 432 lives, including at least
23 civilians. More than 50,000 people have reportedly
been internally displaced by the hostilities, while others
remain trapped in conflict-affected areas. In addition,
there are serious concerns for the safety of migrants
and refugees who are detained in centres near areas
of conflict.
On 16 April, I issued a statement calling on all
parties to the armed conflict to fully respect the rules
of international humanitarian law. I emphasized that all
parties to the armed conflict must take all necessary
2/16

08/05/2019

measures to protect civilians and civilian infrastructure,
including schools, hospitals and detention centres.
In particular, I urged commanders, both military
and civilian, to ensure that their subordinates do not
commit Rome Statute crimes. The law on this is clear.
Where a commander knew or should have known that
his or her subordinates were committing or about to
commit crimes and failed to take all necessary and
reasonable measures within his or her power to prevent
or repress such crimes, the commander may be held
criminally responsible.
I take this opportunity once again to make my
message clear to all those involved in the fighting
in Libya. My Office stands ready to investigate and,
where appropriate, to prosecute any persons party to the
ongoing armed conflict should they engage in conduct
constituting a crime within the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court (ICC). The suffering of
the Libyan people must stop. I urge the Council and all
States Members of the United Nations to ensure that a
consistent and unambiguous message is conveyed to all
warring factions in Libya that the rules of international
humanitarian law must be fully respected and that
perpetrators of atrocity crimes will be held individually
and criminally responsible.
I would now like to update the Council in relation
to the case of Mr. Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi. As Council
members are aware, in June 2018 Mr. Al-Qadhafi filed
a challenge to the admissibility of his case before the
ICC. Mr. Al-Qadhafi contended that his case was
inadmissible because he had already been tried in Libya
for the same conduct alleged in the case before the ICC.
Mr. Al-Qadhafi lost that challenge. On 5 April, the
majority of Pre-Trial Chamber I judges rejected this
admissibility challenge, deciding that Mr. Al-Qadhafi’s
case remains admissible before the ICC. Earlier today,
a separate, concurring opinion was issued by Judge
Perrin de Brichambaut of the same Chamber, in which
he concurred with the majority decision on three main
points: first, that Mr. Al-Qadhafi has standing to lodge
the admissibility challenge; secondly, in rejecting
the admissibility challenge; and thirdly, that the case
against Mr. Al-Qadhafi is admissible.
In reaching its decision, the Chamber found that
Mr. Al-Qadhafi had not been tried in Libya within the
meaning of the relevant articles of the Rome Statute.
According to Libyan national law, since Mr. Al-Qadhafi
was convicted by the Tripoli Court of Assize in
absentia, once he is arrested his trial should start anew.
19-13477

08/05/2019

The situation in Libya

Thus, no final judgment on the merits had been issued
in the domestic proceedings against Mr. Al-Qadhafi. In
addition, the judgment passed against Mr. Al-Qadhafi
had not acquired a res judicata effect, which was
required in order to satisfy the applicable articles of the
Rome Statute.
Furthermore, the Chamber found that Mr. Al-Qadhafi
had not received amnesty in Libya. The Chamber
observed that granting amnesties and pardons for
serious acts such as murder constituting crimes
against humanity is incompatible with internationally
recognized human rights. It stated that amnesties and
pardons intervene with States’ positive obligations to
investigate, prosecute and punish perpetrators of core
crimes and deny victims the right to truth, access to
justice, and to request reparations where appropriate.
These are important findings in relation to the fight
against impunity for international crimes and ones that
align with previous findings concerning amnesties and
pardons by several regional and international courts
and tribunals around the world. Mr. Al-Qadhafi has
filed an appeal against the Chamber’s decision on the
admissibility challenge.
Irrespective of the current admissibility proceedings,
Libya remains under an obligation to arrest and
surrender Mr. Al-Qadhafi to the ICC. Unfortunately,
Mr. Al-Qadhafi’s case is not the only one related to
Libya that remains at an impasse. Arrest warrants
are also outstanding in relation to all other suspects
in the Libya situation with respect to Mr. Al-Tuhamy
Mohamed Khaled and Mr. Mahmoud Mustafa Busayf
Al-Werfalli.
Ultimately, the execution of these arrest warrants
depends on the cooperation of States. Regrettably,
securing State cooperation in the arrest and surrender
of suspects remains one of the greatest challenges
faced by the ICC. The Court’s performance cannot be
divorced from this reality. The Court’s success largely
depends on the effective and concrete cooperation
of States.
Failure to arrest and surrender persons against
whom warrants of arrest have been issued can result
in real harm. A stark illustration of that can be found
in the case of Mr. Al-Werfalli. Despite the ICC warrant
of arrest against him for the war crime of murder in
relation to 33 people, Mr. Al-Werfalli remains at liberty
and allegedly murdered another 10 victims just five
months after the ICC arrest warrant was issued. Today,

S/PV. 8523

two warrants for his arrest remain outstanding. The
fact that Mr. Al-Werfalli is in Libya is well known. He
is not detained and there is no evidence that he has been
genuinely prosecuted in Libya by his superiors in the
Libyan National Army.
Mr. Al-Tuhamy, former head of the Libyan Internal
Security Agency, who is accused of crimes relating to
the unlawful imprisonment, persecution and torture
of perceived political opponents of the Muammar
Al-Qadhafi regime, has been wanted since 2013.
Notwithstanding the grave crimes alleged against
them, all three suspects in the Libya situation remain at
large. The failure to arrest those suspects jeopardizes
the Office’s ongoing investigations. It sends a message
to victims that alleged perpetrators can evade justice
and continue to commit crimes with impunity. It deters
witnesses from coming forward and putting their
confidence in the ICC, and places them in unnecessary
danger. In the long run, that lack of accountability
undermines respect for the rule of law and impedes
progress towards stability and security in Libya.
The status quo is not sustainable. Impunity for
atrocity crimes is hardly conducive to bringing peace
and stability to that war-torn country. I take this
opportunity to renew my call for State cooperation
with the arrest and transfer of ICC suspects, and ask
the Council to lend its support by taking a clear and
vocal position in support.
My Office also continues to follow the situation
relating to internally displaced persons in Libya. Tens
of thousands of persons reportedly remain internally
displaced. Internally displaced persons, especially
women and children, are among the most vulnerable
populations. They suffer not only significant social
and economic impacts, but are also exposed to acts
of violence.
Migrants also represent a highly vulnerable
population in Libya. Reports of serious and widespread
crimes being committed against migrants have not
diminished over the past six-month period. My team
continues to gather evidence in relation to those alleged
crimes through both investigative and cooperation
strategies. In doing so, we pay particular attention to
the commission of sexual and gender-based crimes.
The body of evidence collected by my Office
indicates that crimes including torture, unlawful
imprisonment, rape and enslavement are committed

19-134773/16

S/PV.8523

The situation in Libya

against migrants throughout their journeys and in both
official and unofficial detention centres. The evidence
implicates individuals, militias and State actors in the
migrant smuggling and trafficking business in many
parts of Libya, including Misrata, Zawiya, Tripoli and
Bani Walid.
On the basis of the evidence collected to date, my
team continues to assess the feasibility of bringing cases
before the ICC in relation to crimes against migrants.
At the same time, my Office is cooperating with a
number of States and organizations to support national
investigations and prosecutions that relate to human
smuggling and trafficking through Libya. This strategy
is aimed at closing the impunity gap by assisting
national systems in providing accountability for crimes
that may not fall within ICC jurisdiction. Feedback
from our partners shows that that strategy is already
proving effective and producing concrete results.
Before I conclude, I would like to express my
appreciation for the cooperation that my Office
receives from many States, including Libya, Tunisia,
the Netherlands, Italy and the United Kingdom. We
also receive valuable assistance from organizations,
such as the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
and INTERPOL. The practical support of those States
and organizations for the work of the ICC deserves
recognition. I would like to acknowledge the courage
of many Libyans who have cooperated with my Office
since 2011 to the present day. My team has spoken to
people who have endured unspeakable suffering and
lost loved ones in terrible circumstances. We are aware
that, given the prevailing climate of impunity in Libya,
there are people who see the ICC as their only hope
for holding alleged perpetrators of atrocity crimes
to account.
We also know that many people, understandably,
would like to see more results from the ICC sooner
rather than later. The types of investigations undertaken
by my Office are complex and often lengthy. However, I
assure the Council and the Libyan people that the Libya
situation remains a priority for my Office. My team
takes most seriously its responsibility to investigate
and prosecute ICC crimes in Libya and is working very
hard to advance its existing cases and also to bring
new ones.
Ultimately, my Office’s progress in the Libya
situation is frustrated and confidence in the ICC is
undermined when, year after year, warrants of arrest
4/16

08/05/2019

remain unexecuted. The credibility of the Council will
also be tarnished if it fails to take concrete measures
to secure the arrest and surrender of suspects. When
suspects are arrested and surrendered to the ICC, the
allegations against them can be tested in a fair and public
hearing. That gives the victims of their alleged crimes
the opportunity to participate in the proceedings, be
heard and see justice done.
Therefore, it is imperative that all of the outstanding
warrants of arrest in the Libya situation be executed. The
achievement of that goal requires the full cooperation
of members of the Council and all concerned States.
That includes States parties and non-States parties
alike, including Libya itself. Together, we can ensure
the effective implementation of resolution 1970 (2011)
and adequately respond to the hopes and expectations
that it generated for the Libyan people. The peace and
stability that the Libyan people have desired for so
long is closely intertwined with the ICC’s ability to
effectively execute its mandate in the Libya situation.
In a country devastated by war and conflict, with
great human suffering, it is past time for the protective
embrace of the law to feel real and tangible to Libyans.
Acting within our respective mandates, we share a
joint burden and great responsibility in that regard for
the sake of all Libyans and Libya. We must not fail to
deliver on that joint duty.
The President: I thank Prosecutor Bensouda for
her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Dickson (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank the Prosecutor for briefing the Council on her
seventeenth report to the Security Council pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011), on the situation in Libya. The
United Kingdom remains fully supportive of the work
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) to tackle
impunity in Libya and ensure that those responsible for
the most serious crimes of international concern are
held accountable.
The Prosecutor’s latest report highlights once again
the highly troubling situation in Libya. It is particularly
concerning that the security and humanitarian
situations continue to deteriorate, with numerous
incidents of civilians being killed. The increasing
instability and violence benefit no one. The Libyan
people deserve better, and we must continue to support
19-13477

08/05/2019

The situation in Libya

the United Nations efforts to bring about the security
and stability that all Libyans should have. We call on
those involved in the conflict to commit to a ceasefire,
return to the United Nations-led process and respect
their obligations under international humanitarian law.
In that context, we would note with approval
that the Prosecutor issued a preventative statement
on 16 April calling on all parties and armed groups
involved in the fighting to respect fully the rules of
international humanitarian law and avoid committing
any crimes within the Court’s jurisdiction. We note her
determination to pursue those who commit such crimes,
while fully respecting the principle of complementarity.
Separately, it is essential to negotiate humanitarian
pauses to allow innocent civilians, including displaced
persons, refugees and migrants, to be evacuated
to safety.
Despite the increasingly challenging environment,
we must ensure that all those who commit serious
breaches of international humanitarian law and human
rights violations and abuses in Libya, including unlawful
killings, are held accountable. The United Kingdom has
previously supported calls for accountability and for
those committing acts in Libya amounting to war crimes
or other serious breaches of international humanitarian
law to be investigated and, as appropriate, prosecuted.
Reports of such violations cannot be met with impunity.
The ICC has an important role to play. We once
again call on all parties to cooperate with the ICC,
including through the execution of outstanding arrest
warrants. The United Kingdom is grateful for the
Prosecutor’s reports on the cases against Mr. Al-Werfalli,
Mr. Khaled, Mr. Al-Qadhafi and Mr. Al-Senussi and
notes in particular the Prosecutor’s update on the
Court’s activities in relation to Mr. Al-Qadhafi. The
United Kingdom believes that it is important for the
people of Libya that the Court continue its efforts to
see those and other individuals in relation to whom it
is working brought to justice. We note in particular that
Mr. Al-Werfalli apparently still continues to be at large
within Libya.
The United Kingdom notes with deep concern the
deteriorating situation of displaced persons, migrants
and refugees in Libya. We will continue to work
closely with other Member States, the Office of the
Prosecutor and the Libyan Prosecutor General’s Office
in the investigation of reports of appalling crimes and
human rights violations and abuses, such as torture,

S/PV. 8523

unlawful killings, sexual violence and forced labour,
some of which have been perpetrated by militias and
armed groups in Libya against migrants, including
international migrants transiting through Libya.
We are also appalled by the conditions and abuses
that some migrants face in detention facilities and
call on the Libyan authorities to pursue alternatives
to detention. The human rights of displaced persons,
migrants and refugees must be respected. We
acknowledge the work of the ICC in tackling human
trafficking. The United Kingdom has been clear on the
need to do more to break the business model of people
smugglers and to tackle organized immigration crime.
The United Kingdom continues to be a strong,
principled supporter of the work of the ICC. We will
continue to provide our full support to the Prosecutor
and her team while they carry out their investigations.
In the light of the devastating security situation, it is as
important as ever that the Council monitor and assess
developments in Libya and that States support the
Prosecutor in her efforts. The international community
must be united in its condemnation of the situation
in Libya and provide its full support to combat the
challenges faced there, including through calls for
a ceasefire and a return to the United Nations-led
political process.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), for her valuable
briefing on the seventeenth report of the Court to the
Security Council, pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).
We welcome once again the efforts of the ICC to lay the
foundations for ensuring justice and avoiding impunity
under international law.
We commend the role of the Office of the Prosecutor,
despite the great challenges it faces in carrying out its
responsibilities to monitor and bring to justice those
who commit crimes and violations, especially given
the difficult security situation in Libya, including the
military escalation around Tripoli that began in early
April. We share Ms. Bensouda’s concern over the
escalation of the military clashes, which have resulted
in a large number of people being killed or injured
while thousands of civilians have been displaced from
the combat zones.
We cannot but commend the great role played by the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL),
with Special Representative of the Secretary-General

19-134775/16

S/PV.8523

The situation in Libya

Mr. Ghassan Salamé at its helm, in striving to reach
a renewable temporary humanitarian ceasefire and
ensure humanitarian access to those who need it.
We once again urge all Libyan parties to exercise
self-restraint, respect international humanitarian law,
avoid targeting civilians and civilian infrastructure
and return to the United Nations-sponsored political
dialogue. We also express our concern regarding the
reference in the report of the Prosecutor to violations
against migrants in detention centres, in contravention
of international humanitarian law. Those violations
have escalated with the recent military operations.
We stress that the main responsibility for ensuring
justice in all Libya lies with the Libyan authorities,
which must exercise their sovereignty and jurisdiction,
in line with article 1 of the Rome Statute. The ICC must
therefore respect all national criminal jurisdictions in
Libya over cases before Libyan courts so as to ensure
complementarity between the ICC and the national
courts, given that the ICC is a body that complements
national criminal jurisdictions.
We are aware of the grave security challenges in
Libya that are hampering the ability of the Court’s
experts to conduct the necessary investigations. We
welcome the assistance provided by certain countries,
international and regional organizations and civil
society organizations, in addition to the support
provided by the relevant Libyan authorities, UNSMIL
and the Office of the Prosecutor, which will undoubtedly
contribute to the effectiveness of its investigations in
order to achieve the mandate entrusted to it.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We are pleased to begin by
commending the briefing provided by Prosecutor Fatou
Bensouda on a subject that so urgently needs a solution.
The Dominican Republic takes this opportunity
to commend the efforts of the Office of the Prosecutor
and reaffirm our full cooperation with and support
for the work of the International Criminal Court. The
Dominican Republic, open to international cooperation
and inspired by the vital need to maintain international
peace and security, ratified the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court in March 2005, and since
then has demonstrated its commitment to cooperating
with that body of international justice.
The International Criminal Court acts in accordance
with the principle of complementarity vis-à-vis
6/16

08/05/2019

national criminal jurisdiction. States must therefore
exercise their criminal jurisdiction in coordination
with international justice by establishing a national
regulatory framework contributing to the prosecution
and punishment of any act that disrupts international
peace and security.
As we heard today from Ms. Fatou Bensouda, the
situation in Libya is very worrying. The situation of
its people is cause of deep uncertainty and grief to
us. For that reason, the Dominican Republic joins and
supports the call of the Prosecutor for the cessation of
the commission of crimes to all parties involved in the
conflict. In the brief course of this year, an estimated
432 people have lost their lives and some 50,000
people have been displaced. However, no one has been
prosecuted for those crimes. The ongoing attacks on
the civilian population and civilian structures, such as
hospitals, schools, relief vehicles and health centres,
must be arrested and the perpetrators be brought
to justice.
For that reason, we believe that it is essential that
State authorities recognize the complementary role
of the International Criminal Court in the struggle
for the prosecution, investigation and punishment
of crimes against humanity and war crimes. Without
the collaboration of State agencies, the work of the
International Criminal Court will be limited, at the risk
of rendering it ineffective.
In that regard, we call on the Libyan authorities
to cooperate efficiently with the arrest of the
Mr. Al-Qadhafi, Mr. Al-Werfalli and Mr. Al-Tuhamy,
who, in spite of the arrest warrants against them,
have not been arrested or brought to justice. As an
international community, we must join the efforts of
the Office of the Prosecutor by providing, as far as
possible, the resources and tools necessary to improve
the discharge of its duties.
Based on all that we have heard and have yet to hear
today, we call on those countries that have not accepted
the International Criminal Court’s jurisdiction and
vehemently urge the national authorities to cooperate
with the surrendering of individuals, investigations
and arrest of criminals. We urge the Office of the
Prosecutor to pursue its investigations and monitoring
of events in Libya. Its work is a fundamental part in the
struggle to assist the desperate Libyan population and
its migrant population, victim of terrible mistreatment,
illegal arrests and sexual abuse.
19-13477

08/05/2019

The situation in Libya

Let me conclude with the words of the philosopher
Sophocles, who said that a State where disrespect and
the freedom to do anything are left unpunished ends
up sinking into the abyss. Impunity is an evil that
undermines economic and social development, piercing
the depths of the people, making them victims twice
over for lack of effective and impartial justice.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to thank the Prosecutor for her briefing.
Eight years ago, the Security Council referred the
situation in Libya to the International Criminal Court
(ICC). Resolution 1973 (2011) addressed a dangerous
moment in Libya’s history. Al-Qadhafi’s horrific abuses
stunned the world. Now, as then, we stand against
impunity and support efforts to bring to justice those
responsible for atrocities in Libya. We reiterate our call
for Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Al-Tuhamy Mohamed
Khaled, former head of Libya’s notorious Internal
Security Agency, to be held to account for their alleged
crimes against humanity, torture and the murder and
persecution of hundreds of civilians in 2011. We also
renew our call for Libyan authorities to hold Mahmoud
Al-Werfalli to account for alleged unlawful killings.
The United States is deeply concerned by the
instability in Tripoli, which is endangering innocent
civilians. Lasting peace and stability can come only
through a political solution. All parties should rapidly
return to United Nations political mediation, the
success of which depends upon a ceasefire in and
around Tripoli.
We support the ongoing efforts of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ghassan
Salamé and the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya to help avoid further escalation and chart a path
forward that provides security and prosperity for all
Libyans. This briefing is an important reminder that
accountability not only provides justice for victims of
past violations and abuses, but also signals that future
violations and abuses will not be tolerated.
We remain concerned about abuses that human
traffickers and smugglers have perpetrated against
migrants, refugees and asylum-seekers in Libya. We
support efforts to hold those individuals, including
Government officials found to be complicit, accountable.
The United States will continue to work to end
impunity for human rights abuses, including the
persistent problem of human smuggling and trafficking,

S/PV. 8523

which has plagued the region. We strongly condemn
attempts by terrorists, including the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham in Libya and Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb, to use violence against innocent Libyans and
key institutions to sow chaos. They must not be allowed
to succeed. We will continue to work to defeat those
groups. The United States has historically been, and
will continue to be, a strong supporter of meaningful
accountability and justice for the victims of atrocities,
through appropriate mechanisms.
The perpetrators of atrocity crimes must face
justice, but we must also be careful to recognize
the right tool for each situation. However, I must
reiterate our long-standing and principled objection
to any assertion of ICC jurisdiction over nationals of
States that are not party to the Rome Statute, absent a
Security Council referral or the consent of such States.
Although we note the recent decision not to authorize
an investigation into the situation in Afghanistan, we
remain concerned about illegitimate attempts by the
ICC to assert jurisdiction. Our position on the ICC in
no way diminishes the commitment of the United States
to supporting accountability for atrocity crimes.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): First, let me make a
few remarks about the situation in Libya. In general,
Germany remains very concerned about the situation
on the ground. We continue to witness a military
escalation. There are continued reports about the
shelling of densely inhabited areas. We repeat our call
on all parties to respect international humanitarian law
and protect civilians and civilian infrastructure. We
continue to support the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Libya, Mr. Salamé, in his efforts
to achieve a ceasefire, protect civilians and return to
the political track. There is no military solution to
the situation in Libya. We have to come back to the
negotiating table as soon as possible. I very much regret
that the Security Council is not united on that very
simple call.
I would like to thank Ms. Bensouda for her briefing
and her report. Without going into detail, I would like to
align myself with other speakers with regard to support
provided and their concerns about situation. I would
also like to align myself with those who have said that
countries responsible must cooperate with Ms. Bensouda
and enforce all outstanding arrest warrants.
We are appalled in particular — and the Prosecutor
referred to this — about reports pertaining to violence

19-134777/16

S/PV.8523

The situation in Libya

against refugees and migrants. She also mentioned, and
reported about, the lack of respect for human rights
and the sexual and gender-based violence, in particular
against migrants in detention centres. Libya must
do everything to ensure accountability for the most
serious crimes. If it is unable to do so, it should request
assistance from, and work with, the International
Criminal Court (ICC).
Let me make a few general remarks about the ICC.
Unfortunately, today we are witnessing worldwide a
proliferation of acts that violate international law. Many
atrocity crimes have been committed. Two weeks ago,
we had witnesses of atrocity crimes here in the Security
Council (see S/PV.8514). Sexual violence in conflict is a
particular problem. We must prevent impunity for grave
crimes. We cannot, and must not, allow it to become a
new normal. Perpetrators must be held accountable. We
must recognize the victims and bring perpetrators to
court. That is extremely important. As the Ambassador
of the Dominican Republic very convincingly said, it is
also important for prevention.
Germany hosted one of the first international
courts on atrocity crimes — the Nuremberg Tribunal.
Today we are proud to uphold the tradition and what
the Nuremberg Tribunal stood for. We believe that we
have to defend and support the ICC now more than ever
before. The ICC is a crucial element of the international
rules-based order. Let me therefore reconfirm
Germany’s commitment to the ICC and to the values
of justice and accountability that the ICC represents.
We support all efforts to strengthen its effectiveness
and defend it against all threats, including threats to
its independence.
Let me conclude by sending a clear message to the
Prosecutor of the ICC, Ms. Bensouda, and her team. I
thank them for their work against all odds. Germany
will continue to support her and her mandate.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the convening of today’s meeting
and the important briefing by the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
whom we welcome.
Peru expresses its deep concern about the escalation
of armed conflict in Libya, in particular in recent
weeks. We call on leaders and political factions to cease
hostilities and engage in dialogue — hand in hand with
the good offices of the United Nations Support Mission
8/16

08/05/2019

in Libya — and to work on concrete measures for the
well-being and protection of the civilian population.
We also reiterate our strong condemnation of the
many instances of atrocity crimes, the grave human
rights situation and the violations of international
humanitarian law that have been occurring in Libya.
Deliberate attacks on civilians and the fear generated in
the face of allegations of extrajudicial executions have
resulted in almost 40,000 internally displaced persons.
Only eight years ago, assuming its responsibility
under the Charter of the United Nations, the Council
expressed its confidence in the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court, by referring to it the
situation in Libya. Today, given the challenges facing
the Court, we reaffirm the values of the Rome Statute
and the need for States to cooperate with it.
In acknowledging the efforts of the Libyan
Prosecutor General’s Office, we call upon other
Government authorities in Libya, as well as the
authorities of any State concerned, to execute the
arrest warrants issued by the Court, in particular the
two arrest warrants against Mr. Mahmoud Al-Werfalli,
whose flagrant crimes, according to the report, were
recorded and shared through social networks.
We reiterate our support for the mandate of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court. Any
support for, and cooperation with, the work of the Court
must be understood as an opportunity to entrench justice
and the rule of law domestically and internationally. That
means promoting greater confidence in jurisdictional
institutions and effective deterrence.
The armed conflict in Libya is exacerbated by the
acts of terrorist organizations such as the Islamic State
and its affiliates, as well as Boko Haram, which control
areas of Libyan territory and are involved in human
trafficking and the smuggling of migrants. In particular,
we highlight the importance for Peru to address the
nexus between international terrorism and organized
crime, which is especially serious in the region.
With regard to the Islamic State, we express our
strongest rejection of the heinous terrorist attacks
in Libya, including one against the headquarters
of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs in Tripoli on
25 December 2018, which left more than a dozen dead
and many wounded. In this context, we encourage
the Office of the Prosecutor — in accordance with
the principle of complementarity — to also evaluate
such situations, as well as their possible connection
19-13477

08/05/2019

The situation in Libya

to ongoing investigations. This is all in the context of
efforts to find a political solution in Libya that will
put an end to the ongoing high levels of violence,
promote national and regional stability and achieve a
sustainable peace.
I conclude by emphasizing that trust in justice and
in the institutions responsible for guaranteeing it is
key to resolving and preventing the conflicts affecting
a growing number of countries. In that regard, the
International Criminal Court is essential to fulfilling
the responsibility of protecting the population and
guaranteeing accountability for the atrocious crimes
committed as a key component of the international,
norms-based order.
Mr. Yao Shojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I thank Ms. Bensouda for her briefing.
China is highly concerned over recent developments
in Libya and consistently believes that the Libyan issue
must be resolved through political means. We hope
that the parties to the conflict in Libya will keep the
interests of the country and its people at heart and
respond to the calls of the international community by
establishing a ceasefire as soon as possible and easing
tensions in the country.
We hope the parties to the conflict will return
to the path of settlement through peaceful dialogue
and consultations and actively promote the political
settlement process in Libya with a view to the timely
restoration of peace, stability and development in Libya.
This is a premise and foundation of the realization of
justice in Libya.
China supports all efforts that are conducive to
stabilizing the situation in Libya and promoting a
political solution to the situation there. We support
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ghassan Salamé and regional organizations, such
as the African Union, in pursuing their good offices
to form synergies. China is ready to work with the
international community in an active effort to achieve
lasting peace and security in Libya.
China’s position on the International Criminal
Court remains unchanged.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): At the outset,
let me thank the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her
comprehensive briefing on the situation in Libya.

S/PV. 8523

South Africa continues to support resolution
1970 (2011), which calls for a cessation of violence
towards civilians and mandates the ICC to investigate
war crimes and crimes against humanity. We remain
concerned over the ongoing fighting in Libya, which
is not conducive to finding a political solution that will
bring to an end Libya’s long transitional period and lead
to the unification of the country’s institutions, as well
as the holding of national elections. This is essential to
enhancing security, stability and living conditions for
the Libyan people.
On the humanitarian front, my delegation is
concerned over the deteriorating humanitarian
situation, especially as some humanitarian actors face
challenges that restrict their access to parts of the
country. We condemn the loss of civilian lives during
the violence in Tripoli and support the SecretaryGeneral’s call for all commitments made under the
September 2018 ceasefire agreement to be adhered to
in order to maintain calm and avoid further violence in
the capital. We also call on all parties to fully respect
international humanitarian law and to ensure that all
possible measures are put in place to avoid conflict.
We call on all parties and stakeholders to recommit
to efforts towards building durable peace in Libya on
the basis of inclusive political dialogue as the only
viable means to achieve sustainable peace in Libya.
We echo the Prosecutor’s preventive statement, issued
on 16 April, calling on all parties and armed groups
involved in the fighting to fully respect the rules of
international humanitarian law. This includes taking
all measures necessary to protect civilians and civilian
infrastructure, including schools, hospitals and
detention centres.
It is of vital importance to also address the
conditions that give rise to terrorism and extremism,
including violent extremism, and to take the measures
necessary to address them so as to discontinue the
vicious cycle of conflicts on the continent. This would
further contribute to ensuring the safety, protection and
well-being of the population on the African continent.
Mr. Bakayoko (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation congratulates Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for her six-monthly briefing on the activities of the
Court in the cases relating to the situation in Libya. Côte
d’Ivoire, a State party to the Rome Statute, reaffirms
its full support for the ICC’s efforts to promote

19-134779/16

S/PV.8523

The situation in Libya

international justice and the fight against impunity in
the world.
My delegation notes with regret the deterioration
of the security situation in Libya since the onset of
fighting, on 4 April, between the forces of General
Haftar and those of the Government of National Accord,
led by Prime Minister Faiez Serraj. In view of the everincreasing number of casualties and the deterioration
of the humanitarian situation, my country urges the
cessation of hostilities and respect for the ceasefire
signed on 4 September 2018, in order to return all the
parties to the negotiating table and thereby create the
conditions for a revival of the political process to end
the crisis.
My country is of the opinion that the deterioration
of the security situation in Libya could create
conditions for the entrenchment of the Libyan branch
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. Indeed, the
attacks on the High National Election Commission in
Tripoli, the National Oil Corporation and the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs in 2018 are a sad manifestation
of the violence perpetrated by terrorist groups and
deserve the combined attention of our Council and the
International Court.
Similarly, the issue of human rights requires the
greatest attention of the international community
and the increased vigilance of the ICC because of the
increased risk of human rights violations in such a
context. That is why my country commends the efforts
made to date by the Court, as well as its cooperation
with the Government of Libya in investigating the
alleged crimes committed in the country.
My delegation is concerned, however, that the
precariousness of the current context may further affect
the institutional capacities of the Government of National
Accord and its willingness to fulfil its obligations under
the Rome Statute. We note that the arrest warrants
issued against Messrs. Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi,
Al-Tuhamy Mohamed Khaled and Mahmoud Mustafa
Busayf Al-Werfalli have not been executed to date. It
therefore reiterates its call on all parties to cooperate
with the ICC in bringing alleged perpetrators to justice
before the competent international tribunals.
The peace and security that are at the centre of
our Council’s concerns are inseparable from the fight
against serious violations of human rights and human
dignity. In that regard, the Security Council and the ICC
must work together to achieve that noble goal, which is
10/16

08/05/2019

one of the pillars of the process of restoring peace and
national reconciliation in Libya. In that respect, Côte
d’Ivoire welcomes the statement made by the Prosecutor
on 16 April concerning the escalation of violence in and
around Tripoli. In that statement, the Prosecutor urged
all parties to the conflict not to commit crimes within
the jurisdiction of the Court and, in particular, invited
the commanders of the armed groups that take part in
these battles to fully respect the rules of international
humanitarian law.
My country sees this as an expression of the
Prosecutor’s desire to remain seized of the human rights
situation in the Libyan crisis. I therefore remind all
Libyan parties of their obligation to protect civilians,
humanitarian personnel and hospital infrastructure.
Côte d’Ivoire also reiterates its call for the extension of
ICC jurisdiction to crimes against migrants.
To conclude, I would like to reiterate Côte
d’Ivoire’s support for the work of the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court to ensure respect for
human rights in Libya, and we call on the United Nations
and the African Union to pool their efforts to achieve a
rapid cessation to the clashes in and around Tripoli and
to achieve the restoration of peace in the country.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): I would like at the outset to thank the
Prosecutor for her written report and also for the very
informative briefing that she has just delivered.
Belgium would recall its tireless support for the
International Criminal Court (ICC) as an independent
and impartial judicial institution and its unswerving
support for the work of Ms. Bensouda and her Office.
The court embodies the efforts of the international
community to develop the rule of law throughout
the world and thus participates in the maintenance
of international peace and security. I wish to take
advantage of the presence of the Prosecutor here in
the Council to reiterate my country’s commitment to
preserve the integrity and independence of the Court
and its officials.
In the cases pending before the court following
the referral of the situation in Libya by the Council in
2011, three suspects remain at large. As underscored
by the Prosecutor in her report, the Court depends
entirely on the cooperation of States in carrying out its
arrest warrants. Once again, it must be recalled that all
States Members of the United Nations, whether they
are parties to the Rome Statute or not, are called on to
19-13477

08/05/2019

The situation in Libya

cooperate fully with the Court and the Prosecutor under
resolution 1970 (2011). This, of course, concerns first
and foremost Libya, which must cooperate with the
ICC, notably in the framework of the arrest and transfer
to the Court of Mr. Al-Tuhamy, Mr. Al-Qadhafi and
Mr. Al-Werfalli.
We welcome the positive cooperation between the
ICC and the authorities of the Government of National
Accord. Concerning Mr. Al-Werfalli, it is up to General
Haftar, the Commander of the Libyan National Army,
to facilitate his immediate transfer to the Court.
The Security Council also has an important
responsibility with respect to this situation, which it
itself referred to the Court. We invite the other members
of the Council to engage in a collective process of
reflection on the concrete measures that could be taken
to support the Court and its mandate. In this regard,
several of the proposals made during the Arria Formula
meeting held last July at the initiative of the Netherlands
to consider the relationship between the Council and
the ICC are particularly relevant.
The Council could thus consider allowing the
designation on sanctions lists of persons wanted by the
Court as soon as an arrest warrant is issued. It is also
important to encourage the exchange of information
between Sanctions Committees and the Court as well
as the communication of arrest warrants and mutual
assistance in such arrests.
My country would also like to recall that, in
accordance with article 115(b) of the Rome Statute,
there is a provision for the United Nations to cover the
expenses incurred due to referrals to the Court by the
Security Council. It would be illogical for the financial
burden of such investigations to be borne solely by the
States parties. We hope that the Council will be able to
reach an agreement on this issue.
Belgium strongly deplores the resumption of
fighting in and around Tripoli in recent weeks and
believes that it is now urgent for the Council to be able
to express its opinion on the situation in Libya. It must
be firmly recalled that all those who are guilty of grave
violations of international humanitarian law and, more
broadly, those who would jeopardize peace in Libya
will have to answer for their acts.
As the Prosecutor underscored in her statement of
16 April last, all leaders, both military and civilian, who
have control, authority or effective command over their

S/PV. 8523

subordinates are susceptible to criminal prosecution
before national courts or the ICC for the crimes
the latter have committed. In this respect, Belgium
welcomes the fact that the Office of the Prosecutor is
currently gathering information on this issue and will
determine whether parties to the armed conflict have
committed crimes that fall under the jurisdiction of the
Court. Equally, we applaud the work that has been done
with a view to the potential prosecution of perpetrators
of crimes against migrants.
The fight against impunity for the most serious
crimes is a vital part of any lasting, peaceful solution to
the crisis in Libya. It is therefore more than ever the duty
of the Council and of all States Members of the United
Nations to support the Court in the implementation of
its mandate.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): Let me at the outset thank
Ms. Fatou Bensouda for her briefing and assure her
of Poland’s full support for her work and that of the
International Criminal Court (ICC). Our support is
based on the strong conviction that the work done by
the ICC and her Office in particular remain essential
in ensuring accountability and fighting impunity. Her
work therefore lies at the very core of the mandate of the
Security Council — the maintenance of international
peace and security — because atrocity crimes are
not only features of most conflicts but also their root
causes. We therefore fully agree with the conclusion
in her report that the Security Council should take
concrete action to uphold accountability for atrocity
crimes, including in Libya.
On Libya, we can fully subscribe to Ms. Bensouda’s
statement of 16 April calling on all parties to respect
international humanitarian law. Let me stress here
that respect for and compliance with international
humanitarian law and human rights law is not a matter
of choice; it is a legal obligation of both States and
non-State actors. All those responsible for violations
and abuses of international humanitarian and human
rights law should be held accountable.
We attach particular importance, as a top priority
of our Security Council membership, to the protection
of civilians. Again, we concur with the Prosecutor’s
concerns regarding the situation of the civilian
population in Tripoli as a result of recent developments
and the ongoing conflict. Let me also remind everyone
in this Chamber that as an integral part of international
humanitarian law, the protection of civilians has been

19-1347711/16

S/PV.8523

The situation in Libya

highlighted in a number of Security Council resolutions,
which are also part of international law. Just one month
ago we agreed to Security Council press elements in
which
“The United Nations Security Council reminded
all parties of their obligation under international
humanitarian law, including the imperative of the
protection of civilians”,
which is something that is very close to our hearts. As
Ms. Bensouda said, the Libyan people deserve to live in
peace and safety.
Poland recognizes that an indispensable step in
ensuring accountability in Libya is the arrest and
surrender to the Court of individuals named in arrest
warrants issued by it. Noting that Libya remains
under an obligation in that respect, we support the
Office’s call on all States to take steps to ensure
that those warrants are executed and the suspects
transferred to the ICC. That means that the outcome
of Ms. Bensouda’s work depends very much on the
cooperation of Member States. Once again, it is not just
our duty and responsibility to work with her, it is our
obligation. Without cooperation in good faith on the
part of Member States, the Prosecutor will be unable to
move forward with her proceedings.
We are also very concerned about the ongoing
crimes and serious human rights violations and abuses
suffered by migrants and refugees in Libya, as well as
the continuing impunity for the smugglers, traffickers,
members of armed groups and State officials involved
in them. We also recognize that the business of human
smuggling and the associated alleged crimes have an
impact on peace and security not just in Libya but
beyond it. I said earlier that accountability is also a
tool for conflict prevention, and that is because if we
can provide accountability, it can serve as a deterrent
both to potential violations and abuses of international
human rights law and to conflict. It is a very important
tool for preventing conflict.
Poland also welcomes the Office’s efforts to monitor,
investigate and analyse allegations of crimes committed
against migrants and refugees in Libya in order to
determine whether they fall within the jurisdiction
of the Court. We also appreciate and encourage the
Office’s cooperation with Libya and other States, as
well as with national and international organizations,
to enhance the coordination of investigative and
prosecutorial strategies aimed at closing the impunity
12/16

08/05/2019

gap with respect to the Rome Statute, transnational
crimes and organized criminal activity.
In conclusion, I would like to urge that we assist
the Court in ending violations and ensuring full respect
in Libya for international law, including international
humanitarian law and human rights law, in order to
support the ICC’s efforts with regard to the situation
there, as well as the political process, and to work
towards strengthening the rule of law and achieving
peace in Libya.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking Ms. Bensouda for her detailed
report and briefing. As we have done every time she has
appeared before the Council, we would like to reaffirm
France’s full support for the International Criminal
Court (ICC). I would also like to take this opportunity
to stress that the role of the Court is as important
today as it was yesterday, given the difficult context
for multilateralism in general and for human rights and
international humanitarian law in particular. The Court
must be able to act and exercise its prerogatives without
impediment, independently and impartially, within the
framework defined by the Rome Statute. In that regard,
France affirms its support for the implementation of
resolution 1970 (2011), which referred the situation in
Libya to the International Criminal Court. We believed
then, and still believe today, that a lasting peace in
Libya requires justice for the victims, and the ICC
continues to play a key role in that regard.
The current fighting in Libya is undermining the
peace efforts undertaken with the support of the United
Nations generally, and the Council in particular. It is
civilians who are the main victims. It is therefore urgent
to ensure that the parties reach a ceasefire as soon as
possible, with an immediate halt to military operations
and effective de-escalation. Many terrorist and criminal
groups are taking advantage of the situation to try to
regain ground, and they include individuals who are
listed by the Council, which is absolutely unacceptable.
We must not lose sight of the need to resume the dialogue.
The parties have made commitments, notably in Paris,
Palermo and at the end of February in Abu Dhabi, on an
initial agreement that provides for the unification of the
country’s institutions and the formation of a transitional
Government tasked with restoring basic services for the
people and preparing for elections. It is therefore now
crucial to re-establish that dialogue under the auspices
of the United Nations and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, whom we fully support.
19-13477

08/05/2019

The situation in Libya

We must maintain the perspective and momentum for
the political settlement, because, as we know, only a
political solution can put an end to this conflict.
Beyond those general observations, we would like
to make three more specific comments. First, the Office
of the Prosecutor’s ability to continue its investigations
requires the full cooperation of all stakeholders. In
that regard it is essential for the Court to have the
cooperation of the Libyan authorities, including for
the execution of arrest warrants. It is crucial that all
the States concerned, whether or not they are parties
to the Rome Statute, strengthen their collaboration in
order to provide the necessary support to the Office of
the Prosecutor for as long as it is needed, and in that
regard, France welcomes the effective cooperation
that a number of States and organizations, including
INTERPOL, have given to the Office of the Prosecutor.
I also want to express my delegation’s appreciation for
the continued support and cooperation provided by the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya.
Secondly, I want to reiterate how important it is to
ensure that all of the most serious crimes committed
in Libya since 2011 and still being committed today
are investigated and prosecuted, including crimes
committed by Da’esh.
In that regard, and this is my third and final point, we
commend the Prosecutor’s focus on human trafficking
and the smuggling of migrants, which constitute a direct
threat to peace and stability in Libya. The findings in the
reports mentioned by the Prosecutor are illuminating
and disturbing as to the seriousness and extent of such
crimes. We welcome the rigorous approach taken by the
Office, including its role in advancing investigations
and prosecutions at the national level. We hope that
it will be effective in combating impunity for crimes
committed against migrants.
In conclusion, the violent, fragmented situation
in Libya throws the vicious circle of impunity and
instability into stark relief. If we are to put an end to
it, we must deal with the political, security and social
challenges that Libya is facing. Those challenges
cannot be overcome without the effective assistance of
the Court and the Council’s support. France continues
to be ready to act in that respect.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Every six months for eight years now, we
have listened to briefings from the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) on the investigation

S/PV. 8523

of the situation in Libya. Today is the seventeenth
report in a row. From one year to the next in this
Chamber we are assured that the ICC is the institution
that can play an important role in ending armed
confrontation, restoring the rule of law, bringing the
guilty to justice and strengthening Libyans’ faith in the
possibility of fairness. Sadly, the reality testifies to the
complete opposite. Each year the ICC becomes ever
less of a meaningful factor in the international arena.
Its investigations have no momentum and no results.
Before the meeting I looked through the statements
on this subject in the Security Council by Russia’s
representatives in previous years, and I could have
delivered any one of them today. They are 100 per
cent up to date. It seems that the ICC is chronically
unreceptive to fair criticism.
The conflict in Libya has deep roots. In 2011 the
attempts by the air forces of the United States, France,
the United Kingdom, Canada, Belgium, Denmark, the
Netherlands, Norway and a number of other States
to bomb democracy into the former Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya resulted in nothing but many human victims
and the creation of chaos, rampant crime and floods of
refugees. All of that has somehow mysteriously escaped
the attention of the Prosecutor of the Court. There are
clearly specific reasons for that.
I would recommend that anyone who still cherishes
a naive belief in the shining image of the ICC as a
champion of justice should examine the judges’ decision
of 12 April. I believe my United States colleague
spoke of it earlier. The Court flat-out declared to the
international community that in certain circumstances
justice proper can be disregarded. The interests of
victims and the severity of crimes are secondary
categories for the ICC. The most important criterion
is that of the so-called interests of justice. In the
interests of justice, from now on the ICC has the right
not to undertake an investigation if it has doubts as to
the feasibility or possibility of an investigation given
the lack of cooperation of interested parties against
a backdrop of sanctions pressure on the members
of the Court themselves or if it feels constrained by
budgetary limitations.
I fear that it will never be possible to restore the
Court’s reputation in the wake of this oh-so-elegant
verdict describing the ICC’s understanding of the
interests of justice. With a judicial policy like this one
it will also hardly be possible for the investigation of
the situation in Libya to achieve any credible results.

19-1347713/16

S/PV.8523

The situation in Libya

Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): Before I begin my statement, I would like to
express our full solidarity with the Libyan people who
continue to suffer the barbarity of war to this day.
My delegation would like to express its gratitude and
congratulations to Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court, for her comprehensive
briefing today on her seventeenth report to the Council
and for her commitment to executing her functions.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea promotes
respect for international law and international
humanitarian law. We therefore commend the major
efforts of the United Nations, especially the Security
Council, in the area of accountability and impunity.
We hope they continue unchanged and with the same
intensity, regardless of the origin of the accused. The
international community expects the criteria and the
will of the International Criminal Court in prosecuting
crimes to be uniform, and that it will carry out its tasks
with objectivity, credibility and impartiality while
ensuring that its cases are not politicized.
The tragic deterioration of the situation in Libya in
recent weeks, which has resulted in the loss of hundreds
of lives and in injury to thousands, is intolerable and
should not be accepted. We are deeply worried about
the seriousness of the current situation. We therefore
believe that at this point the priority should be to stop
the fighting, immediately establish a ceasefire and bring
the Libyans back to the negotiating table to re-establish
peace in Libya, since only inclusive negotiations can
enable peace to be achieved and normality restored to
this battered country. The Libyan people are clamouring
desperately for it, and this body must act accordingly.
The continuing violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law in Libya remain a
concern, as does the commission of war crimes with
total impunity. By way of example, explosive weapons
are being used indiscriminately in civilian areas and
innocent people are being murdered, as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General rightly
indicated in his press release of 17 April. This matter
falls under the purview of the Criminal Court, which
must therefore take action in accordance with the legally
established procedures. We encourage all members of
the Council and the international community to take
urgent action in response to these events by taking
measures to protect civilians and medical personnel, as
well as civilian infrastructure.
14/16

08/05/2019

In conclusion, it is important to bear in mind that
the current situation in Libya has serious regional
repercussions. It directly and adversely affects the
migrants and refugees stranded there who have
remained or been returned to Libyan territory, which
makes the situation even more complex against the
backdrop of existing tensions.
The President: I will now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Indonesia.
At the outset, Indonesia would like to thank
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), for her briefing. We have taken
note of her seventeenth report to the Security Council,
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) on Libya. Indonesia
joins others in showing our deep concern for the
situation in Libya, and today I would like to bring three
points to the Council’s attention.
First, like others, Indonesia calls for the cessation
of hostilities in Libya. We also call for all parties to
come back to the negotiating table with a view to
achieving a peaceful future for the country. We heard
promises less than two months ago about preparations
for a Libyan national conference in April. That date has
come and gone. Peace is still nowhere to be found. The
international community, including the Council, should
work together to give Libyans a chance to finally
experience peace again. We are also concerned about
the large number of grave violations of international
law and of serious, multifaceted crimes, as Prosecutor
Bensouda just informed us, such as murder, sexual
violence, human trafficking and violence against
migrants. We join the Prosecutor’s call in her 16 April
statement to all parties and armed groups involved in
the fighting to fully respect international humanitarian
law and take measures to protect civilians.
Secondly, Indonesia calls for humanitarian relief
during the month of Ramadan. It is very worrying that a
month after armed conflict began in Tripoli, the World
Health Organization reported this week that 432 people
have died, 2,069 people have been wounded and more
than 50,000 have had to flee their homes. Every day of
violence means that more people are killed, injured or
displaced. That must stop. Efforts should be made to
help those in need in order to save innocent lives.
That leads me to my third and final point, which
relates to the ICC’s proceedings. Indonesia is committed
to pursuing justice in Libya, which is part of broader
efforts to achieve long-lasting and sustainable peace in
19-13477

08/05/2019

The situation in Libya

Libya. While peace cannot be complete and sustainable
without justice, justice cannot prosper in the absence of
peace. The rule of law must be respected. For Indonesia,
the priority at hand is to cease all remaining hostilities
and continue the peace process previously set up. Any
action taken by the international community must be
carefully monitored in order to ensure that it does not
provoke further violence, thereby endangering lives
and jeopardizing the quest for peace. On that note, the
referral of the situation in Libya to the ICC should not
prevent the competent Libyan authorities from invoking
their jurisdiction to investigate gross violations of
human rights and bring the perpetrators to justice.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I deliver
this statement on behalf of His Excellency Mr. Mohamed
Taher Siala, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Libya.
At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month and to wish you every
success. I would also like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for her seventeenth report and for her briefing today.
We have reviewed the report of the Prosecutor, in
which Ms. Bensouda presents some of the cases that are
before the Court in accordance with the mandate granted
to the ICC in resolution 1970 (2011). In paragraph 4 of
that resolution, the situation in Libya since 15 February
2011 was referred to the Prosecutor of the ICC. In that
regard, the Government of National Accord sent a
letter, on 10 April, addressed to the President of the
Security Council from the President of the Presidential
Council requesting an investigation into the violations
and crimes perpetrated against civilians and civilian
infrastructure in Tripoli and its suburbs. The President
of the Presidential Council stressed the importance of
holding the perpetrators of those crimes accountable
without impunity. He also stressed the importance of
investigating the involvement of certain countries in
assisting Haftar in his aggression against the capital.
Once again, we call upon the international community,
especially the United Nations and its various organs,
including the ICC, to hold the countries involved in the
aggression accountable.

S/PV. 8523

The President of the Presidential Council sent
another letter, on 17 April, addressed to the Prosecutor
of the ICC. In that letter, he clarified the most recent
events in Tripoli resulting from the aggression launched
by Haftar and his forces, which is still under way, and
the resulting crimes against humanity, as he targeted
civilians, schools, hospitals and civilian airports, in
addition to recruiting children. All those responsible for
those criminal acts must be held accountable without
impunity. The perpetrators are defying resolution 2434
(2018) and all the international efforts mentioned in
that resolution. They are also disregarding the United
Nations road map that was adopted on 20 September
2017 to achieve peace in Libya.
The resolution referred as well to individuals and
entities that participate in acts that threaten peace,
stability and security or provide assistance to those
responsible for carrying out such acts. Those entities
and individuals can be subject to targeted sanctions,
according to resolution 2238 (2015), which stresses
that all parties in Libya must engage constructively
with the United Nations and refrain from any acts that
could undermine the United Nations-mediated political
dialogue. The resolution also emphasizes that there can
be no military solution to the conflict in Libya.
My question to all States Members of the United
Nations is the following: are they committed to
implementing Security Council resolutions on the
situation in Libya, which threatens international peace
and security? The Security Council acts in accordance
with Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
meaning that Member States are committed to
implementing Security Council resolutions, according
to Article 25 of the Charter.
Administering justice in all Libyan territories is a
responsibility that falls within Libyan sovereignty and
national jurisdiction. That does not mean that we do not
cooperate with the ICC. On the contrary, the Libyan
judiciary works with the ICC as a partner in a spirit of
cooperation and complementarity between the national
judiciary and the ICC. The Prosecutor has underscored
that cooperation on a number of occasions and in her
various reports.
My country’s Government notes the reference in
Ms. Bensouda’s recent report to the delay in prosecuting
some of the accused. That is attributed to the security
situation in Libya and the military clashes, which stop
and start in a never-ending cycle of violence.

19-1347715/16

S/PV.8523

The situation in Libya

We would also like to recall that, among those who
are wanted by the national judiciary and the ICC are
persons who do not reside on Libyan territory; they
live outside of Libya. Also, resolution 1970 (2011) did
not oblige the countries where those wanted people
live to extradite them to the Libyan authorities or the
ICC. Paragraph 5 of resolution 1970 (2011) states:
“recognizing that States not party to the Rome Statute
have no obligation under the Statute”. Some countries
have interpreted that paragraph as encouragement to
cooperate, but not as an obligation.
Resolution 1970 (2011) defines the mandate of the
ICC concerning the situation in Libya. The mandate is
not limited to prosecuting certain individuals, but rather
includes monitoring the situation since 15 February
2011 as a whole. Legally speaking, the situation was
referred by the Council to the ICC, which has the right
to work on cases regardless of whether countries are
cooperating with the Court or not.
From a procedural point of view, the mandate
has now been operationalized. The ICC is mandated
to present periodic briefings, and the Office of the
Prosecutor is ready to consider the cases before it.
The memorandum on burden-sharing between the ICC
Office of the Prosecutor and the Libyan authorities
consolidates the cooperation between both jurisdictions.
From a legal point of view, we stress that the
Libyan judiciary is capable of prosecuting those who
have committed crimes on Libyan territory since
2011. Those crimes are not subject to the statute of
limitations. However, we must take into account the
current security situation in Libya, which significantly
contributes to the perpetration of crimes against
civilians. We emphasize that the Libyan judiciary is
monitoring all those violations.

16/16

08/05/2019

The Prosecutor, in her recent report, expressed
her concern over the situation of illegal migrants. The
Government of National Accord confirms that it has
taken swift measures to protect those migrants. In
cooperation with the International Organization for
Migration, they were relocated and moved away from
areas of fighting. The Government of National Accord
wishes to underscore that it is monitoring all violations
targeting hospitals, public facilities and civilian
infrastructure. It has taken all the necessary measures
to protect civilians and keep them away from the
dangers posed by fighting. My Government even asked
the Security Council to dispatch a fact-finding mission
to investigate the crimes perpetrated against civilians
who were often targeted with rockets by Haftar and his
troops during the latest clashes around Tripoli. Those
who committed these crimes must be identified.
In conclusion, the Government of National Accord
stresses its full commitment to resolution 1970 (2011),
especially the mandate of the International Criminal
Court, as set out therein. The Government of National
Accord, which is the only legitimate Government
established under the Skhirat Agreement, hopes that the
Council will consider the situation in Libya as one of its
priorities, without neglecting it. This could be done by
engaging in continuous coordination with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ghassan
Salamé, to achieve peace and security and overcome
the current impasse. All Council members must make
concerted efforts to reconcile their differences in order
to adopt a binding resolution that ends the ongoing
hostilities and force those troops that launched the
aggression to go back immediately to where they
came from.
The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m.

19-13477
