asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6919

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6919th meeting
Wednesday, 13 February 2013, 10.20 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kim Sook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Republic of Korea)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Menan
Mr. Parham
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security
European Union

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

13-23193 (E)

*1323193*

S/PV.6919

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security
European Union
The President: Under rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Baroness
Catherine Ashton, High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy of the European Union, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Baroness Ashton.
Baroness Ashton: I want to begin by thanking you,
Mr. President, and the Security Council for inviting
me to address the Council on this occasion. I want to
congratulate the Republic of Korea on its presidency
and membership in the Council, as well as Argentina,
Australia, Rwanda and Luxemburg on their election to
the Security Council — especially Luxembourg as a
first-time member.
I would like today to present the different ways in
which, I think, the European Union (EU) contributes
to international peace and security. Our contribution
should be seen in the context of the strong and
long-standing commitment we have to effective
multilateralism with the United Nations at its core. I
want to pay tribute to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
a good partner and a good friend. The European Union
has always strongly supported his actions. His current
efforts to broker peace in the Great Lakes region is just
one case in point.
I believe that the European Union’s contribution
is three-fold: our ability to marshall a wide range of
instruments in what we call a comprehensive approach;
our direct involvement in international negotiations,
including mediation, on behalf of the international
community; and our close work with our international
and regional partners, where only collective efforts can
deliver results. A particular strength of the European
Union is its ability to respond to a crisis with a wide
range of tools and instruments — short- and long-term,
humanitarian and development, security and political.
2

We are particularly pleased that the long-standing
engagement of the EU in Somalia and the Horn of
Africa, as set out in the Strategic Framework for the
Horn of Africa and carried out in close cooperation
with the United Nations, has contributed to the recent
breakthrough in the political process and in terms
of security in that region. Through our missions, we
have contributed to greatly reducing piracy; it dropped
by 95 per cent over the past two years. Through our
development cooperation and political support, we
contribute to lasting security, what I have coined “deep
democracy” and prosperity.
I was pleased to receive the Somali President,
Mr. Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, who expressed his
country’s appreciation for the EU’s efforts at the end
of last month, although he also called for the continued
and comprehensive engagement of the European Union
and the international community. It is imperative that
we all join in that support to ensure effective and
continued progress, as the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2013/69) emphasizes.
Our support to Mali and the Sahel should also
be seen in the context of a comprehensive European
engagement. The current crisis in Mali provides us
with a challenging test case. The threat posed by
terrorist groups is a threat not only to the existence of
one country, but also to the security of a region and
the international community. It calls for swift and
coordinated international action, and, of course, the
United Nations plays a leading role in that.
The situation on the ground changes rapidly.
Thanks to the intervention of France, which responded
to the Malian President’s appeal for help, we are
witnessing rapid advances in the liberation of the
north of Mali. We have also seen progress regarding
the adoption of a road map by the Malian authorities
to restore democracy and constitutional rule and faster
deployment of the African-led International Support
Mission in Mali (AFISMA). For all that, challenges and
threats still remain.
What we have called our comprehensive approach
is an integral part of that international response.
Humanitarian aid has been increased by an additional
€20 million from €58 million in 2012. We have also
contributed through security-related measures, such
as the EU training mission to help the Malian Army
to be restructured under civilian authority. We have
given considerable financial and logistical support to
AFISMA. We have made available €50 million through
13-23193

S/PV.6919

the African Peace Facility and established a clearing
house to channel national contributions.
Our political support for Mali focuses on
supporting the concrete implementation of the road
map, support for the electoral process and, what is
extremely important, an inclusive national dialogue,
especially with representatives of the people from the
north of Mali. We have also provided economic support
by resuming EU development aid. We are making
available more than €250 million for new projects
across the entire country and for budgetary assistance.
It is important that the Malian authorities investigate
all allegations of human rights abuses. We support
the United Nations intention to deploy human rights
observers to Mali, and we welcome the decision by the
International Criminal Court to open investigations.
Lasting peace and reconciliation and reconstruction
require long-term commitments on the part of the
international community. The donors conference on
29 January, as well as the Support and Follow-up Group
on the Situation in Mali, the third ministerial meeting
of which we were proud to host last week, have helped
to further mobilize international support.
But we need to do more. It is important to stress
the central coordinating role that has been assigned to
the United Nations under resolution 2085 (2012). We
appreciate the leadership that the Security Council
has shown, as well as the recognition that the Council
has given to our efforts. All of us need to support the
United Nations in taking on greater responsibility for,
for example, peacekeeping, particularly in what will be
a crucial stabilization phase.
We will also continue to play our role in the
broader framework of our Sahel strategy, and we look
forward to working closely with the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General, Romano Prodi, in the context
of the upcoming integrated United Nations strategy for
the Sahel.
In my role as High Representative/Vice-President,
I am responsible for dealing with the Iranian nuclear
programme, and, as the Council knows, the Iranian
nuclear issue remains at the top of the international
agenda. Based on the mandate we have received from
the Security Council, and working together with what
I describe as the E3+3 Governments, but they are
also known as the five plus one group — there are six
either way — we are engaging in intensive diplomatic
efforts to seek a negotiated solution that meets the
13-23193

international community’s concerns about the Iranian
nuclear programme. After very lengthy consultations,
we were able to agree on the next round of talks to be
held on 26 February in Kazakhstan. We hope Iran will
come to that negotiation with flexibility and that we
can make substantial progress.
Our strength and credibility in negotiating with
Iran derives from the E3+3, but also from the more
general support that we receive from the international
community. I am very grateful for the constant support
of the Security Council, and I would add that our
cooperation with and support to the International
Atomic Energy Agency is also very important. We
remain determined to work towards a solution to the
Iranian nuclear issue based on the dual-track approach.
There is no doubt that the pressure of sanctions has been
instrumental in bringing Iran back to the negotiating
table, but sanctions cannot be an end in themselves. The
key is for Iran to comply fully with its international
obligations.
Like the Security Council, the European Union has
condemned in the strongest possible terms the latest
nuclear test of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. It is a further blatant challenge to the global
non-proliferation regime and an outright violation of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s international
obligations not to produce or test nuclear weapons, in
particular under Security Council resolutions.
It remains vital therefore that the international
community stays united and determined. We will work
with key partners, especially with the Council, to build
a firm and unified response aimed at demonstrating to
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea that there
are consequences for its continued violations. We once
again urge them to abandon their nuclear weapons
programme, including the uranium enrichment
programme, in a complete, verifiable and irreversible
manner.
In the European Union, I take responsibility for
facilitating the dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo,
between Prime Ministers Thaçi and Dačić. So far this
has led to some concrete results. We have an agreement
to take forward the implementation of integrated border/
boundary management, and as a result four gates are
now open and fully operational. We have an agreement
on arrangements for the protection of religious and
cultural heritage, and we have an agreement to appoint
liaison officers to be hosted in the European Union
offices in Belgrade and Pristina.
3

S/PV.6919

As the Council may have noted, last week the two
Presidents, Serbian President Nikolić and Kosovan
President Jahjaga, met in Brussels for the first time,
marking an important step between Belgrade and
Pristina. The process continues; a new meeting with
the two Prime Ministers will take place next week in
Brussels. I want to take this opportunity to commend
Prime Minister Dačić and Prime Minister Thaçi for the
way they have approached these discussions, and for
the courage they have shown in doing so. It is not an
easy process for either of them, but they have our full
support, and I also count on the support of the Council.
We are also working closely with partners to address
some of the more difficult challenges to international
peace and security. Here, I want to mention briefly
Syria and the Middle East peace process. In the Middle
East peace process, we believe that the time has come
for concrete steps to be made towards peace, to see
direct and substantial negotiations and to achieve
a lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
based on two States — a solution that addresses both
Palestinian aspirations to statehood and sovereignty
and Israeli concerns about security. We believe there is
an urgent need for renewed, structured and substantial
peace efforts in 2013 that will require work with all
international partners, including the United Nations
and the League of Arab States. The European Union
position remains that we will not recognize changes
to the pre-1967 borders other than those agreed by the
parties.
We suggest that the following parameters could
be a basis for resuming negotiations. We see security
arrangements that respect the Palestinians’ sovereignty,
protect Israel’s security and prevent the resurgence of
terrorism as key. There must be an agreed, just and fair
solution to the question of refugees, and a fulfilment of
the aspirations of both parties for the status of Jerusalem
as the future capital of both States.
It will be important to set up an internationally
supported framework for negotiations. I would like to
highlight in this regard the role of the Secretary-General
in the Quartet, and to strongly support the important
work done by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and
Special Coordinator Robert Serry on the ground. We
will continue to work with all those who are willing to
join the quest for peace, stability and prosperity in the
Middle East, and in so doing to recognize the critical
importance of regional involvement. We think of Jordan

4

and the role that His Majesty the King has played, and
of other Arab nations, including at this time the role of
Egypt in what has happened in Gaza, and, of course,
the whole question of Palestinian reconciliation. All of
us, I would argue, should engage.
In our efforts to support Syria, we coordinate
closely with all partners at the bilateral, multilateral
and inter-institutional levels. We give lasting support
to the United Nations through common actions and
initiatives, which are crucial to preserving the role
of the Security Council. That includes tackling grave
human rights abuses and war crimes.
We stand firmly behind the complex mission of
Joint Special Representative Brahimi. We hope his
plans will result in concrete initiatives by the Council
to make the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex)
operational. We also welcome the recent statements
made by the President of the Syrian coalition, Sheikh
Mouaz Al-Khatib, who has proposed launching
discussions with acceptable representatives of the Syrian
Government. We encourage the Syrian authorities to
seize this opportunity. If together we can set up the
right conditions and a timetable for discussions and add
important confidence-building measures, we might be
able to build new momentum for what has so far been a
most difficult challenge.
But in addition to our political efforts, we have
remained an important donor of humanitarian aid to
Syria; the financial support of the EU and its member
States is now €600 million. We have also imposed
EU-wide sanctions against the regime, and we are
working on improving the operational capacity of
the Syrian opposition coalition, which we accept as a
legitimate representative of the Syrian people.
It will be equally important to engage in planning
for the future and to closely involve the Syrian
opposition coalition in that process. The EU will
support a political transition with effective measures on
the ground, institutional and economic recovery, postconflict accountability and needs-disaster assessment.
I have not been able today to refer to all the various
contributions of the EU to the work of the United
Nations. I have very much limited myself to what are
perhaps the most pressing issues. But we harbour a
strong belief in effective multilateralism and wish to
be a good and supportive partner to the United Nations.
Let me end by acknowledging the great responsibility
of the Council for steering the international community

13-23193

S/PV.6919

away from conflict and confrontation. In carrying
out its tasks, it can count on the full commitment and
support of the European Union.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would also
like to welcome the High Representative of the European
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy. France
naturally associates itself with the European Union’s
vision and commitment in the service of an effective
multilateralism in full cooperation with the Council,
which she has just briefed us on.
I would like to emphasize three aspects of the
European Union’s contribution to achieving the goals of
the United Nations. First, the European Union remains
a unique model of cooperation and integration in the
service of peace and security on the continent of Europe.
As Ms. Ashton explained, today the European Union is
playing its part in the very heart of the continent, in the
Balkans, where war once raged. It promotes bilateral
dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo and offers them
a prospect of integration within a larger geographic
context. Kosovo’s period of supervised independence
came to an end without incident on 10 September of
last year. That is a success for the entire international
community and one that the European Union can fully
share in. The opening at the highest level of a new
phase of political dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia,
under the auspices of the European Union, expands
that effort. I also commend last week’s meeting in
Brussels between the Serbian and Kosovar Presidents.
This dialogue confirms the willingness of both parties
to normalize relations in the context of their European
rapprochement, which, we hope, will enable the two
countries to turn the page on their conflicts.
The European Union also possesses the tools needed
to act beyond the European continent in the service of
the system of collective security of which the Council
is the cornerstone. Exactly two years ago, the High
Representative briefed the Council (see S/PV.6477) on
the creation of the European External Action Service,
an important milestone in the implementation of the
Lisbon Treaty. Since then, these developments have
helped to strengthen the European Union’s contribution
to collective peace and security and thus to become
a valuable partner for the United Nations. To give a
few examples, as Ms. Ashton said, the African forces
that make up the African-led International Support
Mission in Mali, authorized by resolution 2085 (2012)
in December, began their deployment in support of
the Malian armed forces in restoring State security.

13-23193

Through the African peace facility, the European Union
helps by contributing to paying their wages.
It also provides support in reshaping the Malian
defence apparatus. The deployment, beginning in
mid-March, of a European Union training mission
is also part of the same goal of restoring Malian
sovereignty. The mission, which is 500 people strong
and includes 172 trainers, will also provide for the
training in one year of four battalions of 650 Malian
soldiers each. Its support in the quest for a political
solution in Mali demonstrates the European Union’s
global approach, according to which they have recently
managed to release their economic aid to help restart
the country’s development and thus lay the foundations
for a sustainable peace.
Furthermore, on another topic, despite the ongoing
stalemate in the Council, the European Union has
made a firm commitment to a democratic transition
in the Syrian Arab Republic. That is why it was swift
to condemn the bloody oppression carried out by the
Bashar Al-Assad regime and considers the Syrian
national coalition as the legitimate representatives
of the Syrian people. It has shown, in this crisis, its
willingness and ability to act. Starting in May 2011, the
European Union deployed a wide array of individual,
financial and trade sanctions against the regime.
With over €400 million delivered in humanitarian
assistance, the European Union and its member States
have provided significant aid to ease the plight of the
Syrian population, including refugees. The European
Union has always supported the efforts of the Joint
Special Representative to find a political solution to the
conflict.
On the Iranian nuclear issue, the High Representative
has been intervening as a facilitator in the dialogue
with Tehran. We thank her for her intensive efforts and
exemplary commitment, working alongside the E3+3
Governments, to keeping the door to dialogue open. A
new meeting with Iran will take place in Almaty on
26 February. It will be an opportunity for Iran to make,
without further delay, the goodwill gesture that the
international community expects from it in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions and the
resolutions of the International Atomic Energy Agency
Board of Governors. As long as Iran does not comply
with its obligations, we will fulfil our responsibilities
and increase pressure in order to convince it to abandon
its policy of isolation and provocation.

5

S/PV.6919

The European Union and its member States are fully
committed to playing their role in that issue, setting
up a very strong sanctions apparatus. We continue to
believe that firmness is still the best guarantee for the
achievement of a long-term diplomatic solution, which
is the goal we all share.
Finally, the European Union provides support to the
work of the Security Council on several crosscutting
issues, showing thus that it is a major partner of the
United Nations in defining prospects for progress in
international affairs. It promotes the role of women
in crisis exit strategies, as is the case in Afghanistan,
through the European Union Police Mission in
Afghanistan, where a clear effort has been made to
increase the number of female police officers.
With respect to the protection of children in armed
conflict, I thank the European Union for the ongoing
support provided to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.
I will conclude by recalling that the special role
played by the European Union led two years ago to the
adoption by the General Assembly of resolution 65/276.
That resolution affirmed the role of the European Union
as a partner, pillar and friend of the United Nations, not
just as a regional organization but also as a pillar of a
coherent and effective international system.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to thank
the High Representative of the European Union for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Baroness Catherine
Ashton, for her statement, insights and analysis on a
number of contemporary challenges to global peace
and security.
The establishment of international peace and security
is an important task that cannot be accomplished by a
single entity acting alone. Cooperation, communication
and assistance among the responsible actors are vital.
That spirit unites the United Nations and the European
Union and leads them to merge their efforts for the
preservation of global peace and security.
There is an established pattern of cooperation
between the two entities in a variety of areas, including,
in particular, peacekeeping and conflict prevention, the
protection of human rights, sustainable development
and the environment, development assistance, and
combating terrorism and other criminal activities.
Strengthening that cooperation and the continued
contribution of the European Union to the efforts of
the Security Council and the United Nations more
6

broadly are indispensable in addressing challenges to
international peace and security.
I would like to speak more specifically about some
geographical and thematic issues. The situation in the
Middle East with regard to both the Middle East peace
process and the Syrian Arab Republic still occupies the
top position on the list of international security issues.
While it has been exposed to conflicts and insecurity
for many decades, the region has also gone through
major transformation processes over the past two years.
The international community must be more united
and consistent in its efforts to help the regional States
through these difficult times and find a peaceful and
lasting solution to ongoing conflicts.
Another challenging issue is the situation in Mali,
where decisive action has enabled significant advances
in the restoration of Malian territorial integrity. It is
essential that the international community stand ready
to undertake efforts for peacebuilding, governance,
security sector reform, reconstruction and regional
cooperation.
At the same time, Mali is not the only country
facing terrorism and violent separatism. It is therefore
important to maintain consistency in deciding
on responses to such situations, especially those
aggravated by external political, military and economic
support in violation of international law and Security
Council resolutions.
Issues relating to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and the rule of law have become
some of the major topics on the international agenda.
However, despite increasing attention to those topics,
issues of accountability in certain conflict or postconflict situations have often been overlooked. As
a result, erroneous policies and behaviours that
contradict international law and its basic norms and
principles have often been allowed to remain, under
the cloak of impunity, and garner the potential of
further destabilizing the situation by thwarting the
achievement of peace and fomenting future conflicts
and related crimes. We believe that the international
community cannot approach selectively, or remain
indifferent to, situations involving the use of military
force against civilians and massive expulsions. If there
are reasonable grounds to believe that such violations
and other serious wrongdoings have indeed occurred
during armed conflicts and have given rise to valid
international concerns, an obligation to investigate and
prosecute alleged offences, as an important safeguard
13-23193

S/PV.6919

and tool for prevention, will definitely serve the
principles of justice and the rule of law. We encourage
the European Union to continue to assist the affected
countries and support national and international efforts
to that end.
It is essential, when dealing with conflict and postconflict situations, that the relevant organizations and
entities ensure that peace and justice are both present
in a mutually reinforcing manner. Such an approach
ensures that no peace settlement is reached that is
inconsistent with international law. That understanding
is particularly important, as it would provide guidance
not only for the parties to the conflict but also for
the international community as a whole and, when
appropriate, mediation efforts.
In situations of unresolved conflict, the lack of
agreement on political issues cannot be used as a pretext
for marginalizing problems caused by continued and
deliberate disrespect for international law, including
international humanitarian and human rights law. It
is therefore crucial to insist on the importance, with
respect to such situations, of reaffirming the continued
applicability of all relevant international legal norms
and standards. We encourage the European Union to
consistently address concerns in that regard and support
relevant national initiatives to that end within the
United Nations. At the same time, it is also important
to carefully approach ideas having the initially declared
purpose of fostering confidence-building measures but
that in reality carry the danger of sustaining the status
quo created as a result of the unlawful use of force and
the commission of other serious crimes of concern to
the international community.
In conclusion, let us express the hope that increased
efforts and more intensified cooperation between the
United Nations and the European Union will yield better
results in dealing with the many existing challenges to
international peace and security.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this briefing.
I join previous speakers in welcoming Mrs. Catherine
Ashton, High Representative of the European Union for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, and I thank her
for her briefing. As a European, I fully subscribe to
Ms. Ashton’s statement. I assure her of my country’s full
support in the Council, in the context of her mandate,
to strengthen cooperation between the European Union
and the United Nations in promoting international
peace and security.
13-23193

As a founding member both of the United Nations
and the European Union, Luxembourg appreciates the
values shared by the two organizations. In the words of
the Charter of the United Nations, those values include
“faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity
and worth of the human person, in the equal rights
of men and women and of nations large and small”.
The United Nations and the European Union have
the same goal of promoting peace. Each represents a
peace project born of the same desire to protect future
generations from the scourge of war.
This third presentation to the Council by the High
Representative, following those of 2010 and 2011,
clearly shows that the European Union remains a
reliable partner of the United Nations. The 27 members
of the European Union contribute more than one-third
of the ordinary and peacekeeping budgets of the United
Nations. The European Union and the United Nations
closely cooperate at Headquarters and on the ground.
The European External Action Service and the United
Nations Secretariat maintain continuous contact. Our
joint actions now involve all aspects of responding
to international crises, in particular emergency crisis
management, humanitarian efforts, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding and development.
Allow me to echo the High Representative in
highlighting two examples that illustrate the synergy
of efforts undertaken by the European Union and the
United Nations in Africa — in Somalia, in the regional
context of the Horn of Africa, and in Mali, in the regional
context of the Sahel. Since 2011, the European Union
has developed its Strategic Framework for the Horn of
Africa, which emphasizes the need to link security, the
fight against poverty and good governance. In Somalia,
the significant support of the European Union relates to
those three areas.
Since its launch in March 2007, the European Union
and the United Nations have supported the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). To date, the EU has
contributed more than €400 million to pay the salaries
of the Green Helmets and the Mission’s operations in
Nairobi through the African Peace Facility. AMISOM’s
contribution to security in Somalia is inestimable, and
for now remains essential. In the medium-term, it will
be up to us to decide how the international community
will support Somalia in order to ensure that the Somali
National Security Forces — which are supported by

7

S/PV.6919

an EU training programme — will be able to assume
responsibility for their country’s security.
Also in 2011, the European Union developed its
Strategy for Security and Development in the Sahel.
In recent months, the international community’s
attention has rightly focused on Mali to respond to the
multifaceted crisis affecting that country. The European
Union and the United Nations are dynamically engaged
politically, militarily and financially to respond to
a situation that threatens regional and international
peace and security. In the next few months, the synergy
between the European Union training mission in Mali
and the stabilization mission to be established under
the auspices of the United Nations will be crucial.
Beyond the crisis in Mali, it is now urgent that the
United Nations also develop an integrated strategy on
the Sahel.
The European Union is actively committed also
in the Middle East, playing a key role in the efforts
of the international community with respect to the
nuclear programme in Iran. Europe maintains a firm
attitude in that regard, while calling for diplomacy and
dialogue. We therefore welcomed the announcement
that negotiations will resume between Iran and the
E3+3 in Almaty on 26 February, after several months of
interruption. Like the High Representative, we express
the hope that those discussions will lead to significant
progress towards achieving a negotiated solution.
In Syria, the situation on the ground continues
to deteriorate day by day. A protracted conflict will
lead only to the destruction of the country. Every
effort must be made to promote a negotiated political
settlement of the crisis. At the start of the week, as
was noted, Mr. Al-Khatib once again called upon the
Syrian authorities to follow up on their initiative to talk
with the aim of ending the bloodshed. We hope that the
Damascus authorities will respond to that request for
dialogue extended by the head of the Syrian National
Coalition. As the High Representative mentioned,
it will be necessary for the European Union and the
United Nations to continue to work hand in hand at the
political level and to provide assistance to the affected
populations in Syria and in neighbouring countries.
I would like to add a comment on the peace process
in the Middle East. We of course support the efforts
made by the European Union as a member of the Quartet,
along with the United Nations, the Russian Federation
and the United States, to foster a resumption of direct
talks between the Israelis and the Palestinians. If there
8

is an area where close cooperation and engagement have
added value, it is there. When the talks resume — which
we hope will happen soon on the basis of a structured
framework and the parameters indicated by the High
Representative — the parties will require appropriate
international support and determined commitment on
the part of all key stakeholders.
Finally, allow me to highlight a subject that is dear
to our hearts — the protection of children in armed
conflict. Yesterday we celebrated the International
Day against the Use of Child Soldiers. We welcome the
joint press statement on that subject issued by the High
Representative and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflicts,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui. For 10 years now, the European
Union has taken a stance on children in armed conflict.
The European Union and its member States can promote
the protection of children in armed conflict through
political dialogue and cooperation measures.
Luxembourg particularly welcomes the European
Union initiative to allocate its Nobel Peace Prize money
to projects devoted to child victims of war. In particular,
that initiative will help to revive hope among Syrian
refugee children in Iraq and the children displaced by
the conflict in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo by providing them with access to basic education.
In that area as in others, the European Union and the
United Nations can make a difference by working
together and in complementarity. Luxembourg pledges
its continuous support to strengthen that partnership.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I would like to thank High
Representative Ashton for her briefing and welcome
her to the Council for the third time in this capacity.
Since she last briefed the Council, the European Union
(EU) was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. The award
recognizes the EU’s powerful and historic contribution
over six decades in advancing peace and reconciliation,
democracy and human rights.
The EU is, of course, is a unique experiment among
nation States, born out of the most violent century in
human history. All of us have a keen interest in its
success. As the Council now more acutely knows, close
cooperation between it and regional organizations,
including the EU, can be a decisive component in our
collective efforts to maintain international peace and
security. Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations recognizes that. As a long-standing, integrated
regional organization that has learned many lessons
of its own over the years in developing and improving
13-23193

S/PV.6919

normative frameworks for dealing with conflict and
post-conflict situations, the EU is strongly placed to
make a strong contribution in that regard.
I would like to thank High Representative Ashton
for her hopeful analysis on some of the contemporary
issues on the Council’s agenda. The EU’s engagement
on those issues is an indication of its own strong
contribution to international peace and security. We
endorse her condemnation of North Korea’s latest,
third nuclear test. The Council itself is united in that
condemnation. There have been threats of a second and
even a third nuclear test to follow the one earlier this
week. We must now develop a strong draft resolution
with tough new sanctions. We will certainly be working
closely with all Council members, including members
of the EU, to achieve that quickly.
We welcome the role the EU plays in Africa in
support of the African Union. The EU’s assistance to
the African Union Mission in Somalia has been central
to the Mission’s role in achieving security gains, which
in turn have helped bring Somalia to a point where it
can embrace the best chance it has had in a generation
to build sustainable peace and stability.
We acknowledge and appreciate the EU’s efforts
to address the crisis in Mali through the EU training
mission and support to the African-led International
Support Mission to Mali (AFISMA) through the Africa
Peace Facility. Making AFISMA operational as soon as
possible remains vital whatever the final peacekeeping
configuration in Mali may be. Alongside that security
effort, the EU’s very significant humanitarian and
development assistance is an important contribution to
restoring stability in that country.
On the Syrian Arab Republic, we share the EU view
that the international community must do everything it
can to promote a credible Syrian-led political transition
to realize the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people.
We also support the EU’s view that those responsible
for serious crimes in Syria should be held accountable.
We appreciate the very significant contribution the EU
is making to provide humanitarian assistance, and we
encourage the EU in its efforts to ensure that its aid is
delivered as effectively as possible. We will continue to
work together with the EU in support of Joint Special
Representative Brahimi, and agree that the Council
needs to provide clearer support soon to his complex
mission. We will also continue to work closely with the
EU to advance one particular aspect of our collective

13-23193

humanitarian effort — the protection of medical
workers and facilities in Syria.
This is a decisive year for the Middle East peace
process. The prospect of a two-State solution is quickly
disappearing. We agree with the High Representative
that it is time for new effort to resuscitate the peace
process. The continued support of the EU to the
Palestinian Authority and its active participation in the
Quartet remains essential. EU activism in support of
renewed negotiations will be influential.
Regional tensions in the Middle East will only
increase, as we know, unless Iran engages with the
five plus one process and cooperates fully with the
International Atomic Energy Agency. Australia
appreciates the EU’s critical role in pursuing dialogue
with Iran to find a diplomatic solution to the international
community’s strong concerns about its nuclear
programmes. We commend the High Representative
for her personal engagement on the Middle East peace
process and the Iran nuclear issue.
We also commend her role in relation to Kosovo, an
issue the Council will consider next week. By mediating
high-level dialogue, the EU has certainly helped to open
a new constructive phase in negotiations, which has
been achieving progress towards agreed solutions to
outstanding differences between Belgrade and Pristina.
Australia and the EU are very close partners in
global security. We work together in Afghanistan. We
cooperate closely on aid delivery through joint projects
in the Pacific and Indonesia, and this will soon extend
to delegated cooperation arrangements elsewhere,
including South Sudan and Fiji. We work closely in
international sanctions regimes.
We acutely recognize that the EU and its member
States play a very substantial role as partners to the
United Nations. Together they form the single largest
financial contributor to the United Nations system,
providing a sizeable proportion of the United Nations
regular budget, at almost 40 per cent, and to the United
Nations peacekeeping budget, at over 40 per cent. Of
course, its support is absolutely indispensable to United
Nations funds and programmes. That contribution
enables the EU to act as an essential multiplier of our
collective efforts on peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
conflict prevention.
The EU’s efforts to promote democracy and the rule
of law are important. Its expertise helps build capacity
and promote reform in law enforcement, the judiciary
9

S/PV.6919

and border security. Through its election observation
missions in particular, the EU has helped to deepen
public trust in electoral processes and to deter voter
fraud, intimidation and violence.

that all parties will make their best efforts to find a
negotiated solution acceptable to all, bearing in mind
the three pillars of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Power.

Its actions to tackle piracy deserve particular
recognition. We commend the EU Naval Force for its
work off the Horn of Africa, which has contributed to
reducing Somali piracy to its lowest level since 2008.
We value the EU as a continuing partner in the fight
against terrorism and support its efforts to ensure that
counter-terrorism remains a key priority for us. We
welcome the EU activities on preventing terrorism by
addressing terrorist radicalization and recruitment.

Secondly, with regard to the peace process in the
Middle East, Guatemala believes that the European
Union, as a member of the Quartet of core international
mediators, must step up its efforts to encourage Israel
and Palestine to seek a solution to the age-old conflict
between them. We should spare no effort towards
achieving the ultimate aim of identifying common
ground in order to resume negotiations.

To conclude, close engagement between the
Council and regional organizations is self-evidently
an essential component to securing international peace
and security. We encourage the Council to continue to
look for opportunities to work closely with the EU in
particular in that primordial objective.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting. We would also like to thank the High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, Ms. Catherine Ashton,
for her informative briefing on the activities of the
European Union in the various areas that bring us
together.
The delegation of Guatemala takes this opportunity
to express its gratitude to the European Union for
its constructive presence in the United Nations and
its important role in many activities, ranging from
cooperation and development to peacekeeping, and for
the contributions of its member countries to the United
Nations budget.
On this occasion, I would simply like to make six
brief comments, all on topics covered in the briefing of
High Representative Catherine Ashton.
First, in the case of non-proliferation talks between
the European Union and the Islamic Republic of Iran,
we are concerned over the deadlock in the process, and
we urge the European Union to persist in its efforts.
We note the additional sanctions that the European
Union has applied against Iran with the ultimate aim
of weakening the actions that would allow it to develop
a nuclear programme. We welcome the announcement
that the upcoming round of talks between the E3+3
Governments and the Islamic Republic of Iran will take
place in Almaty, Kazakhstan, on 26 February. We hope
10

Thirdly, as for the situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic, we note that the policies of the European
Union from the outset of the conflict have been based
on the following actions: supporting the efforts of the
United Nations and the League of Arab States to find
a political solution to the conflict and to encourage a
political transition; exerting pressure on the regime
through the application of unilateral sanctions; and
using debates within the Security Council and the
United Nations system to exert pressure on the Syrian
authorities.
However, those actions have not led to strategic
success, since the Government has yet to commit to a
serious political dialogue on the future of the country.
On the contrary, while the Syrian army and the armed
opposition continue to commit human rights abuses
and violate international humanitarian law against the
civilian population, the violence seems to escalate every
day. We welcome the role of the European Union in the
area of humanitarian assistance and acknowledge that
its member States are the largest bloc of donor countries
providing humanitarian assistance in the Syrian crisis.
Fourthly, with regard to its mediating role for the
normalization of relations between Serbia and Kosovo,
we congratulate the European Union, in particular
High Representative Ashton, on the leadership in the
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. That new
phase of mediation, which led to the convening of
the first high-level meeting, took the process from a
primarily technical to a political level, offering new
prospects for resolving various long-standing issues.
We encourage the parties to continue those efforts
in line with the existing legal framework, namely,
resolution 1244 (1999).
Fifthly, with regard to Mali, we welcome the
logistical and financial support provided by the European

13-23193

S/PV.6919

Union to the African-led International Support Mission
in Mali. We commend the establishment of a European
Union training mission in Mali in order to train the
Malian armed forces in supporting the restoration of
the country’s territorial integrity. The mission is an
integral part of the European Union’s comprehensive
approach to the situation in Mali and the Sahel region.
We look forward with great interest to its launch in
the coming weeks. We also congratulate the European
Union and the High Representative Ashton on having
hosted the ministerial meeting of the Support and
Follow-Up Group on the Situation in Mali in Brussels
on 6 February, at which the international community
underscored, among other issues, the importance of
respecting international humanitarian law and the
protection of civilians in Mali.
Finally, Guatemala has always supported a broader
development of and greater cooperation among the
United Nations, the Security Council and regional and
subregional mechanisms. Such cooperation should take
place on the basis of the Charter of the United Nations,
in particular Chapter VIII. As a regional mechanism,
the European Union has established close and fruitful
cooperation with the United Nations on a wide range
of key areas. We will continue to support the further
strengthening of that cooperation.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to welcome Baroness Ashton, High Representative
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy of the European
Union, and to thank her for briefing the Council on
the cooperation between the European Union and the
United Nations in maintaining international peace and
security. The European Union has been an important
partner of the United Nations in the area of peace
and security. In recent years, the European Union
has actively participated in the discussions within the
Council on regional hotspots and thematic topics.
The European Union has been working closely with
United Nations in carrying out preventive diplomacy,
providing good offices and promoting the settlement of
disputes through peaceful means, such as mediation and
negotiation, as well as through strong support to United
Nations peacekeeping operations and special political
missions. The European Union also actively participates
in the United Nations Peacebuilding Commission and
plays a very positive role in peacebuilding in conflictaffected and post-conflict conflict countries.
We acknowledge the great importance that the
European Union attaches to its cooperation with other
13-23193

regional organizations. Recently, certain hotspot issues
in Africa, such as Mali and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, have become more prominent. The European
Union has maintained close coordination with the
African Union and African regional and subregional
organizations, such as the Economic Community of
West African States, the Southern African Development
Community and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, in providing strong assistance to their
good offices and capacity-building efforts.
China appreciates the significant contribution
of the European Union in maintaining regional and
international peace, stability and security. It encourages
and supports the European Union in continuing to play
a positive and constructive role in that regard.
Dialogue and consultation are the fundamental
way to bridge differences and to prevent and resolve
conflicts. While the European Union has extensive
experience and resources in that regard, various
regional and subregional organizations have a profound
understanding of and unique advantages concerning
regional issues. The Security Council should strengthen
its communication and coordination with various
regional and subregional organizations, including the
European Union, in line with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, in particular on
the basis of more pragmatic and effective cooperation
in maintaining international peace and security.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We welcome High
Representative Baroness Ashton to the Security Council
and thank her for her briefing on the European Union’s
cooperation with the United Nations. We join Australia
in congratulating the European Union on receiving the
Nobel Peace Prize.
Pakistan and the European Union enjoy excellent
relations. The European Union is an important trading
and development partner of Pakistan. Our country
attaches the highest importance to cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
and security.
Over the years, the European Union has become a
major cooperation partner of the United Nations and
has made important contributions to the maintenance
of international peace and security. African issues
constitute the bulk of the Security Council’s agenda.
Although the African Union and African subregional
organizations are currently working actively to resolve

11

S/PV.6919

conflicts in Africa, they face funding and capacity
problems. The European Union has provided significant
support to peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities
in Africa. It has provided substantial funding for
United Nations-mandated African Union peace support
operations and plays an active role in post-conflict
peacebuilding efforts on the continent.
The Sahel region faces serious security,
humanitarian and socioeconomic challenges that have
negative consequences for the long-term stability
of the region. They include chronic food insecurity,
underdevelopment, the impact of climate change and
the rise in organized crime, including terrorism and
the trafficking of drugs and weapons. The outflow
of refugees from Mali, for instance, has placed an
additional burden on neighbouring countries, which
have already suffered from the consequences of
drought. The enormous challenges in the region can
be addressed effectively through a coherent strategy.
The region lacks capacity and resources. It needs the
support of the international community.
In that context, Pakistan supported the elaboration
of the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel
region. The European Union is already making a
significant contribution to the Sahel region through its
Strategy for Security and Development in the Sahel.
In addition to the funds pledged under the Strategy,
the European Union has also made a commitment to
address the humanitarian situation in the region. We
hope that the European Union will continue to support
the region and to provide resources for the United
Nations integrated strategy, which we expect to be
finalized soon.
The situation in Mali poses a serious threat to
the peace and security of the region and beyond. The
crisis in Mali stems from internal causes, as well as the
overall situation in the wider Sahel region. Following
the French intervention, the situation has significantly
improved, but the country requires sustained support on
the part of the international community to consolidate
peace and restore full constitutional order.
We welcome the European Union’s decision to
provide training to the Malian defence forces through
the deployment of the European Union’s training
mission, as well as its commitment to contribute to
the funding of the African-led international support
mission for Mali, through the European Union African
Peace Facility. We hope that, as a clearer picture

12

emerges regarding the country’s needs, the European
Union will offer further assistance to Mali.
The European Union has also made an important
contribution to consolidating peace in the Balkans.
The European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo is
providing support to Kosovo in the area of the rule of
law. The European Union-mediated dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina has helped to bring the two
sides together to resolve their outstanding disputes.
The recent elevation of the dialogue to the level of
Prime Ministers is an important contribution, made by
Baroness Ashton herself.
The Syrian crisis has assumed catastrophic
proportions. According to the Secretary-General, more
than 70,000 people have died there. An estimated
4 million Syrians, including 800,000 refugees
and 2 million internally displaced persons, need
humanitarian assistance. The pursuit of the military
option has fuelled this devastating internecine strife for
the past two years. The Syrians, as one nation, have to
reconcile their differences through dialogue.
With the recent statements of the opposition and the
Government for dialogue without preconditions, there
is a glimmer of hope for engagement. This opportunity
must be seized by the Syrians, the United Nations and
the European Union. Full support for the efforts of the
Secretary-General and Joint Special Representative
Lakhdar Brahimi will help in making the Geneva
communiqué operational and giving a fresh impetus to
diplomacy.
We welcome the results of the donors conference
held in Kuwait on 30 January, where the international
community was able to pledge $1.5 billion. We hope
that those pledges will be fulfilled and materialized
expeditiously to alleviate at least some part of the
suffering of the Syrian people. We appreciate the
humanitarian assistance that the European Union is
providing to the affected people of Syria.
The Security Council has invested considerable
time and effort to address the Iranian nuclear issue. It
is time to reflect on and to review the objectives and
strategy pursued so far. A peaceful resolution of this
issue is possible on the basis of confidence-building
measures while pursuing the goals of non-proliferation
and respecting Iran’s right to peaceful uses of nuclear
energy.
We encourage the E3+3 and Iran to stay the course
of meaningful engagement, build on the talks they have
13-23193

S/PV.6919

held so far and deepen the diplomatic process for a
negotiated resolution of the Iranian nuclear issue. We
hope that the talks to be held on 26 February will make
some headway.
We welcome Baroness Ashton’s statement that the
Middle East peace process should be launched again.
The European Union and the Secretary-General, as
members of the Quartet, can play an important role in
reviving the completely stalled process. The two-State
solution is in freefall. The European Union can help in
reversing that trend by putting its collective political
moral weight behind the efforts to persuade key States
and players to come back to the negotiating table.
In conclusion, we welcome the Security Council’s
continued engagement and exchange of views with
the European Union. We encourage the ongoing
cooperation and coordination between the United
Nations and regional organizations. Such cooperation
plays an effective role in conflict prevention and in the
resolution of conflict and post-conflict situations.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I join others in
welcoming Baroness Ashton to the Council and thanking
her for giving us her briefing today. These meetings are
an important step in broadening and strengthening the
European Union’s relationship and collaboration with
the United Nations and in highlighting areas where
the European Union (EU) and the United Nations are
already cooperating successfully in pursuit of their
shared objectives.
In Syria, where the situation continues to worsen,
the United Kingdom and, indeed, the European Union
have remained steadfast in our support of Joint Special
Representative Brahimi and his plan to take forward
the establishment of a transition Government with full
executive powers. We encourage others to do the same,
recognizing that Al-Assad cannot be part of such a
transition if it is to realize the legitimate aspirations of
the Syrian people.
In support of transition, the European Union has
introduced measures against the Al-Assad regime,
imposing sanctions against those responsible for
the violence and repression and applying increased
economic pressure on the regime. The United Kingdom
and the European Union have also provided substantial
humanitarian assistance to the people of Syria through
our financing of United Nations humanitarian appeals.
We now need to find innovative ways of allowing

13-23193

humanitarian personnel to deliver assistance to those in
need to alleviate the appalling situation on the ground.
In Mali and the Sahel, the international community
has united to face the challenge posed by violent
extremism. Building on the success of French-led action
in support of Mali’s territorial integrity, the Council is
working towards the deployment of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation once conditions are right. The
European Union will deploy a military training mission
to build the capacity of the Malian armed forces to
deliver stability in support of democratic governance.
European Union action in Mali, founded on its
comprehensive strategy for security and development
in the Sahel, continues to support those efforts by
delivering vital humanitarian assistance and building
security and development for people in Mali and across
the region.
In all those endeavours, the European Union works
hand in hand with the United Nations, particularly the
Secretary-General’s Special Envoy, Romano Prodi, and
with the Special Representative for West Africa, Said
Djinnit.
The European Union and the United Nations
are also working closely to implement resolution
1325 (2000), including promoting the role of women
in peacebuilding and tackling impunity for sexual
violence. In Mali, the United Kingdom will contribute
human rights experts to the European Union military
training mission to provide specialist training to the
Malian armed forces on preventing and responding to
sexual violence. The new United Nations Office in Mali
will have a strong human rights component, which we
hope will also focus closely on issues of gender and
sexual violence.
In Somalia, international action in support of the
Somali Government has already delivered significant
gains. Here the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) has led the fight against extremism, in the
form of Al-Shabaab, but has been supported by both
the European Union and the United Nations through
troop salaries from the EU Africa Peace Facility and
logistical support from the United Nations Support
Office for AMISOM.
That is a good example of the EU and the United
Nations working together to make a difference and to
address a major challenge to international peace and
security. The European Union is making a further
contribution by providing training for 3,000 troops to
13

S/PV.6919

build up Somalia’s own armed forces to fight alongside
AMISOM.
We now have a real opportunity to make progress
in Somalia, which we look to the United Nations, the
African Union and the EU together to seize in the
coming months.
As many of us in this Chamber have noted already,
2013 will be a critical year for the Middle East peace
process. The European Union has worked closely with
the United Nations as members of the Quartet on a
number of initiatives, including delivering practical
assistance to the Palestinian State-building programme
and calling on Israel to ease restrictions on movement
and access to the West Bank and Gaza. The EU rightly
continues to underline that a political solution must be
reached and remains committed to working with the
United Nations, other Quartet members and the wider
international community to make progress.
The United Kingdom warmly welcomes the
tireless efforts of Baroness Ashton in support of the
E3+3 negotiations with Iran and the continued work
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
The countries of the E3+3 are scheduled to meet Iran
in Almaty, Kazakhstan, on 26 February, to present a
balanced and credible offer. The onus is firmly on Iran
to come to the next talks ready to negotiate seriously
and to take concrete steps to respond to international
concerns over its nuclear programme.
The Security Council has adopted six resolutions
on the Iranian nuclear issue, four of which contain
sanctions. European Union countries have fully
implemented those measures and have agreed further
sanctions in support of the E3+3 Governments’
dual-track strategy of pressure and engagement.
We also welcome Baroness Ashton’s engagement
in driving forward the European Union-facilitated
dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo. It is important
that the momentum is maintained to get both countries
to reach the conditionalities set out in the December
General Affairs Council conclusions, notably with
regard to northern Kosovo. That process of dialogue
offers the best prospect for consolidating recent
progress and generating the necessary understandings
and cooperation between Serbia and Kosovo, from
which both countries and the region as a whole will
benefit.
If recent history has taught us anything, it is that
the international community acts most effectively
14

where it acts coherently. Action by the European Union
and cooperation between the European Union and
others, including the United Nations, continue to make
an important contribution to those efforts.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would like
to begin by thanking Baroness Ashton for her briefing,
which underscored the many and various contributions
of the European Union in cooperation with the United
Nations to the promotion of peace and development
throughout the world.
Togo welcomes the organization of today’s briefing,
in the context of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations. It is being held, I would recall, after
the sixth consultative meeting on cooperation on peace
and security between the United Nations and the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union, which took
place on 13 June 2012 in New York.
In my country’s view, those types of meetings show
the need to further tighten the bonds between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations,
allowing those organizations to share, with the Security
Council in particular, their experiences and lessons
learned as regional stakeholders with real knowledge of
the reality on the ground.
There are many examples of the cooperation
between the European Union and the United Nations,
which is one of the major development strategies of
the Common European Security and Defence Policy,
whose principles were set by the European Council
in Nice in 2000. We recall that, at the operational
level, since the success of Operation Artemis in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which was carried
out in accordance with resolution 1484 (2003) during
the deployment of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
many other military and civilian operations have been
developed by the European Union in collaboration with
United Nations missions on practically all continents.
With regard to security sector reform, we welcome
the European Union’s support in working with the
United Nations in countries such as Afghanistan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Guinea Bissau.
In terms of counter-piracy efforts, Operation
Atalanta, which was led by the European Union pursuant
to resolutions 1814 (2008), 1816 (2008), 1838 (2008) and
1846 (2008) off the shores of Somalia, helped protect
World Food Programme vessels that were sending
humanitarian assistance to Somalia. Togo hopes that
13-23193

S/PV.6919

that type of cooperation will also lead to determined
action to assist the countries and organizations of the
Gulf of Guinea, which are still suffering from the
effects of piracy. We hope therefore that the upcoming
summit on piracy in the Gulf, which will be held in
April, will provide an opportunity to establish the areas
of that cooperation.
The involvement of the European Union in
promoting the objectives of the United Nations is
not only operational. Indeed, the comprehensive
approach adopted by the European Union aimed at
preventing and managing crises by combining the
diplomatic and political dimensions and the element of
cooperation in development with operational measures
is commendable.
With regard to financing, as Baroness Ashton just
recalled, the European Union contributes almost half
of the resources of the United Nations Development
Programme and 80 per cent of those of the
Peacebuilding Fund and is one of the major contributors
to peacekeeping operations. In that regard, we welcome
the announcement of financial support in the amount
of €50 million through the African Peace Facility to
support the deployment of the African-led International
Support Mission in Mali (AFISMA) and the European
Union training mission for the Malian army and its
logistical support for the Mission. We hope that in
AFISMA’s transition to a United Nations peacekeeping
operation, the European Union is planning to play an
important role in mobilizing the necessary finances
and logistical resources.
With regard to preventive diplomacy, my country
especially welcomes the efforts of the European Union
in a number of areas, including the Iranian nuclear issue
and the rapprochement between Kosovo and Serbia.
In conclusion, I would like to say that, while the
cooperation between the European Union and the
United Nations has been dynamic, thanks to the daily
exchanges between the two Secretariats, we hope that
the close cooperation will continue to grow and become
more significant.
Moreover, the fact that the European Union
occasionally does not speak with one voice on
some major international issues hinders vigorous
cooperation with the United Nations. A comprehensive
diplomatic strategy, both for defence and all global
issues, would make the European Union a better partner
in the resolution of the major crises that are shaking

13-23193

our world, in particular in the Middle East and North
Africa, regions that are so close to Europe.
Finally, in order to prevent the actions of the two
Organizations from overlapping in some areas, it is
important that both Organizations bear in mind what
the other is doing before making a new commitment.
In that regard, it is important that due account be
taken, in developing a comprehensive United Nations
strategy for the Sahel, of the European Union’s strategy
on the Sahel, which has the advantage of showing the
inextricable link between security and development.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy of the European
Union. For us, today’s meeting is important both from
the standpoint of the role played by the European Union
(EU) in collective efforts to support international
peace and security and from the standpoint of the
strategic relations linking Russia and the European
Union — both major continental centres of power
with great responsibilities for the situation in Europe
and, more broadly, in the Euro-Atlantic region. In
that context, we are generally satisfied with the way
our dialogue with the European Union has evolved,
including at high-level summits. We note some
proximity in our positions on many international issues
on the agenda of the Security Council.
The Russian Federation has consistently advocated
multilateral development and improvements in the
cooperation of the United Nations with regional and
subregional organizations. That cooperation must be
based on the firm foundation of the Charter of the
United Nations, especially, its Chapter VIII.
The European Union contributes to strengthening
multilateralism, with the United Nations playing the
lead role, in combating new threats and challenges,
mitigating the consequences of natural disasters and
eliminating poverty and discrimination. We note the
useful role played by the European Union as a major
donor of development and humanitarian assistance
and their significant contribution towards financing
peacekeeping operations and peacebuilding.
We value the participation of the European Union
in international efforts to help Somalia, Afghanistan
and Mali, in the Middle East peace process and in
looking for political and diplomatic solutions to the
Iranian nuclear programme, as well as in combatting

15

S/PV.6919

piracy at sea and in establishing regional counterpiracy capacities.

for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy of the European
Union, Baroness Catherine Ashton, for her briefing.

The inspiring potential of the European Union
must therefore be used for the good of the international
community and not for compelling individual members
of the United Nations to take positions on certain issues
at odds with their own national policies. The question
of observing human rights must not become a pretext
for selective political pressure.

The Republic of Argentina welcomes cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations, in this case, the European
Union. In establishing the Security Council as the
organ with primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peacekeeping and security, the Charter
of the United Nations, in Chapter VIII, also provided
for a role for regional agreements or bodies, particularly
in seeking peaceful solutions to disputes, as long as
such agreements and bodies and their activities are
compatible with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations and as long as the Security Council
is kept fully informed of whatever activities are
undertaken or planned by such regional agreements
and bodies for maintaining international peace and
security. We would like to see the meetings now being
held with the European Union and the African Union
extended with similar regularity to other regional and
subregional bodies that also deal with matters relating
to the maintenance of international peace and security.

General Assembly resolution 65/276, adopted in
May 2011, did not change the EU’s observer status; it
merely expanded some of its capacity to participate in the
Assembly’s work. The resolution should be interpreted
holistically rather than as a series of separate positions.
We call on the European Union to follow the resolution
strictly in both letter and spirit.
We are concerned about the European Union’s
increasingly active use of unilateral sanctions, both
those imposed in addition to United Nations sanctions
and those implemented without any corresponding
Security Council decisions. In our view, such sanctions
are counterproductive; they undermine the Council’s
prerogative and add to the burden placed on the
populations of the countries on which they are imposed.
Frankly, at times such actions amount to attempts to
stifle entire sectors of the economies of independent
States, and the humanitarian assistance that the EU
sometimes provides is only partial compensation for
such losses.
Having taken upon itself a specific role in organizing
a dialogue on Kosovo, the EU should not stray into acts
of pressure or force; such relapses have sometimes
been observed in the region. Solving Kosovo’s complex
problems should not be effected only by the EU at the
expense of the United Nations presence, whose role, as
prescribed in resolution 1244 (1999), cannot be seen as
an auxiliary or second-tier one.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that,
despite the growing need for an effective mechanism
for the division of labour between the United Nations
and regional organizations, including the EU, the
leading role of the Security Council on issues of the
maintenance of international peace and security
remains unshakeable. It is enshrined in the United
Nations Charter, and to change it is out of the question.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you for convening this meeting,
Mr. President, and to thank the High Representative
16

I would now like to discuss a few of the issues
mentioned by Ms. Ashton in her briefing. Over the
past two years both the Government and the opposition
groups in Syria have chosen to try to resolve the crisis
there by military means. One of the most worrying
results of that decision has been the catastrophic
humanitarian situation that exists not only in Syria
but also in neighbouring countries, which continue to
receive an endless influx of refugees. In that regard, we
must recognize the solidarity shown by the European
Union and its member States in continuing to respond to
that humanitarian tragedy. Argentina believes that the
unacceptable levels of violence and destruction in Syria
have been largely enabled by the assistance provided by
external players in arming and financing the parties to
the conflict. In that regard, we concur with the appeal
made by the Council of the European Union in its
conclusions adopted on 15 October in Luxembourg for
all States to refrain from sending arms to Syria.
Briefly, with respect to the peace process in the
Middle East, I would like to say that my country holds
and has always held a clear position. We consider
it crucial to work towards a two-State solution and
essential to renew and strengthen the mechanisms
and strategies that the international community has
developed to contribute effectively to that goal, with
the understanding, as our President has said, that the

13-23193

S/PV.6919

question of finding a peaceful solution in the Middle
East should not be seen as a regional conflict but as a
universal issue.
We also support Ms. Ashton’s comments on the
nuclear test carried out by North Korea and on that we
do not have to speak in depth. Both the Argentinian
authorities and the Security Council have made
clear, forceful and prudent statements on the matter.
Regarding non-proliferation, as in other cases that have
arisen, Argentina is of the view that the issue should
be resolved through effective negotiations. As the High
Representative said, the imposition of sanctions cannot
be an end in itself, and we share that position; they
must be supported by negotiations. We believe that the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons is
the cornerstone of a coherent non-proliferation regime
and that all States should support it.
In that context, I would like to point out that
Argentina has a very clear historical commitment to
disarmament and non-proliferation. We are party to all
of the export-control regimes and firmly support the
efforts of the international community in that area.
We do, however, understand that such efforts cannot
be used as indirect means for limiting the inalienable
rights of States that are party to the Treaty to develop,
produce and use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
In the case of Iran, Argentina believes that that country
should cooperate fully with the International Atomic
Energy Agency in order to regain the trust of the
international community regarding the nature of its
nuclear programme.
Argentina takes note of the crisis in Mali and
recognizes the European Union’s initiative on the issue.
We have always stressed that a medium- and longterm solution to the Mali crisis cannot be a military
one; we should prioritize the political process by
holding free, fair and transparent elections as soon as
conditions allow, as well as an inclusive dialogue as a
necessary condition for the restoration of the rule of
law, constitutional order and full enjoyment of human
rights. We also believe that it is important to make
progress with regard to the country’s development
in order to ensure security in the medium and long
term. In that regard, initiatives such as the Brussels
conference held on 5 February on the future of Mali
and the announced resumption of the European Union’s
assistance for development are all measures worthy of
note.

13-23193

I cannot conclude without mentioning the European
Union’s support for the work of the Security Council in
the area of women and peace and security, which the
Ambassador of Luxembourg also remarked on. Issues
concerning children and armed conflict and every
area related to sexual and gender-based violence are a
priority for Argentina, and we attach great importance
to them within the framework of our human rights
policy. In that respect, I would like to recognize the
fact that the European Union is one of the parties that
is most committed to the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions on women and
peace and security. Like my own country, the European
Union itself and more than half of its member States
have adopted action plans on women and peace and
security.
Finally, the promotion and protection of the rights
of the child are a priority of European Union human
rights policy, as can be seen in its many efforts to
provide critical assistance to children affected by
conflict and for the demobilization and reintegration of
child soldiers.
My country is a member of the International
Criminal Court and has signed the Rome Statute. When
it comes to the recruitment of children under the age
of 15 to be used to play an active role in hostilities, the
Statute states that such children are the victims of a
war crime. Argentina has set that age in line with the
provisions of the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
We know that international human rights instruments
are a bare minimum, not a ceiling.
In conclusion, I reiterate the importance that my
delegation attaches to this dialogue with regional
and subregional organizations in the framework of
the central role of the Council in the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to welcome Baroness Ashton,
High Representative of the European Union for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, and to thank her
for her briefing on the contribution of the European
Union to the achievement of United Nations goals, in
particular the prevention of conflict, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding.
On the basis of its status as a model of integration
and its concrete and substantial commitment to peace,
development and the respect for human rights, the
European Union remains a privileged partner of the

17

S/PV.6919

United Nations. The Nobel Peace Prize awarded to it is
eloquent testimony to that fact.
Today’s debate continues the recent momentum
launched by the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations aimed at strengthening
their partnerships in order to deal with active or latent
conflicts and multifaceted crises that destabilize entire
regions and affect millions of people. Morocco attaches
great importance to the role of regional and subregional
organizations and to the cooperation of those
organizations with the United Nations, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations and within the
parameters established by Council resolutions.
The European Union has contributed significantly
to efforts to promote the resolution of conflicts. Its
cooperation projects and its economic and technical
assistance provide significant support to socioeconomic
development efforts. The work of the European
Union aimed at entrenching stability and democracy
strengthens international peace and security. With
its influence and experience, the instruments it has
established and its special relations with several
regions of the world, the European Union can continue
to provide essential support to international peace and
security and to the strengthening of United Nations
multilateralism.
In that regard, I would like to highlight the
importance of the European Neighbourhood Policy,
which seeks to strengthen Europe’s relations with
countries to the east and south; the Union for the
Mediterranean, the goal of which is to promote
economic integration and democratic institutions
in the 16 countries of the Mediterranean basin; and
the Instrument for Stability, which has strengthened
European efforts aimed at preventing conflicts,
managing crises and peacebuilding.
Morocco welcomes the efforts of the European
Union to support international and regional efforts
aimed at resolving the conflict in the Middle East, in
particular through its contribution as a member of the
Middle East Quartet. We believe that the European
Union will continue to support the Middle East peace
process and work to clear away the obstacles to the
resumption of negotiations, so that the Palestinian
people can fully enjoy its legitimate rights, including
the establishment of its State, with East Jerusalem as
its capital. All the people of the region, together with
the international community, hope that 2013 will be the
year of the prompt and effective implementation of the
18

vision of two States, Palestine and Israel, living side by
side. No effort must be spared in making that vision a
reality that is experienced by all peoples of the region,
for the good of all.
The Kingdom of Morocco welcomes the sustained
and ongoing commitment of the European Union
to peace, security and development on the African
continent. That commitment is not a new one. It has
been progressively strengthened over the past decade
to become an important vehicle for stabilization and
development for countries in crisis or emerging from
crisis, as shown by all of the work that the European
Union has undertaken or continues to undertake in
Africa, whether it is in Somalia, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Chad, the Central African
Republic, Guinea-Bissau, the larger Sahel region or,
recently, Mali.
With respect to the crisis in Mali, the swiftness
of the French and African response was decisive.
The European Union, for its part, has shown its
commitment to stand with the Malian people and
all of Africa, in particular through its support it has
given to the reform of the Malian security forces, the
contribution it announced at the donors conference and
the announcement made as recently as yesterday by the
European ministers for development of the progressive
resumption of its development aid to Mali following the
adoption of the Malian transitional road map.
The situation in Mali cannot be understood outside
of its regional context, namely, that of the Sahel. The
region is confronted with multifaceted and complex
challenges. We hope that, once it is laid out, the
comprehensive United Nations strategy for the Sahel
will also receive the active support of the European
Union.
With respect to the Syrian Arab Republic, we
welcome the humanitarian assistance from Europe for
Syrian refugees, and we call on the European Union
to continue its efforts, in cooperation with the United
Nations and the League of Arab States, aimed at
putting an end to the horrific situation of the Syrian
people by bringing about an end to the violence and
by facilitating an agreement on a political solution
ensuring a transition, in response to the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people and in full respect for
the country’s territorial integrity and national unity. In
that respect, it is important to support the work of Joint
Special Representative Brahimi and to ensure that the

13-23193

S/PV.6919

Security Council can take unified action to put an end
to the suffering of the Syrian people.
Morocco supports and contributes to international
and regional disarmament and non-proliferation efforts
and to the development and implementation of a collective
response to global threats, including terrorism. The
weakening of the non-proliferation regime threatens to
put the goal of nuclear disarmament, to which Morocco
remains committed, out of reach. Based on its belief
in the virtue of dialogue and diplomacy, Morocco
supports the E3+3 dialogue and hopes that the Almaty
meeting will make further progress towards arriving at
a diplomatic solution for the Iranian nuclear issue.
At this point I wish to reiterate the importance of
getting all Middle Eastern States to sign the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and
conclude comprehensive safeguards agreements with
the International Atomic Energy Agency. We also
count upon the European Union’s support of efforts
to establish a zone free of nuclear weapons and other
weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East.
Morocco, which enjoys advanced status in
its relations with the European Union, values its
commitment. We hope that the EU’s cooperation with
our Organization will strengthen both Organizations,
as that is in the interest of the European Union, the
United Nations and even beyond — it is in the interest
of the entire international community.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I would
like to join others in welcoming High Representative
Ashton to the Council today, and I thank her very much
for her remarks. The European Union (EU) remains an
indispensable partner to the United Nations and to the
United States. It is an important leader in international
efforts to address the world’s most pressing challenges.
Today’s briefing illustrates the considerable benefits
that strong United Nations partnerships with regional
organizations can generate in the interest of advancing
our goals of international peace and security.
I would like to highlight four areas that we find
most noteworthy. First, the United States appreciates
the EU’s leadership in promoting stability in the
European region. The EU has played a very important
role in assisting Kosovo and Serbia in normalizing
relations through dialogue, bringing together Prime
Ministers Dačić and Thaçi for discussions as well as
facilitating the historic meeting between Presidents
Nikolić and Jahjaga.

13-23193

We agree with High Representative Ashton that
that dialogue has produced concrete results that will
promote stability in the region. A resolution of the
differences between Kosovo and Serbia will allow both
countries to move forward on their respective European
paths. We also welcome the efforts of the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo in helping to
strengthen Kosovo’s institutions.
We also commend the EU for its ongoing engagement
in Georgia, particularly through its monitoring
mission. We appreciate the joint efforts of the United
Nations, the EU and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) over the past several
years to help create space for direct dialogue between
Georgia and Russia to address outstanding concerns
and normalize relations. And we deeply appreciate the
EU’s contribution to peace and security in Bosnia and
Herzegovina through the Security Council-mandated
European Union-led peacekeeping force.
Secondly, the United States welcomes the EU’s
efforts to advance peace and security beyond Europe.
The Iranian nuclear issue remains a matter of serious
concern for the entire world. We must continue to
consult and work together to ensure that Iran cooperates
seriously with the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), comes clean about its past and present nuclear
activities and reassures the international community
about its nuclear programme, including by complying
with relevant Security Council resolutions and its
nuclear safeguards obligations.
We are pleased that the Iranian negotiating team
has confirmed that the next round of talks between the
five plus one group and Iran will take place in Almaty
on 26 February. We appreciate the critical role that High
Representative Ashton has played in our diplomacy
to address that issue. It is time for Iran to discuss
substance, and we hope the talks will make concrete
progress regarding the international community’s
concerns about the nature of Iran’s nuclear programme.
Also, we greatly appreciate High Representative
Ashton’s statement that the European Union strongly
condemns the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
latest nuclear test and urges that country to refrain from
further provocative actions. The United States will
continue to take the steps required to defend ourselves
and our allies. We will strengthen close coordination
with allies and partners and work with our Six-Party
Talks partners, the Security Council and other United
Nations Member States to pursue firm action.
19

S/PV.6919

The EU is also a valued partner in the Middle East
peace efforts, including as a member of the Quartet,
which supports a comprehensive resolution of the
Arab-Israeli conflict. We remain committed to working
with our EU partners, including through the Quartet,
to encourage the parties to create an atmosphere
conducive to the resumption of direct negotiations
without preconditions. Only through direct negotiations
between the parties can Palestinians and Israelis address
all permanent status issues and achieve the peace that
both deserve.
Turning to Syria, we fully share the concerns
expressed by High Representative Ashton regarding
the ongoing violence, grave humanitarian rights abuses
and war crimes, and we agree that the international
community must come together to help end the
suffering of the people of Syria. The United States
joins the EU in continuing its support for the efforts of
Joint Special Representative Brahimi to find a durable
political solution to the crisis in Syria.
Thirdly, the United States welcomes the EU’s
commitment to provide technical assistance to bolster
security and development in societies emerging
from conflict. In Afghanistan, the EU’s expertise
on policing issues has been critical in assisting
Afghanistan in establishing and training an effective
civilian police force. The EU’s efforts complement the
work of the United Nations, the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, the United States and other international
actors working with Afghanistan to promote a stronger
political, security, economic and social future for the
Afghan people.
In Mali, the United States welcomes the EU’s
pledge to provide financial and logistical support to
the African-led International Support Mission in Mali
through the African Peace Facility. We commend
the EU for its commitment through the EU training
mission in Mali to train the Malian defence and
security forces, with an emphasis on civilian oversight,
the protection of civilians and respect for human rights.
And we welcome the EU’s efforts, in coordination with
the United Nations, the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States and other partners,
to resolve Mali’s interrelated political and security
challenges through the Support and Follow-up Group
on the Situation in Mali.
In the wider region, the EU strategy for security
and development in the Sahel, which is focused on
capacity-building and countering violent extremism,
20

complements the United States regional approach,
including through the Trans-Sahara Counter-Terrorism
Partnership, to strengthen the capacity of Governments
across the Sahel to better address threats to peace and
security.
Finally, we strongly support the EU’s efforts to
promote and protect human rights, both in its bilateral
engagements and through the United Nations. The
United States shares the EU’s commitment to promoting
and protecting the fundamental human freedoms, such
as freedom of expression, combating gender-based
discrimination and violence, and promoting the rights
of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender individuals.
Respect for human rights is the cornerstone of stable
democratic societies and essential to regional and
international peace and security.
In closing, the United States reiterates its
commitment to working with the European Union in
support of United Nations principles and activities
in the maintenance of peace and security around the
world.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): At the outset, let me thank
Baroness Catherine Ashton, High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy of the European
Union, for her statement. Rwanda views positively these
regular interactions between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations, particularly the
European Union (EU) and, in my region, the African
Union (AU).
From the ashes of the Second World War,
Europeans decided to come together and establish an
economic and political union, which, five decades later,
has succeeded in establishing peace and security on the
continent, despite certain challenges such as Kosovo or
Cyprus. Here, I would like again to commend Baroness
Ashton for her role as mediator in bringing the Prime
Ministers of Kosovo and Serbia together in Brussels for
a fourth meeting on political dialogue.
Based on its experience in making and building
peace at home, the EU has been collaborating effectively
with the United Nations, supporting peace and security
outside the continent, particularly in Africa. In that
regard, the African Peace Facility is playing an
important role in equipping Africa with the necessary
tools and means to prevent conflict on the continent,
notably through capacity-building and support for an
early warning system.

13-23193

S/PV.6919

I would like to take this opportunity to commend
the action of the EU in Mali and in the Sahel. We have
welcomed the decision to establish an EU training
mission in Mali aimed at building the capacity of the
Malian forces and providing financial and logistical
support for the African-led International Support
Mission in Mali (AFISMA). Similarly, I commend the
EU for its continuing engagement in Somalia and the
Horn of Africa, particularly by supporting the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
In peacekeeping operations, Rwanda values the
triangular cooperation of the AU, the EU and the
United Nations. Support by the EU, mainly in the
form of capacity-building, planning and financial
support, has provided robustness to peacekeeping in
Africa, particularly the AU-led missions AFISMA
and AMISOM. Most of the time, support has been ad
hoc, fragmented and sometimes politicized. There is,
therefore, a need for a more coordinated, coherent,
predictable and sustained United Nations and EU
support to AU with a view to assisting the AU to resolve
its structural and capacity challenges.
In conflict and post-conflict situations, the
European Union has consistently advocated for the rule
of law; protection of civilians, particularly for women
and children; responsibility to protect human rights;
and accountability. We share all those principles, as
they are universal values that should guide each of us.
In order better to achieve those goals, however, it is
important that the EU and other partners give priority
to peace and political dialogue, while strengthening the
capacity of national jurisdictions. International justice
and universal jurisdictions, when used genuinely, are
important as means to end impunity for the most serious
crimes. They should, however, be the last resort.
I conclude by once again commending the EU for
its effective and important collaboration with both
the United Nations and the AU in peace and security.
We look forward to sustained and strengthened
collaboration.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the Republic of Korea.
It is a great pleasure for me to welcome Baroness
Ashton to the Security Council.
The Republic of Korea highly appreciates the
positive contributions that the European Union
(EU) has made to the work of the Security Council,
with its expertise in the areas of conflict prevention,
13-23193

crisis management, peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
and respect for human rights. Given the scope of the
challenges we face today, such effective cooperation
between the two Organizations is of utmost importance
in managing crises across the world.
In that regard, we welcome the active role played
by the European Union in maintaining international
peace and security in its region and beyond, from the
Balkans and the Caucasus to the Middle East, North
Africa and Asia. Above all, we applaud the EU’s
increased role in promoting political dialogue and
peaceful reconciliation.
Particularly worthy of note is the ongoing
EU-facilitated dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade.
We welcome that the presidents of Kosovo and Serbia
have held their first meeting, mediated by Baroness
Ashton. We believe that that first highest-level meeting
is itself a meaningful step towards the normalization of
bilateral relations, and we encourage the EU to continue
its efforts in that regard.
The EU has also made great efforts towards
resolving issues relating to the proliferation of sensitive
nuclear activities on the part of the Islamic Republic
of Iran. Those efforts have included the EU sanctions
regime and the dialogue with Iran within the framework
of E3+3 Governments negotiations. We hope that the
EU’s efforts will bear fruit in the near future.
The Republic of Korea appreciates the firm position
that the European Union has consistently demonstrated
regarding North Korea’s nuclear programme. North
Korea’s recent third nuclear test — the two previous
tests were in 2006 and 2009 — constitutes a clear
and blatant violation of relevant Security Council
resolutions and other international norms. We are quite
confident that the Security Council, along with the
international community, remains united in resolutely
reacting and taking firm measures. Sharing a strong
sense of solidarity in that regard, we look forward to
the EU’s continuing role in presenting the position of
the international community towards the North Korean
nuclear weapons development programme.
The Israeli-Palestinian issue is another important
agenda item. The Israeli general election will soon
result in the formation of a new Government. Fatah and
Hamas are once again moving towards reconciliation.
At this juncture, my delegation is of the view that now
is the right time for the parties to reinvigorate the peace
process by taking a new initiative.

21

S/PV.6919

As Baroness Ashton highlighted, the deadly
clashes in the Syrian Arab Republic demand our
constant attention. In Syria the death toll is still rising,
and the number of people in need of external assistance
is increasing every minute. Although recently the
possibility of negotiations has been cautiously
suggested by actors in Syria, the positions of each
side still seem far apart. Both the United Nations and
the EU have critical stakes in resolving the crisis in
Syria and in preventing the situation from spreading
into a regional conflict. Despite internal disagreement,
the Security Council will continue its sincere efforts
to forge common ground with a view to making an
appropriate response.
Another situation of special interest to the Republic
of Korea is that of Mali. We value the contribution of the
EU in addressing the crisis in Mali in close cooperation
with the United Nations and other regional partners. In
that regard, we welcome that the EU, together with the
United Nations, the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States, convened a
ministerial meeting of the Support and Follow-up Group
on the Situation of Mali on 5 February in Brussels. The
EU’s financial support for the rapid deployment of the
African-led International Support Mission in Mali and
the economic development of Mali demonstrates its
commitment to support the people of Mali on their path
back to freedom and development. We also commend
the EU’s initiative to share its military expertise by
deploying a military training mission for the Malian
forces in the coming days.
We also appreciate the crucial role that the EU is
playing in maintaining and strengthening peace and
stability in Somalia in cooperation with the United
Nations.

22

Before concluding, the Republic of Korea would like
to applaud the EU’s positive contribution in addressing
global threats and challenges and sincerely hopes that
it will further strengthen its close partnership with
the Security Council, thereby making a substantial
contribution to international peace and security.
I now resume my function as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to Baroness Ashton to respond
to the comments.
Baroness Ashton: Thank you, Mr. President. I will
be very brief.
I just want to say again what a privilege it is to be
here at the Security Council and to have had not only
an opportunity to describe some of the pressing issues
and how the European Union is responding to them,
but also the pleasure of listening to members of the
Council, both in a complimentary manner, for which I
thank them, and in our common cause of trying to find
the right solutions.
I end by simply repeating what I said in my
remarks — that we will remain a steadfast partner of
the United Nations. We will continue to work with
the United Nations, as well as other organizations, in
the pursuit of conflict prevention and resolution for a
peaceful and more secure world.
The President: There are no more speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

13-23193
