S/2018/677

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 July 2018
Original: English

Implementation of resolution 2367 (2017)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2367
(2017), in which the Secretary-General was requested to report every three months
on progress made towards fulfilling the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). The report covers key developments relating to Iraq and
provides an update on the activities of the United Nations in Iraq since my previous
report, dated 17 April (S/2018/359), and the briefing of my Special Representative
for Iraq and Head of UNAMI to the Security Council on 30 May, until 21 June 2018.

II. Summary of key political developments
A.

Political situation
2.
On 12 May, Iraq concluded its first elections following the defeat of Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and its fourth under the Constitution of 2005. On
election day, 52,483 polling stations opened, including more than 3,000 dedicated to
internally displaced persons. In addition, advanced special voting for the security
forces took place on 10 May, while out-of-country voting was held on 10 and 11 May.
Based on field reports gathered by the Independent High Electoral Commissio n, most
polling stations opened on time, although delays were encountered at several owing
to challenges with new technology for voter verification and vote counting and
sorting. A total of 449 polling stations — 370 in Anbar Governorate and 79 in Kirkuk
Governorate — did not open at all, while 262 polling stations in 12 governorates had
to use alternative scanning devices because of a malfunction of the new technology.
3.
Although, prior to the elections, Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani had emphasized
that participation in the elections was the right of every eligible citizen, he left it to
every individual to choose whether to participate. As concerns over low voter turnout
arose during election day, the Prime Minister, Haider Al Abadi, decided in the
afternoon to order the lifting of movement restrictions that had been put in place for
security reasons. In an additional effort to boost participation in the last hours of the
polls, political and religious leaders publicly urged Iraqis to vote. After the ele ctions,
the Independent High Electoral Commission announced a turnout of 44.52 per cent
(10.8 million of a total 24.3 million eligible voters). This figure includes 9 million

18-10702 (E)

120718

*1810702*

S/2018/677

votes cast on 12 May itself, 1 million on 10 May (special voting for security for ces
and prisoners) and 179,000 out-of-country votes.
4.
Immediately following the closure of the polls, several senior officials and
political party representatives issued public statements on the electoral process. The
President, Fuad Masum, expressed satisfaction with the organization of the process
and the professionalism of polling staff. The Prime Minister praised the performances
of the Independent High Electoral Commission and the security forces during an
“historic day”, providing security and enabling voters to cast their votes. One of the
three Vice-Presidents, Nouri al-Maliki, thanked the Commission for its efforts and
the political parties for their adherence to the United Nations -facilitated Electoral
Charter of Honour, in which parties had been called upon to conduct the elections
freely, fairly, impartially, transparently and credibly. In addition, cleric Muqtada
al-Sadr congratulated the Iraqi people on a “successful democratic day”. However,
one of the three Vice-Presidents, Ayad Allawi, and the Speaker, Salim al-Jubouri,
expressed concerns about technical shortfalls, calling upon the relevant authorities to
address them diligently and neutrally, while another of the three Vice -Presidents,
Osama al-Nujaifi, commented on problems encountered with voting devices and
reports of intimidation and fraud.
5.
The international community congratulated Iraq on the parliamentary elections.
Notably, on 13 May, the Secretary of State of the United States of America, Mike
Pompeo, congratulated the Iraqi people and pledged that the United States would
stand ready to partner with the new Government to “continue to build a long-term
relationship of cooperation and friendship … to contribute to stability in the region
and growing peace and prosperity in Iraq”. On the same day, the Minister of State for
the Middle East of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Alistair
Burt, congratulated the Iraqi people, security forces and electoral authorities on the
peaceful conduct of the elections. He stated that his Government looked forward to
working with the new Government to “help deliver stability, security and prosperity
for all Iraqis”. On 14 May, the Islamic Republic of Iran congratulated the nation and
Government of Iraq on holding successful elections in a secure environment, which
it deemed a continuation of the country’s victory against terrorism. It highlighted the
intention of the Islamic Republic of Iran to further cement friendly relations between
the two countries. On the same day, the Secretary-General of the League of Arab
States, Ahmed Aboul Gheit, congratulated the Government and people of Iraq on
holding successful parliamentary elections. On 15 May, the Emir of Kuwait, Sheikh
Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, congratulated the President and the Prime
Minister of Iraq on the success of the elections.
6.
On 19 May, the Independent High Electoral Commission released provisional
election results. Of 329 parliamentary seats, the Sa ’iron Alliance won 54 seats, the
Conquest Alliance 47 seats, the Victory Alliance 42 seats, the State of Law coalition
25 seats, the Kurdistan Democratic Party 25 seats, the Wataniya coalition 21 seats,
the National Wisdom Movement 19 seats, the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan 18 seats
and the Iraqi Decision Alliance 14 seats. Nine seats reserved for minority components
were also allocated: five seats for Christians and one each for Yazidis, Shabaks,
Sabean Mandaeans and Faili Kurds. In line with the constitutional requirement for
female parliamentary representation, women candidates gained 84 seats, or 25.5 per
cent of the total.
7.
The release of the provisional results triggered the start of the formal complaint
and adjudication process. The Independent High Electoral Commission received
1,438 complaints, including 27 pertaining to out-of-country voting and 139 on special
voting. The Commission identified 33 complaints for full investigation, following
which it decided to cancel the results from 768 polling stations in Anbar, Baghdad,
Dahuk, Diyala, Erbil, Ninawa, Salah al-Din and Sulaymaniyah Governorates. An
2/15

18-10702

S/2018/677

appeal process against the Commission’s decisions was concluded on 31 May. The
Commission recorded 1,882 appeals, which were subsequently referred to the
Electoral Judicial Panel, convened to adjudicate all appe als prior to the certification
of the results by the Federal Supreme Court.
8.
Turkmen- and Arab-led parties in Kirkuk Governorate contested the results
there, alleging tampering with electronic vote-counting devices. Demonstrations and
sit-ins were organized in and around the city of Kirkuk, notably surrounding the
warehouse of the Independent High Electoral Commission, with hundreds of
protestors demanding a recount. In Anbar Governorate, the Wataniya coalition and
the Iraqi Decision Alliance demanded the annulment of conditional votes by
internally displaced persons owing to alleged fraud. In the Kurdistan Region, on
13 May, the Movement for Change, the Kurdistan Islamic Union, the Kurdistan
Islamic Group, the Kurdistan Communist Party, the New Generation Movement and
the Alliance for Democracy and Justice jointly announced their rejection of the results
and requested a repeat of the elections in the Kurdistan Region and the disputed areas,
calling upon the Commission to investigate allegations of fraud.
9.
Several political parties and candidates also challenged the election results
directly through the Council of Representatives (the parliament), outside the legal
complaint process. Following a request submitted by 81 parliamentarians, the Speaker
convened a special session on 19 May to discuss alleged voting irregularities, which
were attributed to the performance of the Independent High Electoral Commission
staff and the malfunctioning of electronic devices. On 28 May, the Council adopted a
decision calling for a manual recount of at least 10 per cent of all ballot boxes, noting
that a full manual recount might be needed if significant deviation from the earlier
results were found. The Council further called for the annulment of out -of-country
voting results and the voting results of internally displaced persons in all governorates
except Ninawa and Anbar Governorates.
10. The President met the Vice-Presidents on 29 May to discuss the decision of the
Council of Representatives, subsequently issuing a statement in which all parties were
called upon to follow the correct legal procedures with regard to complaints and
appeals. The following day, he wrote to the Federal Supreme Court, asking it to issue
an opinion on the constitutionality of the Council’s decision. He subsequently issued
a statement saying that the Council had no authority to demand a total or partial
annulment of election results.
11. During an extraordinary meeting on 24 May, the Council of Ministers decided
to form an investigative committee, chaired by the director of the Federal Board of
Supreme Audit, to view all documents pertaining to the electoral process and submit
recommendations to the Supreme Judicial Council, the Federal Supreme Court and
the Electoral Judicial Panel. On 5 June, the Council of Ministers approved the report
of the investigative committee, in which the committee recommended the manual
sorting and recounting of votes in no less than 5 per cent of all polling stations in
order to verify and cross-check results and the annulment of out-of-country voting
results and some of the results from the polling stations for internally displaced
persons in Anbar and Ninawa Governorates. The committee also recommended the
prosecution of those involved in electoral violations. It further recommended that
electronic counting and sorting devices not be used in future electoral processes and
that the Independent High Electoral Commission Law be amended to ensure that
future electoral processes would be overseen and managed by judges.
12. On 6 June, the Council of Representatives adopted an amendment to the Council
of Representatives Elections Law, requiring the Independent High El ectoral
Commission to perform a full manual ballot recount under the supervision of judges
appointed by the Supreme Judicial Council and in the presence of representatives of
18-10702

3/15

S/2018/677

political parties and temporarily suspending the work of the current Board of
Commissioners. The amendment annuls the results of out-of-country voting and
special (i.e. security forces and prisoners) voting in the Kurdistan Region, as well as
the results of the voting by internally displaced persons in Anbar, Salah al -Din,
Ninawa and Diyala Governorates.
13. On 10 June, the Supreme Judicial Council announced that nine judges had been
nominated to replace the Board of Commissioners until the recount process was
completed, together with the 19 judges who would replace the directors gener al of the
governorate electoral offices. The work of the Electoral Judicial Panel relating to the
appeals and complaints was suspended pending the completion of the recount process
and the submission of new appeals.
14. On the same day, a fire damaged the warehouses of the Independent High
Electoral Commission in the Rusafah area of Baghdad, which contained the electronic
vote tabulation devices and voter verification kits used in the parliamentary elections.
An investigative committee established by the Ministry of the Interior subsequently
stated that the fire had been set deliberately, adding that four suspects had been
arrested.
15. On 13 June, the Federal Supreme Court announced that it had decided not to
rule on the five petitions requesting the suspension of the implementation of the
amended law, stating that it could not issue a ruling before a final judgment had been
made on the constitutionality of the amendment. On 21 June, the Court ruled on the
constitutionality of the amended law, stating that it was in line with the Constitution,
but that the provision to annul the results of out-of-country voting and special voting
by the security forces in the Kurdistan Region, as well as the results of the conditional
voting by prisoners and internally displaced persons in Anbar, Salah al-Din, Ninawa
and Diyala Governorates, contradicted the Constitution and denied the rights of
voters.

B.

Relations between Baghdad and Erbil
16. Discussions between the federal Government and the Kurdistan Regional
Government over outstanding issues, including oil and gas management and revenue,
the disputed internal boundaries and the status of Kirkuk Governorate, paused during
the campaigning and post-election periods. On 22 May, two separate delegations
representing the Kurdistan Democratic Party and the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan
arrived in Baghdad to discuss the formation of the next federal Government with other
Iraqi leaders. The delegations held separate meetings with the Prime Minister, the
Vice-President (Mr. al-Maliki) and party leaders Muqtada al-Sadr, Hadi al-Amiri and
Ammar al-Hakim. The following day, 23 May, the President convened a meeting with
both delegations to discuss government formation. Also on 22 May, the head of the
New Generation Movement, Shaswar Abdulwahid Qadir, travelled to Baghdad where
he met Muqtada al-Sadr to discuss a non-sectarian-based political agenda. The Chair
of the Alliance for Democracy and Justice, Barham Salih, visited Baghdad on 5 June
to meet the Prime Minister, the Vice-President (Mr. Allawi) and Mr. al-Amiri to
discuss the government formation process.
17. Disagreements among the main parties in the Kurdistan Region became more
pronounced following the announcement of the provisional election results.
Following calls by the Movement for Change, the New Generation Movement, the
Kurdistan Islamic Union, the Kurdistan Islamic Group, the Kurdistan Communist
Party and the Alliance for Democracy and Justice for the annulment of results and a
rerun of the elections, on 16 May the Prime Minister of the Kurdistan Regional
Government, Nechirvan Barzani, publicly underlined the importance of Kurdish unity

4/15

18-10702

S/2018/677

in the post-election period, while also calling upon the Independent High Electoral
Commission to investigate the allegations. The Patriotic Union of Kurdistan also
called for a united Iraqi Kurdish position in the talks on the formation of the new
federal Government.
18. On 7 May, in a letter to the Kurdistan Regional Parliament, the Prime Minister
of the Kurdistan Regional Government proposed that the regional parliamentary
elections be held on 30 September. He subsequently clarified that the Kurdistan
Democratic Party was ready to hold both parliamentary and presidential elections
simultaneously, in line with the Kurdistan Region Presidency Law of 2005. The status
of the Kurdistan Region presidential role has remained unclear following the
resignation of the President of the Kurdistan Regional Government, Masoud Barzani,
in October 2017. In the light of the concerns raised in the Kurdi stan Region over the
conduct of the elections to the Council of Representatives, the Kurdistan Independent
High Electoral and Referendum Commission unanimously decided on 24 May to
employ manual vote counting for the regional elections.
19. On 6 May, the Federal Supreme Court announced that it had, upon the request
of the Kurdistan Regional Government, postponed its hearing on the legality of the
independent oil exports by the Ministry of Natural Resources of the Kurdistan Region
until 3 June. On 3 June, the Court announced that the hearing had been postponed.

C.

Security
20. The Iraqi security forces have continued operations to clear ISIL remnants in
Anbar Governorate and in the Tall Afar, Ba‘aj and Sinjar districts of Ninawa
Governorate. Nevertheless, asymmetric attacks have continued in Ninawa, Salah
al-Din, Kirkuk, Anbar, Diyala and Baghdad Governorates, with ISIL targeting
security forces and community leaders and also destroying farms and residential
buildings. On 16 May, an ISIL suicide bomber detonated his explosive vest during a
funeral in the Tarmiyah area of Baghdad Governorate, killing at least 7 civilians and
wounding 25 others. According to an official report, the suicide bomber was a 9 -yearold boy. The group also claimed responsibility for a suicide attack on 23 May in which
13 people were killed and 25 wounded in Saqlawiyah Park in Baghdad. On 8 June,
an explosion in the city of Kirkuk reportedly killed 2 people and wounded 14 others.
21. Although ISIL released a statement on 22 April in which it expressed intent to
disrupt the elections, the vote was conducted without major security incidents. After
the closing of the polls, the Prime Minister and the Minister of the Interior, Qasim
al-Araji, thanked the security forces for successfully securing the elections. A total of
55 security incidents were recorded on election day, 35 of which were perceived as
having a direct connection to the election. These included the detonation of
improvised explosive devices, attacks on polling stations by mortars or rockets, and
small arms fire and clashes between the Iraqi security forces with unknown gunmen.
Three civilians were killed and five civilians and three police officers were wounded
in the incidents. The most significant incidents occurred in Diyala, Kirkuk and Salah
al-Din Governorates, including the shelling of three polling stations by ISIL fighters
in Abu Sayda in Diyala Governorate, wounding four civilians. Sporadic violence
continued across the country after the elections. On 25 May, the Ira qi Communist
Party office in the Karradah neighbourhood of Baghdad was attacked by unidentified
assailants with two explosive devices, causing no casualties.
22. In the late evening of 6 June, an illegal ammunition storage facility in a densely
populated neighbourhood of Sadr City in Baghdad exploded, with reports suggesting
that 10 people had been killed and 19 wounded. The Prime Minister instructed the
Ministry of the Interior to investigate the incident, recalling an executive order of

18-10702

5/15

S/2018/677

2017 instructing the security forces to confiscate weapons and ammunition stored by
entities other than the security forces. Muqtada al-Sadr announced the formation of a
separate committee to investigate the incident, which some had attributed to a Sadr affiliated armed group.
23. The General Staff of the Armed Forces of Turkey announced that Turkey was
continuing to conduct military operations on Kurdistan Workers ’ Party targets near
the Iraqi-Turkish border in northern Iraq, including between 17 and 25 May and
between 1 and 16 June. In May and June, Turkey also carried out limited ground
operations in the Hakurk area in northern Erbil Governorate. On 3 June,
representatives of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, the Movement for Change and
several other Kurdish political parties issued a statement protesting against the
reported Turkish military operations in the Sidakan subdistrict of Erbil Governorate.
They called upon the regional and federal Governments to “prevent further Turkish
incursions”. On 5 June, during his weekly press conference, the Prime Minister of
Iraq confirmed that there was a modest Turkish military presence in northern Iraq and
called upon Turkey to respect the sovereignty of Iraq. On 12 June, he confirmed that
Iraq was closely following reports of Turkish military operations near the Qandil
Mountains.
24. On 16 May, the Prime Minister confirmed that the Iraqi Air Force had carried
out air strikes against ISIL targets in the Syrian Arab Republic, in coordination with
the Government of that country. On 30 May, he announced that it had carried out
another air strike against an ISIL target in the Syrian Arab Republic, emphasizing that
his country’s focus was on eliminating terrorism on the Iraqi-Syrian border and that
it did not seek to interfere in the internal affairs of the Syrian Arab Republic.
25. On 18 June, the Popular Mobilization Commission stated that on 17 June an air
strike against units of popular mobilization forces on the Syrian side of the border
area with Iraq had resulted in numerous casualties. The Commission called upon the
United States to clarify the incident. The same day, the Iraqi Joint Operations
Command issued a statement in which it indicated that no members of the Iraqi
security forces, including popular mobilization forces fighters, had been hit by any
air strike. The Joint Operations Command noted that, while “units operating inside
Syria” were not part of the Iraqi security forces, an investigation into which “entities”
were responsible for the loss of lives of “Iraqi youth” would be opened. The
international counter-ISIL coalition issued a statement that it was aware of reports of
a strike near Albu Kamal that had killed and wounded several members of an
unidentified force on 17 June and that there were no strikes by United States o r
coalition forces in that area at the time in question. The next day, the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of Iraq issued a statement in which it rejected and condemned the air
operations targeting forces present in “the areas of fighting ISIL”, whether in Iraq,
the Syrian Arab Republic or elsewhere. The Ministry also underlined the importance
of permanent and careful coordination between the international counter-ISIL
coalition and the forces facing the terrorist organizations on the ground.

D.

Regional and international developments
26. On 15 May, the Iraqi Council of Representatives approved a cooperation
agreement between the Governments of Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic. On
29 May, Muqtada al-Sadr travelled to Kuwait, where he was received by the Emir.
27. Following the elections, the Speaker met the United States Special Presidential
Envoy for the Global Coalition to Defeat ISIS, Brett McGurk, on 13 May to discuss
political and security developments in Iraq and in the region. Mr. McGurk then
travelled to Erbil to meet the Prime Minister of the Kurdistan Region. Key political

6/15

18-10702

S/2018/677

players also continued to meet representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran and
Turkey and other regional and international partners to discuss the elections and the
formation of a new Government. On 17 May, the Prime Minister discussed in a
telephone call with his Turkish counterpart, Binali Yıldırım, the deepening of bilateral
ties between Iraq and Turkey and regional cooperation. The latter stressed the interest
of Turkey in the stability of Iraq and the prosperity of its people.
28. On 3 June, the Minister of Water Resources, Muhsin al-Shammari, presented a
report to the Council of Representatives recommending that the Government of
Turkey be requested to delay the filling of the Ilısu dam on the Tigris River upstream
of Iraq, which is suffering from severe water shortages. The previous day, the Vice President (Mr. al-Maliki) had called upon the Government of Turkey to work together
closely with Iraq on the issue. On 4 June, the Deputy Speaker, Humam Hamoudi,
announced that the Council would request the Grand National Assembly of Turkey to
postpone the filling of the reservoir by three months. On 6 June, the Prime Minister
confirmed that dialogue with Turkey was ongoing, e mphasizing that sufficient
drinking water would remain available. On 7 June, the Ambassador of Turkey to Iraq,
Fatih Yıldız, announced at a press conference in Baghdad that his Government had
agreed to delay the filling of the dam until 1 July, in consider ation of the needs of
Iraq.

III. Update on the activities of the Mission and the United Nations
country team
A.

Political activities
29. My Special Representative for Iraq and Deputy Special Representative for
Political Affairs and Electoral Assistance continued to engage with the Independent
High Electoral Commission, representatives of political parties, government officials,
parliamentarians, women’s groups, civil society and religious and community leaders.
On election day, my Special Representative and my Deputy Special Representatives
for Political Affairs and Electoral Assistance and for Humanitarian Affairs visited
polling stations in Fallujah, Kirkuk and Erbil, including camps for internally
displaced persons and other communities, to see how the electoral process unfolded.
In my statement on 13 May, I congratulated the people of Iraq on the holding of
parliamentary elections and saluted the tireless efforts of electoral officials, party
agents and the security forces in making the elections largely peaceful and orderly.
30. Following the elections, several political leaders and political parties, notably
in Erbil, Kirkuk and Sulaymaniyah Governorates, raised concerns with UNAMI over
alleged electoral fraud. My Special Representative called upon the Independent High
Electoral Commission to act expeditiously and seriously to address all complaints,
including, if necessary, to consider conducting a partial manual recount in selected
locations, notably in Kirkuk Governorate. He called for such me asures to be taken in
full transparency and to be witnessed by stakeholders, to strengthen confidence in the
process. He urged the Commission to continue to safeguard the integrity of all
electoral materials and equipment and to cooperate fully with and ab ide by the
decisions of the Electoral Judicial Panel. Meanwhile, political actors and their
supporters were urged to uphold the peace while electoral appeals were being
adjudicated through the established legal channels.
31. On 11 and 12 June, respectively, my Special Representative and Deputy Special
Representative for Political Affairs and Electoral Assistance met the President of the
Supreme Judicial Council, Faiq Zaidan, and the nine judges appointed to perform the
functions of the Independent High Electoral Commission to discuss preparations for

18-10702

7/15

S/2018/677

the recount as provided by the amendment to the Council of Representatives Elections
Law of 6 June. All interlocutors emphasized the necessity of robust United Nations
support in the recount process.
32. Within the framework of the United Nations-mediated Electoral Charter of
Honour, my Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs and Electoral
Assistance continued to hold meetings with political parties and key political figures
in Baghdad and Erbil, in the presence of representatives of the Independent High
Electoral Commission and the electoral security unit of the Ministry of the Interior,
to discuss concerns over the conduct of the elections. My Special Representative and
Deputy Special Representative underlined the readiness of the United Nations to
provide electoral advice and expertise in support of any activities and measures
required to retain confidence in the electoral process.
33. As part of the post-election phase, my Special Representative and Deputy
Special Representative for Political Affairs and Electoral Assistance also met
numerous political leaders and actors, including women and minorities. They urged
their interlocutors to prioritize inclusive, non-sectarian dialogue and to ensure the
swift formation of a new, representative, national Government that reflected the will
of the people, based on the principles of patriotism and citizenship with equal rights.
They urged political leaders to ensure the full participation of women in the forma tion
of the next Government, and their representation at the highest levels in political and
decision-making structures. As part of UNAMI advocacy efforts to promote the
effective participation and representation of women in political and decision -making
processes, my Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs and Electoral
Assistance launched the #WhyNot (#Shakobeha) campaign with short films
introducing successful women political activists, as well as men championing
women’s participation in political processes.
34. Although negotiations to promote the normalization of relations between the
federal Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government were largely suspended
over the electoral campaign period, UNAMI remained engaged with the main
stakeholders. A renewed partnership of dialogue with the new Government will be
required to address outstanding issues, including oil and gas management and
revenue, the disputed internal boundaries and the status of Kirkuk Governorate.
Meanwhile, UNAMI is carrying out a series of engagements with the younger
generation in the Kurdistan Region to foster mutual understanding and to seek
political views from communities at the grass-roots level.

B.

Electoral assistance
35. In the run-up to the parliamentary elections, and at the request of the
Independent High Electoral Commission, UNAMI and the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) provided additional electoral expertise and
resources. In addition to existing operational and management support, special ist staff
were deployed to cover issues including election results management, information
technology, database management, field coordination, electoral procedures and
training, observer coordination, public outreach and electoral complaints. UNAMI
supported the Commission in discussions with the two electoral technology suppliers
to address issues relating to the complementarity of the supplied devices and
witnessed five simulation exercises undertaken by the Commission and the vendors.
UNAMI also submitted written advisories to the Commission, including on the
participation of internally displaced persons, election technologies and expectation
management during the results announcement.

8/15

18-10702

S/2018/677

36. UNAMI facilitated the signature by some 30 parties of the Elector al Charter of
Honour and then convened a weekly follow-up committee in Baghdad, throughout
the electoral campaign and into the post-election period, to address campaigning
violations and ensure adherence to the Charter. The Charter served as a useful
convening mechanism for political parties to discuss the electoral process
collectively, with most of the political leaders calling upon their candidates to respect
its provisions. At the request of Kurdish political parties, UNAMI established a
similar charter and follow-up committee in Erbil for them.
37. On election day, UNAMI and the United Nations country team deployed
26 teams of electoral watchers who visited more than 200 polling locations, including
regular polling stations and stations for internally displaced persons in Baghdad,
Basrah, Kirkuk, Erbil, Dahuk and Sulaymaniyah Governorates. They provided
extensive and regular updates that were fed into the reporting of the ad hoc United
Nations reporting unit.

C.

Human rights and rule of law developments and activities
38. Armed conflict, terrorism and acts of violence continued to take a heavy toll on
civilians. Civilian casualties increased in May, compared with April, with 95 civilians
killed and 163 wounded, owing largely to two ISIL mass -casualty suicide bombings,
one carried out by a 9-year-old child and the other by a juvenile aged between 15 and
16 years. This was, nonetheless, a far lower number than in the same month in 2017.
In the first half of June, at least 31 civilians were killed and 92 wounded. Of these, 2
were killed and 50 wounded when improvised explosive devices detonated in civilian
populated areas in Kirkuk city centre and in Khalis district centre, in Diyala
Governorate. The overall trend since October 2017, of relatively low civ ilian
casualties, nevertheless continues, reflecting a reduction in hostilities between the
Iraqi security forces and ISIL.
39. The leading cause of civilian casualties remains the use by ISIL of improvised
explosive devices, a particular threat to civilians in Baghdad, Diyala, Ninawa, Kirkuk
and Anbar Governorates. Other tactics used by the terrorist group included targeting
first responders assisting victims, killings and abductions at fake checkpoints,
organized attacks on remote villages and the shelling of polling stations during the
elections.
40. On 3 June, the Department of Yazidi Affairs in the Ministry of Awqaf and
Religious Affairs of the Kurdistan Regional Government reported that, of the 6,417
Yazidis (3,548 female and 2,869 male) abducted by ISIL since August 2014, fewer
than half had been freed or escaped. On the same day, the Department also reported
that 3,117 Yazidis (1,452 female and 1,665 male) remained in ISIL captivity or were
missing.
41. Iraqi courts continued to issue death sentences for terrorism-related crimes. To
date in 2018, the Supreme Judicial Council has publicly announced the imposition of
41 death sentences for terrorism-related crimes, including against 24 women, 23 of
whom were foreigners (17 Turks, 3 Kyrgyz, 2 Azerbaijanis and 1 German). On
16 April, the Ministry of Justice announced that 13 executions had been carried out
in 2018, including 11 for terrorism-related crimes. The Government has not responded
to the request by UNAMI for information on terrorism-related indictments,
convictions and death penalty sentences and on where and when executions have been
carried out.
42. Bodies of civilians continued to be recovered from the rubble in Mosul. On
10 May, the Prime Minister ordered the establishment of a committee to recover the

18-10702

9/15

S/2018/677

bodies. The civilian defence corps informed UNAMI that 4,160 bodies had been
recovered to date.
43. Mass graves continued to be discovered in areas previously under ISIL control.
On 2 April, a mass grave containing 51 bodies of Iraqi security forces personnel was
discovered in Mosul. On 6 April, a mass grave containing 22 bodies of former security
personnel and Independent High Electoral Commission employees was also
discovered in Mosul. Both mass graves reportedly contain ISIL victims. Since June
2014, UNAMI has recorded the discovery of at least 124 mass graves, the majority of
which are believed to contain ISIL victims (as reported to UNAMI, from 6,379 to
12,878 victims). UNAMI also continued to advocate the appropriate protection of
mass graves in order to collect, secure and preserve evidence.
44. UNAMI continues its engagement on ISIL accountability. In preparatio n for the
deployment of an independent investigative team, pursuant to Security Council
resolution 2379 (2017), to support Iraqi efforts to hold the group accountable for its
crimes committed in Iraq, UNAMI supported a mission to meet relevant counterparts
and collect information in order to prepare for the establishment of the team on the
ground. On 31 May, I appointed Karim Khan as the Special Adviser and Head of the
Investigative Team.
45. The country task force on monitoring and reporting, co-chaired by UNAMI and
the United Nations Children’s Fund, verified five grave violations against children
resulting in the killing of 10 boys and the maiming of 3 boys. The country task force
is working towards finalizing an action plan with the Government to prevent and end
the recruitment and use of children. Progress is also being made on establishing a
group of friends of children and armed conflict, to enable the international community
in Iraq to better address related issues in the country.
46. Information on sexual violence remains difficult to obtain as a result of stigma
and fear of reprisals. Notwithstanding these difficulties, the Monitoring, Analysis and
Reporting Arrangements Technical Working Group on Conflict-related Sexual
Violence continued its efforts to analyse trends and patterns in relation to conflict related sexual violence with a view to enhancing responses, advocacy and
accountability. UNAMI continued to hold discussions with the Government on the
implementation of the joint communiqué on the prevention of and response to
conflict-related sexual violence of 2016, including in relation to accountability for
sexual violence crimes. The coordination team on Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) held a meeting in Baghdad on 9 May and another in Erbil on 15 and 16 May
and agreed on the pillars for the second national action plan on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and finalized the report on the first plan.
47. According to the Independent High Electoral Commission, 2,009 female
candidates participated in the parliamentary elections. During the campaign period,
posters of female candidates were vandalized and photographs allegedly showing
candidates wearing revealing clothing were posted online. Some female candidates
withdrew following threats and intimidation. My Special Representative issued a
statement to condemn the threats and encourage women to press ahead with their
campaigns.
48. On 21 May, following several months of advocacy efforts led by the United
Nations Population Fund, the Secretary-General of the Iraqi Council of Ministers,
Mahdi al-Allaq, approved a proposal to amend welfare legislation to introduce a
reference to shelter services for gender-based violence survivors, aimed at providing
a legal basis for establishing such shelters.
49. Between 1 and 3 May, a joint Office of Counter-Terrorism and CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate scoping mission visited Iraq to identify
10/15

18-10702

S/2018/677

needs and priorities in the areas of developing youth skills through technical and
vocational training institutes, to support efforts to prevent violent extremism, counter
the financing of terrorism, develop a comprehensive national counter-terrorism
strategy and counter terrorist narratives through strategic communications. The visit
was conducted as a follow-up to the consultations held between the heads of the
Office and the Directorate and the Iraqi authorities in early March. The scoping
mission participants held meetings with United Nations country team officials and
representatives of key government ministries and agencies, diplomatic missions and
relevant international organizations. The Office is now preparing project concept
notes for discussion with the Iraqi authorities, UNAMI and relevant United Nations
country team officials.

D.

Humanitarian assistance, stabilization and development
50. The humanitarian crisis in Iraq continues, despite a number of displaced families
returning to their communities. By the end of May, more than 3.8 million Iraqis had
returned to their area of origin, but more than 2.1 million remain displaced and require
humanitarian assistance. The returns process continues to be dynamic, as new and
secondary displacements are being recorded. Implementing partners of the 2018
Humanitarian Response Plan, aiming to provide emergency support to 3.4 million
highly vulnerable Iraqis, have reached up to 1 million (24 per cent) of those targeted
between January and March with some form of humanitarian assistance. However,
the Plan’s funding is still low: of the $569 million required, only $253 million (45 per
cent) in donor contributions had been received by June.
51. During the parliamentary elections, humanitarian partners advocated the right
to vote for all Iraqi citizens, including displaced persons and returnees. Accordingly,
the humanitarian community developed guidance documents in English and Arabic
for humanitarian workers who were fulfilling their regular duties, as well as best
practice recommendations, which were submitted to the Independent High Electoral
Commission through the UNAMI Electoral Assistance Office, aiming to ensure
respect for humanitarian principles. Nevertheless, more than 64 suspected election related protection incidents were recorded by the protection cluster, which were
subsequently submitted to the Commission for investigation. The continued presence
of armed actors in some camps across Iraq and reports of some attacks by them on
humanitarian personnel, as well as reports of sexual harassment of women and girls
with perceived ties to ISIL, detention and disappearance, recruitment activities inside
the camps, restrictions on freedom of movement and threats of forced return, remain
a grave concern.
52. The clearance of explosive hazards in Mosul and Fallujah continued. Several
suspected ISIL weapons and ammunition manufacturing facilities were also
discovered in the Khatuniyah neighbourhood of Mosul. During the reconstruction of
a bridge in Fallujah, two suspected explosive hazards were found, prompting the Mine
Action Service of the United Nations to deploy an improvised explosive device
disposal team, which removed the devices and allowed work to proceed. Some 18,742
explosive hazards have been removed from Mosul and Fallujah since the beginning
of 2018, reducing the threat to returning civilians and enabling the reconstruction of
infrastructure.
53. In response to the suspected explosive hazard contamination in Hawijah district,
the Mine Action Service established a presence in Kirkuk. As the local police are
particularly vulnerable to explosive hazard threats, an explosive hazard first
responder course was provided in Kirkuk Governorate in June to mitigate the risks of
explosive hazard accidents. A total of 87 police officers have been trained to date.
Following efforts by the Government of Iraq, the international community and the

18-10702

11/15

S/2018/677

Service, two additional non-governmental mine action organizations were registered
by the Government and will become operational once their accreditation is completed.
54. The UNDP Funding Facility for Stabilization continued to facilitate the return
of displaced persons, to lay the groundwork for reconstru ction and recovery and to
safeguard against the resurgence of violence and extremism. More than 2,400 projects
have been completed, are ongoing or are planned across liberated areas in Anbar,
Ninawa, Salah al-Din, Diyala and Kirkuk Governorates. The Mosul University
rehabilitation project reached an important milestone, with the opening of the
women’s education building, the science building and the women’s dormitories.
55. The reconstruction of two major bridges in Anbar Governorate — the Palestine
and Japanese highway bridges — has begun. Valued at $18 million, the project will
benefit the entire governorate, encourage the return of displaced persons and improve
trade and commerce, in particular between Iraq and Jordan. In Qa ’im, Rawah and
Anah, three towns in western Anbar Governorate liberated from ISIL in December
2017, the first stabilization projects have begun, including two electricity projects,
four water treatment plants and three rubble removal projects. Approximately
41 stabilization projects have been earmarked for the first phase, with another 109
awaiting the necessary funding.
56. Following the Kuwait International Conference for the Reconstruction of Iraq,
held in February, the Prime Minister launched a national development plan covering
the period 2018–2022 on 9 May, which includes priorities outlined in the Iraq
reconstruction and development framework for the period 2018–2027 and the poverty
reduction strategy for the period 2018–2022.
57. The United Nations system in Iraq began the process of developing a new United
Nations Development Assistance Framework, covering the period 2020–2024, to
align its interventions with the Government’s priorities, with a focus on implementing
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. In this connection, the road map has
been adopted by the United Nations country team and the regional Peer Support
Group; the data collection phase of the common country analysis has begun. In the
interim, before the implementation of the new Framework, the United Nations
country team will carry out its interventions through a short -term recovery and
resilience programme for Iraq.
58. On 17 May, my Deputy Special Representative for Development and
Humanitarian Affairs participated in the biweekly conference call between senio r
officers on reconstruction and development in Iraq. In the call, participants shared
updates on reforms and plans for engaging with the new Council of Representatives
on reconstruction, recovery and development and on private sector investment for the
country’s reconstruction. Participants exchanged views on the Iraq Reconstruction
and Development Financing Facility and also reiterated the importance of
establishing a Baghdad-level coordination mechanism for sharing information and
building consensus among partners on reconstruction, recovery and development
initiatives.
59. In line with the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals, in
particular Goal 2 on zero hunger, the World Food Programme undertook a zero hunger
strategic review to formulate policies, institutional changes and investments to
achieve the Goal. The review was conducted by representatives of relevant
government institutions, civil society organizations and the private sector, under the
leadership of the Secretary-General of the Council of Ministers. The results were
presented on 10 May in the presence of my Deputy Special Representative for
Development and Humanitarian Affairs. Improving safety-net instruments, enhancing
sustainable agricultural production, addressing poor nutr ition, increasing

12/15

18-10702

S/2018/677

employment, especially among young people and women, and reforming marketing,
trade and pricing policies were identified as priorities.
60. On 7 May, my Special Representative participated in the annual planning retreat
of the United Nations Inter-Agency Gender Task Force in Erbil. The Task Force aims
to promote women’s empowerment as set out in the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women and the Sustainable Development Goals. Participants developed the Task
Force’s strategic priorities for the period 2018–2019 and annual workplan. My
Special Representative highlighted the critical importance of promoting gender
equality and women’s empowerment and the need to continuously support victims of
ISIL and open more spaces for women in the political and economic domains.

E.

Security and operational issues
61. The United Nations in Iraq continued to implement robust security risk
mitigation measures, so as to provide an adequate level of safety and security for
programme delivery in a complex environment. There are 886 international and 1,798
national staff members operating from seven United Nations offices across the
country. Despite significant challenges, the United Nations continues to engage in
political, human rights, humanitarian and development activities in close coordination
with the Government. The Department of Safety and Security intensified monitoring
and reporting of security events and developments in the run-up to and during the
parliamentary elections.
62. Pursuant to my letter dated 17 May 2018 addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2018/479), UNAMI continues to take forward the
implementation of the recommendations of the independent, external assessment. The
Mission has strengthened its regular reporting on mandated implementation,
emphasizing its coordinated efforts with the United Nations country team in thematic
areas including reconciliation, elections and human rights. Joint planning and
reporting efforts have improved the use of thematic coordination mechanisms — such
as those on reconciliation, gender and strategic communication — and the operations
management team.
63. UNAMI is taking measures to identify areas within its structure for potential
efficiencies, in line with the recommendations of the assessment, to be presented as
appropriate to the relevant United Nations budgetary bodies. In this context, it is
preparing to conduct a review of the Integrated Coordination Office for Development
and Humanitarian Affairs, with UNDP and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs providing experts to participate in the assessment. The findings
of the assessment and the introduction of a national United Nations Volunteers
programme will be presented to the appropriate budgetary bodies.
64. The operations management team, currently chaired by UNDP, is leading and
coordinating efforts to submit the requisite documents to t he International Civil
Service Commission for a review of the rest and recuperation cycle in all duty stations
in Iraq.
65. The Department of Safety and Security will lead the second part of the
assessment of the security architecture in Iraq, which is scheduled to be conducted in
the third quarter of 2018. It will include further examination of facility perimeter
protection and access control measures in Baghdad, Erbil and Kirkuk.
66. As requested by the Security Council, my Special Representative present ed the
short-term and long-term priorities and objectives of UNAMI and the United Nations
country team during his briefing to the Council on 30 May and also clarified the

18-10702

13/15

S/2018/677

division of labour among United Nations entities. The priorities and objectives are
intended for further discussion with the Council and the Government, with the aim of
achieving alignment between the needs of the country and the activities and work of
the United Nations.
67. On 14 June, the Security Council adopted resolution 2421 (2018), by which it
extended the mandate of UNAMI until 31 May 2019. The Mission is authorized, inter
alia, to prioritize the provision of advice, support and assistance to the Government
and people of Iraq on advancing inclusive, political dialogue and national and
community-level reconciliation and to further advise, support and assist the
Government and the Independent High Electoral Commission on the development
processes for holding elections and referendums. The Kurdistan regional
parliamentary elections are scheduled for 30 September 2018, while the nationwide
provincial council elections are to be held on 22 December 2018.

IV. Observations
68. The parliamentary elections constituted a significant milestone as the first since
the defeat of ISIL. I applaud the patriotism and determination of all those Iraqis who
participated, in particular those internally displaced persons who voted despite the
difficult conditions in some areas. I also applaud the commitment and vigilance of
the Iraqi security forces in ensuring a largely peaceful and orderly electoral process.
I commend the Independent High Electoral Commission on its efforts to conduct an
electoral process within the constitutional timeline, notwi thstanding the tight
deadlines and myriad organizational and technical challenges.
69. I congratulate the political parties and candidates for their participation in the
elections and their contribution to fostering democracy. I encourage them to be
magnanimous in electoral victory and gracious in defeat. The timely certification of
the election results will pave the way for the convening of the new parliament and the
formation of the next Government, in accordance with the Constitution. I urge
political parties to ensure that women robustly participate in the formation process
and are strongly represented in the new Government.
70. I note the concerns expressed by a number of parties regarding alleged electoral
fraud, in addition to the decision by the Council of Representatives to initiate a
manual recount of the ballots. The United Nations stands ready to scale up technical
assistance, if requested. Most importantly, I urge all political actors and their
supporters to uphold the peace and remain committed to resolving any electoral
disputes through established legal channels, as stipulated in the Electoral Charter of
Honour that they signed, witnessed by representatives of the United Nations, in the
presence of all other party representatives.
71. The low voter turnout in the parliamentary elections sends a clear message. I
urge Iraqi political leaders and representatives to draw the necessary conclusions as
to the need for improved representation, justice for all, democratic accountability and
good governance. I call upon the political establishment to ensure the swift formation
of a truly national Government that reflects the will and addresses the concerns of the
people.
72. I am encouraged by the level of communication between Baghdad and Erbil
during the government formation process and call upon both sides to maintain the
momentum and tackle other outstanding issues through dialogue. My Special
Representative and his colleagues in UNAMI stand ready to support and facilitate
discussions, if requested by both sides.

14/15

18-10702

S/2018/677

73. The Government continued to reach out to neighbouring countries and other
international partners to strengthen bilateral relations, combat terrorism and violent
extremism and advance mutual political, economic and security interests. I am
encouraged that more than 1,085 electoral observers from the region and other
countries came to assist in observing the elections. This is a clear indication of the
international community’s commitment to helping the Government and people of Iraq
to rebuild their nation. I strongly encourage a continued focus on stabilization and
reconstruction and call upon the international community to support Iraqi efforts to
ensure better governance and service delivery.
74. Even though civilian casualties in April were the lowest since UNAMI began
publicly reporting such casualties in Iraq in 2012, ISIL remnants continue to kill and
wound civilians in several governorates, including Anbar, Baghdad, Diyala, Kirkuk,
Ninawa and Salah al-Din. I encourage the Government to continue its efforts to
counter terrorism and violent extremism, in accordance with international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
75. Iraqi women and children with perceived ties to ISIL experience serious
protection concerns in camps, including denial of assistance, restrictions on freedom
of movement, sexual harassment, rape and sexual exploitation. I condemn in the
strongest terms all violations of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, including any form of sexual exploitation and abuse of displaced
persons and refugees. The United Nations will continue to raise awareness and
undertake capacity-building, reporting, referral and follow-up in relation to these
issues.
76. I strongly urge the Government to continue to ensure the conditions necessary
for the voluntary, safe and dignified return of the remaining displaced persons and to
redouble its efforts to respect the civilian and humanitarian character of camps, in
line with the Prime Minister’s directive. I also call upon Member States to provide
timely support to humanitarian response and stabilization efforts. In this critical
period, I urge Member States to provide the immediate humanitarian support required
by the displaced population, help with the stabilization of the liberated areas and
support projects aimed at returning resilience to the social fabric of such communities.
77. Lastly, I should like to welcome Marta Ruedas, who has taken up her functions
as my Deputy Special Representative for Development and Humanitarian Affairs and
Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator. I should also like to express my sincere
appreciation to my Special Representative, Ján Kubiš, and the staff of the United
Nations in Iraq for their unwavering and courageous effor ts to implement the
Organization’s mandate under challenging circumstances.

18-10702

15/15
