V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

ANNEX
Proposed disposition of the staff of the
United Nations Institute for Training and Research

I.
2.

Post
Executive Director (who will also serve as a Programme Officer)
Programme Officer (New York)

3.
4.
5.

Programme Officer (Geneva)
Administrative and Finance Officer
Three General Service staff

42/198.

Furthering international co-operation regarding the external debt problems

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 41/202 of 8 December 1986
on strengthened international economic co-operation
aimed at resolving external debt problems of developing
countries,
Recalling the Final Act adopted by the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development at its seventh session, held at Geneva from 9 July to 3 August 1987, 2
Recalling Trade and Development Board resolutions
16S (S-IX) of 11 March 197890 and 222 (XXI) of 27 September 198091 and the relevant recommendations of the
mid-term global review of progress towards the implementation of the Substantial New Programme of Action for
the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries,88
Concerned about the slowing down of the world
economy in the 1980s and the persistence of large imbalances, which was noted at the meetings of the Interim
Committee of the Board of Governors on the International Monetary System and the Joint Ministerial Committee of the Boards of Governors of the Bank and the
Fund on the Transfer of Real Resources to Developing
Countries in September 1987,
Recognizing that the continuing debt problems of developing countries have become a major obstacle that restricts their economic recovery and long-term development, thereby increasing the vulnerability of the
international financial system and adversely affecting the
ability of debtor countries to import and creditor countries
to export and thereby their growth and employment performance,
Deeply concerned at the increasing debt burden and the
deteriorating debt situation of African countries, which
impede the recovery and development of the continent
and the implementation of the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and
Development 1986-1990,60
Noting that there has been an evolving response from the
international community to the debt problem, which
recognizes the shared responsibility of the main parties
concerned, namely developing debtor countries, developed creditor countries, private and multilateral financial
institutions,
Profoundly concerned that, despite significant efforts by
developing countries to deal with the debt crisis, the
desired results have not yet been achieved and therefore
acknowledging the need for continued and evolving international co-operation, particularly to improve the interna90 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third Session,
Suffilement No. 15 (A/33/15), vol. 1, part two, annex I.
Ibid., Thirty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/35/15), vol. II,
annex 1.

167

tional economic environment, in order to attain a lasting
solution to the problems of indebtedness of developing
countries,
Welcoming the report of the Secretary-General on the
international debt situation in mid-1987, 92
1. Endorses the policies and measures agreed upon and
spelt out in section II.A of the Final Act adopted by the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development at
its seventh session,2 entitled "Resources for development,
including financial and related monetary questions";
2. Expresses concern that external debt problems can
pose a threat to economic, social and political stability in
indebted countries;
3. Stresses that debtor developing countries, creditor
developed countries and international private and multilateral financial institutions should strengthen work on
an evolving and growth- and development-oriented
strategy, through continuous dialogue and shared responsibility, in order to attain a durable, equitable and mutually agreed solution to debt problems;
4. Reiterates that specific measures to deal with the indebtedness of developing countries should pay particular
regard to the relevant factors of the debt-servicing
capacity of each individual country;
5. Also reiterates that, in the present circumstances,
adjustment efforts are needed on the part of all countries,
collectively and individually, each country contributing to
the common objective in accordance with its capacities
and weight in the world economy;
6. Reiterates that it is essential for the international
economic environment to be made more stable and predictable in support of growth through efforts by the major
market economy countries, including strengthened multilateral surveillance, aimed at correcting existing external
and fiscal imbalances, promoting non-inflationary sustainable growth, lowering real rates of interest and making exchange rates more stable and markets more accessible;
7. Further reiterates that it is essential for debtor developing countries to pursue and intensify their efforts to increase savings and investment, reduce inflation and improve efficiency, taking into account their own individual
characteristics and the vulnerability of the poorer strata;
8. Reiterates that it is essential that external financing
from official and private sources be increased on appropriate terms and conditions in support of these efforts;
9. Recognizes the competence of multilateral financial
institutions and the need for providing them with the adequate resources and instruments necessary, inter alia, to
strengthen their contribution to attaining a durable, equitable and mutually agreed solution to the debt problems
and, in this context, takes note with interest of:
(a) The agreement on a substantial general capital increase for the World Bank;
(b) The initiative by the Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund to increase substantially the
resources of the Structural Adjustment Facility;
(c) The work towards an increase of quotas in the context of the Ninth General Review of Quotas in the International Monetary Fund;
(d) The proposal to enlarge the scope of the Compensatory Financing Facility by the creation of a new external
contingency facility;

92 A/42/523.

168

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

(e) The ongoing examination of adjustment programmes and their supportive arrangements, including a
comprehensive review of conditionality in the International Monetary Fund;
I0. Stresses that increased flexibility should be applied
by the parties concerned in the development of innovative
approaches to reduce the debt burden of developing countries, including, as appropriate, the identification of possible regulatory impediments, and that measures such as the
introduction of various forms of new financial instruments
and of formulas that do not add to the stock of debt, including those devised by banks and debtors to take advantage of discounts prevailing in the secondary market,
should be further pursued, and emphasizes that banks
should be encouraged to co-operate flexibly with debtor
countries according to individual circumstances to
achieve this end;
11. Calls upon the international community to continue its efforts, in the context of official debt restructuring
exercises, to take appropriate and realistic measures to
reduce the burden of official debt, adapted to the specific
needs and circumstances of individual countries, inter
alia, so as to allow an adequate planning horizon and longterm adjustment; consideration should be given to unforeseen changes in a country's external payments;
12. Urges the international community to give serious
consideration to mutually agreed ways and means of assisting debtor developing countries faced with large and
bunched debts to the multilateral financial institutions,
taking into account the need for increased capital flows on
terms adapted to their payment situation and the specific
economic circumstances of individual countries;
13. Calls upon the international community to intensify its efforts to provide the necessary resource flows to
African countries, including increasing official development assistance in support of their reform efforts, and to
continue its efforts to grant adequate terms of rescheduling and other effective debt relief measures, as appropriate, to alleviate the debt burden;
14. Stresses that urgent specific actions in respect of
the indebtedness of the least developed and poorest developing countries are required, as contained in the relevant
provisions of the Final Act adopted by the the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development at its seventh
session, including substantial increases of concessional finance, essentially in grant form;
15. Recognizes that the problems of external indebtedness of some other countries with serious debt-servicing
problems also give rise to concern, and invites all those involved to take into account, as appropriate, the above in
addressing these problems;
16. Stresses the importance of the expansion of world
trade and the promotion of a climate conducive to the
strengthening of an open and liberalized trading system,
including, in particular, the improvement of market access
for developing countries' exports, and, in this context,
stresses the importance of ensuring effective observance of
standstill and rollback commitments and the importance
of promoting improved commodity markets;
17. Requests the Secretary-General, in preparing the
agenda for the next session of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, to propose that due priority be given
to the consideration of the issue of the external debt crisis
and development in the Committee's discussions of the international economic situation;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to consult with the
relevant bodies and eminent personalities to prepare a
comprehensive report on the international debt situation,

reviewing also ways and means of advancing the efforts
towards finding a durable, equitable and mutually agreed
solution to the debt problems of developing countries in
the light of the relevant provisions of the Final Act
adopted by the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development at its seventh session and of the present resolution, to be submitted to the General Assembly at its
forty-third session.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987

42/199.

Assistance for the reconstruction and development of Lebanon

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 33/146 of 20 December 1978,
34/135 of 14 December 1979, 35/85 of5 December 1980,
36/205 of 17 December 1981, 37/163 of 17 December
1982, 38/220 of20 December 1983, 39/197 of 17 December 1984, 40/229 of 17 December l 985 and 41/196 of 8
December 1986,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolutions
1980/15 of 29 April 1980, 1985/56 of 25 July 1985 and
1986/46 of 22 July 1986, and decisions 1983/112 of 17
May 1983 and 1984/174 of 26 July 1984,
Noting with deep concern the grave deterioration of the
economic situation in Lebanon,
Welcoming the determined efforts of the Government of
Lebanon in undertaking its reconstruction and rehabilitation programme,
Reaffirming the urgent need for further international action to assist the Government of Lebanon in its continuing
efforts for reconstruction and development,
Considering that filling the vacant post of United Nations Co-ordinator of Assistance for the Reconstruction
and Development of Lebanon would facilitate the normal
operations of international assistance to Lebanon,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General93 and
of the statement made on 15 October 1987 by the UnderSecretary-General for Political and General Assembly Affairs and Secretariat Services,94
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his report and for the steps he has taken to mobilize assistance to Lebanon;
2. Commends the Under-Secretary-General for Political and General Assembly Affairs and Secretariat Services
for his co-ordination of system-wide assistance for Lebanon;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue and intensify his efforts to mobilize all possible assistance within
the United Nations system to help the Government of
Lebanon in its reconstruction and development efforts;
4. Invites the Secretary-General, in view of the critical
economic conditions prevailing in Lebanon, to consider
the urgent need to appoint a United Nations Co-ordinator
of Assistance for the Reconstruction and Development of
Lebanon so that the functions of the Co-ordinator may be
resumed in Lebanon;
5. Requests the organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system to intensify their programmes of
assistance and to expand them in response to the needs of
93 A/42/553 and Corr. I.
94 See Official Records of che General Assembly. Forry-second Session.
Second Commictee, 15th meeting, and corrigendum.
