S/2017/408

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 May 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 22 of Security Council
resolution 2275 (2016) and paragraph 44 of Council resolution 2297 (2016). It
provides information on the implementation of those resolutions, including on the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and
challenges faced by the United Nations Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS) in
carrying out its mandate. It covers major developments in Somalia during the period
from 1 January to 30 April 2017.

II. Political and security overview
A.

Political developments
2.
The electoral processes for the leadership of the tenth Federal Parliament and
for President of the Federal Republic of Somalia were major milestones on the
country’s path to becoming a fully functional federal State with stable political
institutions. Mohamed Sheikh Osman Jawari, Speaker of the previous Federal
Parliament, was re-elected Speaker of the House of the People on 11 January, while
Abdi Hashi Abdullahi was elected Speaker of the new Upper House on 22 January.
3.
The election of Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed “Farmajo” as President of the
Federal Republic of Somalia on 8 February concluded the electoral process. The
inauguration ceremony on 22 February was attended by the Prime Minister of
Ethiopia, the Presidents of Djibouti and Kenya, and other senior officials and
representatives of Member States and relevant organizations.
4.
On 23 February, President Farmajo appointed as Prime Minister Hassan Ali
Kheyre, who was endorsed by the Federal Parliament on 1 March. On 29 March,
Parliament endorsed the 68-member Cabinet, together with the new Government’s
agenda, whose key priorities include drought response, security, and fighting
corruption.
5.
In the tenth Federal Parliament, the House of the People maintains 275 clan based seats, while the new 54-member Upper House consists of members elected by
their respective State Assemblies. Women constitute 24 per cent of the House of the
People, a significant increase from the 14 per cent of the previous Parliament.
Overall, more than 50 per cent of the Members of Parliament are new. About 18 per
cent of the elected Members are under 35 years old.

17-07101 (E)

100517

*1707101*

S/2017/408

6.
Since taking office, President Farmajo has made official visits to Kenya,
where he attended the Special Summit of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) on protection and durable solutions for Somali refugees, and
to Jordan, where he attended the twenty-eighth ordinary session of the Council of
the League of Arab States at the summit level, as well as to Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates.
7.
On 20 February, the President of the HirShabelle Interim Administration, Ali
Abdulahi Osoble, appointed a Cabinet comprising 52 ministers. While his attempt to
balance clan interests faced initial resistance, the Cabinet was eventually approved
by the HirShabelle Parliament on 11 March.
8.
In Puntland, there were renewed protests by soldiers over the non -payment of
salaries. Public dissatisfaction over the Puntland Administration’s poor economic
management and performance increased as a result of the droug ht situation.
Revenues declined owing to a political deadlock with the Galmudug Interim
Administration over the divided city of Gaalkacyo. To address public discontent, the
President of Puntland, Abdiweli Mohamed Ali “Gaas”, defended his government’s
achievements in a media interview on 5 March.
9.
In the Interim South-West Administration, opposition elements in the State
Assembly stepped up efforts towards a no-confidence motion against the President,
Sharif Hassan Sheikh Adan. They accused the State President of neglecting the
drought crisis and focusing on the federal presidential campaign and personal
business interests. In response, Sharif Hassan met various opposition members of
the Assembly to assure them that he would address their concerns.
10. The Galmudug State Assembly initiated an impeachment procedure against the
State President, Abdikarim Hussein Guled, with 54 Assembly members approving
the motion on 10 January. Although the attempt failed, President Guled announced
his resignation on 25 February, citing health reasons. The changes in the federal and
state-level leaderships could offer an opportunity to renew reconciliation efforts
with Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama’a, which occupies the official capital of the State,
Dhuusamarreeb. The Galmudug presidential elections have been delayed until
3 May.
11. The Jubaland State Assembly resumed its session on 3 April. In an address to
the Assembly, the President of Jubaland, Sheikh Ahmed Islam “Madobe”, reiterated
his pledge to cooperate with the new Federal Government. He outlined his
Administration’s priorities, including combating Al-Shabaab, commencement of the
Juba Valley offensive, as well as enactment of a law regulating land use.
12. The Gaalkacyo Ceasefire Team Advisory Group, which is supported by the
United Nations and IGAD, continued to engage local authorities in Gaalkacyo.
Although the main road linking the two sides of the city remained closed, mounting
pressure from local communities compelled local authorities to reopen side roads. In
January, my Special Representative brokered a public commitment for the then
President, Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, the then Prime Minister, Omar Abdirashid Ali
Sharmarke, the Puntland President and the then Galmudug President to achieve
three objectives: troop withdrawal, removal of all roadblocks and joint policing. As
these commitments remain in effect, the joint patrols consisting of security
personnel from both sides played a significant role in facilitating the withdrawal of
militias, dismantling road blocks, and improving passage of humanitarian supplies
through Gaalkacyo.
13. On 9 February, while congratulating President Farmajo on his election, the
“Somaliland” Administration called for his commitment to talks between the
Federal Government and “Somaliland”. The lease of Berbera Airport for 25 years to
2/18

17-07101

S/2017/408

the United Arab Emirates to establish a military base caused demonstrations in
Hargeysa and Berbera from 13 to 15 February. The Federal Government and
members of the Federal Parliament have expressed concern over the deal.
14. On 6 March, the “Somaliland” House of Elders (guurti) voted to delay
presidential, parliamentary and guurti elections until 13 November 2017, 28 April
2019 and 28 April 2020, respectively. The Somaliland public and opposition parties
have widely criticized the delays, as have international partners, who have stated
that they will not meet the costs of the elections arising from the postponements.

B.

Security developments
15. In Mogadishu, Al-Shabaab failed to disrupt the electoral process, despite
conducting two attacks there in January. On 2 January, two explosive -laden vehicles
detonated near the Mogadishu International Airport, killing 16 people and injuring
23. On 25 January, four assailants launched a complex attack on the Daya Hot el,
resulting in 38 fatalities and more than 50 injured.
16. No security incidents were reported during the presidential election on
8 February, but terrorist activities resumed the following week. On 16 February,
four mortar rounds landed near Villa Somalia at the time of the presidential
handover ceremony. On 19 February, a car bomb in a market area killed at least 34
people and injured 50. On 22 February, three mortar rounds impacted the same area,
injuring four civilians. Al-Shabaab senior leaders have expressed hostility towards
the new President and vowed to continue waging war on the Federal Government.
On 13 March, two explosive-laden vehicles detonated near the former Jazeera
Training Centre and in front of the Wehliye Hotel, killing 18 people and injuring
others. Another car bombing at a checkpoint near the National Theatre on 21 March
resulted in over 10 fatalities and more injured. In both cases, Al -Shabaab claimed
responsibility. On 16 April, a United Nations convoy on its way to a settlement of
internally displaced persons in the outskirts of Mogadishu was nearly hit by a
roadside bomb. A rear escort vehicle was slightly damaged and two Somali escort
guards suffered minor injuries. Al-Shabaab claimed responsibility for the bomb,
stating that the United Nations was the intended target.
17. On 6 April, the President instructed the Somali security forces to prepare for a
new offensive against Al-Shabaab and called on Al-Shabaab fighters to surrender
within 60 days to be granted amnesty. He appointed new heads of the security
services, including the National Intelligence and Security Agency, the Somali
National Army, the police force and the Custodial Corps, as well as a new Mayor of
Mogadishu, who also serves as Governor of Banadir. Against this back drop,
Al-Shabaab continued attacking government facilities and civilians in Mogadishu.
On 9 and 10 April, four terrorist attacks in the city killed at least 12 national army
soldiers and 18 civilians, injuring many more. Al-Shabaab claimed responsibility for
a car bombing on 9 April near the Ministry of Defence, reportedly targeting the new
Commander of the Army, and a suicide attack at the former Jazeera Training Centre
on 10 April.
18. The Galmudug and HirShabelle Interim Administrations experienced incr eased
insecurity due to clan conflict, political tensions, and Al -Shabaab activities. On
11 January, six people died and eight were injured in clashes between clan militias
in Abudwak. On 17 January, two soldiers were killed and three wounded in an
exchange of gunfire between Galmudug police and security forces in Cadaado. On
21 January, a hand grenade attack killed the Jawhar Police Division Commander.
19. Al-Shabaab guerrilla warfare continued in rural areas of central and southern
Somalia. Attacks on Somali and African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)

17-07101

3/18

S/2017/408

forces were reported regularly along logistics routes. The most serious incident was
a complex attack on 27 January on a Kenyan military base near Kulbiyow, Lower
Juba region. More than 30 Kenyan troops were reported killed, although the exact
figure remains unknown.
20. Puntland witnessed renewed armed conflict and acts of terrorism. Security
forces clashed with Al-Shabaab fighters near the Galgala Mountains throughout
January and February. In Boosaaso, suspected Al-Shabaab elements gunned down a
traditional elder on 25 January. Three hand grenade attacks targeting a bank, a
police checkpoint, and the Civil Court, on 24 and 26 February and on 4 March,
respectively, resulted in at least five casualties. In Gaalkacyo, a Puntland
parliamentarian was wounded in an Al-Shabaab car bombing on 8 March. Fresh
activities by the splinter group professing allegiance to Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) were reported in Qandala District. On 27 January, ISIL su pporters
abducted five Darawish soldiers at Karimo and beheaded three of them. On
8 February, four suspected ISIL affiliates attacked a hotel in Boosaaso, killing four
members of a militia and two civilians.

III. Support for peacebuilding and state-building efforts
A.

International coordination and political support
21. My Special Representative continued to play a key role in ensuring coherent
and coordinated international support to Somalia’s peacebuilding and state -building
efforts. Through regular meetings with international partners, Somali leaders and
other stakeholders, he helped to ascertain unified positioning and interventions by
the international community around the goal of a successful conclusion of the
federal electoral process and in initiating consultations with the new Government.
22. During the reporting period, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland convened three preparatory meetings of international partners for
the London Conference on Somalia on 11 May. Partners have agreed that the
Conference will discuss security and economic recovery through the lens of the
national development plan and a new partnership agreement.

B.

Inclusive politics
23. In February, the electoral process for the 329 Members of the House of the
People and the Upper House of the Federal Parliament was comp leted. The indirect
electoral process in Somalia was unique: approximately 13,000 appointed clan
delegates elected their representatives to the Federal House of the People in the state
capitals and Mogadishu. Subsequently, the outgoing ninth Parliament han ded over
its constitutional mandate to the next assembly in a democratic and dignified
manner.
24. To promote transparency, UNSOM provided live stream coverage of the
presidential election and the inauguration ceremony, which resulted in more than
250,000 views. The live streaming was used extensively by Somali and international
media, and by 334 external websites and applications.
25. The elections for the Speakers of the two Houses of Parliament and the
President of the Federal Republic were held in acco rdance with the interim rules of
procedure adopted during the first joint session of Parliament on 27 December 2016.
Twenty-one candidates contested the presidency, while 328 parliamentarians voted

4/18

17-07101

S/2017/408

in a secret ballot. It was the first time in Somali histor y that a bicameral legislature
elected a Federal President.
26. The 2016 electoral process was extensively supported by the Integrated
Electoral Support Group, which provided advisory, logistical and budgetary
assistance. As part of its twin-track strategy, the Group also supported the long-term
electoral capacity development of the National Independent Electoral Commission
of Somalia. The Group did so while concepts and processes are being explored to
set the foundations for universal “one person, one vote” elections in 2020. These
include laws pertaining to political parties and electoral security, the electoral
legislative framework and a national identification programme that would include
voter registration.
27. In this regard, a United Nations electoral needs assessment mission deployed
to Somalia from 22 March to 4 April. The mission consisted of members of the
Electoral Assistance Division of the Department of Political Affairs, the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), members of the Integra ted Electoral
Support Group, and electoral experts. The members of the mission met with various
electoral stakeholders, including the National Independent Electoral Commission,
the Prime Minister, the Speakers of both Houses of Parliament, the Federal Mini stry
of the Interior and Federal Affairs, civil society organizations and women’s
associations.
28. The needs assessment mission assessed progress and challenges pertaining to
electoral preparations since the previous mission, in November 2013, including i n
relation to implementation of the United Nations electoral support mandate. The
mission evaluated the political, legal, institutional, technical, human rights and
security environment in Somalia, the legal and institutional framework, options for
voter registration, and the capacity and needs of election stakeholders, particularly
the National Independent Electoral Commission. It sought to recommend the
parameters and nature of United Nations electoral support through UNSOM as a
structurally integrated mission, in addition to resource requirements. The mission’s
findings and recommendations informed the formulation, through UNDP, of an
election-related project document, which will define the new scope of work of the
Electoral Commission.
29. The National Independent Electoral Commission has developed its 2017 -2021
strategic plan, which outlines objectives, steps and challenges in preparing for
universal elections. In a positive acknowledgement of its role, the Commission was
invited by Parliament to attend the presidential election on 8 February, as an
observer.

C.

Rule of law and security institutions

1.

Security sector assistance and reform
30. The new Federal Government has identified security sector reform as a key
priority and initiated discussions with federal member states to reach a political
agreement on a federal security model and architecture. From 6 to 8 March, an
internationally supported workshop was convened to initiate dialogue on the Somali
national security architecture. The workshop recommendations formed the basis for
a high-level meeting between President Farmajo and the Presidents of the federal
member states on 15 and 16 April in Mogadishu. The Federal Government and
federal member states reached an agreement on the national security architecture,
including on the relationship between federal and state -level security institutions
and the overall size, distribution and composition, command and control, and
resourcing and financing of the security forces of Somalia. This represents a

17-07101

5/18

S/2017/408

significant state-building achievement and a first step towards a new chapter in the
rebuilding of the Somali security sector to allow it to assume increasing
responsibility, as part of a conditions-based transition from AMISOM. It is
envisaged that the political agreement will form the foundation for the security pact
to be endorsed at the London Conference on Somalia on 11 May.
31. From 12 to 14 March, UNSOM facilitated the third weapons and ammunition
management consultative process with the Federal Government and the United
Nations Institute for Disarmament Research. Participants explored the Federal
Government’s progress over the past two years in developing a comprehensive
weapons and ammunition management system, including in national coordination,
import procedures, marking, record-keeping, distribution, verification, and storage
of arms and ammunition. The main parameters for a national framewo rk of a
commission to enable the Federal Government and federal member states to
strengthen policies and procedures for managing arms and ammunition were also
agreed.
2.

Police
32. Implementation of the new federal policing model continued to gather
momentum in the federal member states, including the establishment of technical
committees responsible for developing policing strategies for 2017 -2025, focusing
on the deployment of sufficient trained police personnel to deliver basic policing
services. Key priorities include increasing the police presence and its visibility at
the state level and developing the capacity to deliver policing services to local
communities.
33. Technical committees have been established in South -West, Jubaland,
Galmudug and Puntland, membership consisting of senior regional officials and
police. A technical committee for HirShabelle is expected to be established later in
2017, as is a joint technical committee comprising representatives of the Federal
Government and the federal member states.

3.

Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
34. A rehabilitation centre for former Al-Shabaab combatants opened in Kismaayo
on 1 March. Funded by Germany, the centre is the fourth facility to be established
as part of the National Programme of the Federal Government for the Treatment and
Handling of Disengaged Combatants. The centre offers psychosocial support,
religious counselling and vocational training to help to reintegrate former
Al-Shabaab combatants into their communities.
35. Meanwhile, UNSOM continued to support the Federal Government in
implementing pilot reinsertion projects for disengaged Al -Shabaab combatants in
Mogadishu, Baidoa, Kismaayo and Beledweyne, targeting 1,000 beneficiaries.
Projects provide short-term employment opportunities and practical skills training
to promote community reintegration.

4.

Mine action
36. From February to April, the Mine Action Service conducted training activities
for Jubaland police forces in explosive ordnance disposal and improvi sed explosive
device awareness. Support also continued to Somali police teams in Mogadishu,
South-West, Jubaland, HirShabelle and Puntland. In Mogadishu, police teams were
able to neutralize 12 improvised explosive devices.
37. In response to the drought, the Mine Action Service is sensitizing state
officials about the potential threats of explosive hazards to the drought -affected

6/18

17-07101

S/2017/408

population and supporting the Federal Government through direct training in mine risk education to promote protection for the population at risk from explosive
hazards.
5.

Justice and corrections
38. The annual workplan for 2017 of the Somalia Joint Rule of Law Programme
was agreed in principle in March. With a multi-partner trust fund budget of around
$8 million, it focuses on facilitating agreement among Somali stakeholders on a
justice and corrections architecture and service delivery, mainly at state level, in
accordance with the priorities of the Federal Government and donors.
39. During the reporting period there was a geographical increase in justice
delivery with mobile courts for the first time in Jubaland and South-West. The
United Nations, together with Mogadishu University, supported two workshops to
finalize training courses on 10 subjects, which will be used to build judicial capacity
across Somalia.
40. From 25 to 27 February, UNSOM supported the Custodial Corps in convening
a workshop on the Onkod Plan, the strategic plan to develop the corrections service.
Discussions focused on the legal and regulatory framework, command and staffing
structures, location of prisons and resource require ments. The final plan is expected
in the coming months.

6.

Maritime security
41. In March and April five incidents of piracy were recorded off the coast of
Puntland and Galmudug, the first such incidents in Somalia since May 2012.
Notably, on 13 March on the north-eastern coast of Puntland, a group of selfdeclared Somali fishermen hijacked a Comoros-flagged oil tanker near Alula and
demanded ransom for the release of eight Sri Lankan crewmen. Puntland maritime
police forces reached Alula on 16 March, but local clan elders successfully
negotiated the crew’s release without ransom payments. On 2 April, pirates hijacked
an Indian commercial vessel en route to Boosaaso from Dubai and took it to the
Ceel Huur area. Galmudug forces were able to rescue the crew men on 10 April.
Puntland and Galmudug mounted security operations in coastal areas in an effort to
curb the potentially resurgent piracy threat. NATO ended its counter -piracy
operations in December 2016, while the European Union Naval Force has
significantly reduced its presence in the high-risk area off the coast of Somalia.

D.

Economic foundations
42. The drought has affected all economic activity in the country, including
agriculture, pastoralism and fisheries. Weak public capital investment is a critical
binding constraint on protecting livelihoods from climate -related shocks in a
weather-dependent economy. Basic water infrastructure and management could also
have mitigated the current drought.
43. As a result of the drought and its impact on economic activity, Somalia’s trade
imbalance continued to widen. The temporary ban imposed by Saudi Arabia on
livestock imports from Somalia on suspicion of Rift Valley fever in December 2016
contributed to this trend. Since livestock accounts for about 80 p er cent of total
exports and losses in many areas are estimated at 60 to 70 per cent, the drought will
have a serious and persistent negative impact on the economy because of declining
livestock prices and reduced exports.

17-07101

7/18

S/2017/408

44. This is likely to exacerbate an already dire socioeconomic situation, with half
of the population (51.6 per cent) living below the international poverty line.
Inequality remains high, driven by the differential between urban (45.0 per cent)
and rural (52.3 per cent) poverty versus that of internally displaced person
settlements (70.1 per cent).
45. Nonetheless, with continuing support from the international community,
economic growth is projected to increase between 2017 and 2019. Driven largely by
consumption, Somalia’s gross domestic product (GDP) was estimated at $6.2 billion
in 2016. Due diligence for larger scale infrastructure investments is nearing
completion, so that private sector investments are expected to increase in 2017. A
priority requirement will be to address the legal and regulatory framework
restraining private sector development, especially for the banking sector.

E.

Revenue and services
46. While starting from a low base, public expenditure has expanded almost
fivefold in recent years, from $35.1 million in 2012 to $170.5 million in 2016 (2.8
per cent of GDP). Domestic revenue remains low at around $113 million,
international trade taxes accounting for 68 per cent of the total.
47. Although Federal Government revenue has been increasing, it remains too low
to sustain core government functions. Municipal and several state authorities have
increasingly played a bigger role, but most service delivery is still undertaken by
non-governmental organizations and the private sector with the support of
international agencies.
48. Somalia is in debt distress, with significant arrears that make it ineligible for
financing from the International Development Association and other concessional
financing sources. In turn, this blocks financing of national programmes necessary
to lift millions out of food insecurity, vulnerability, displacement and poverty.
Somalia needs to normalize its relations with international financial institutions to
access concessional financing. Development partners, international financial
institutions and the Federal Government are working to develop a clear and
comprehensive road map towards debt relief.
49. Somalia continues to build a track record of reform under the International
Monetary Fund staff monitored program, which gives it an opportunity to establish
a foundation for arrears clearance and debt relief when conditions allow. Reduction
of poverty and inequality will require additional reforms, including more equitable
access and improved quality of education and health services, as well as sustainable
infrastructure and social protection programmes customized to fragility.
50. While the federal leadership and state Presidents made some progress towards
defining the respective roles and responsibilities of the federal and state authorities
in 2016, appropriate arrangements for policy and legal development governing
service delivery, standard-setting, and oversight by the public sector are still
lacking.

F.

Cross-cutting issues

1.

Community recovery and local governance
51. The United Nations supported international efforts to help communities to
recover and rebuild links with their governments. On 20 March, the Joint Steering
Committee of the Peacebuilding Fund approved the annual workplans and budgets

8/18

17-07101

S/2017/408

for the Daldhis (“build your country”) and Midnimo (“unity”) projects, focusing on
service delivery and sustainable integration of returnees, respectively. The Somalia
Stability Fund undertook infrastructure projects in Hobyo, Xuddur and Berdaale,
which generated employment. In Jubaland, UNDP and the Unit ed Nations Industrial
Development Organization helped youths to bolster employment prospects and
initiate microenterprises through the provision of vocational training and cash
grants. The Jubaland Ministry of Women, Family Affairs and Human Rights
participated in the ground-breaking of a new marketplace on 19 February in
Afmadow town with the support of USAID.
52. On 8 March, at the meeting of the Steering Committee of the United Nations
Joint Programme on Local Governance and Decentralized Service Delive ry, the
Federal Ministry of the Interior and Federal Affairs, representatives of federal
member states and United Nations agencies discussed priorities for 2017, which
include supporting the formation of district councils aimed at strengthening local
governance and improving service delivery. They approved funding of a workplan
aligned with the Wadajir National Framework for Local Governance.
53. My Special Representative convened a roundtable meeting on 12 April in
Mogadishu with all stabilization and governance stakeholders from the international
community to reaffirm their commitment to and accelerate implementation of the
Community Recovery and Extension of State Authority and Accountability concept.
2.

Human rights
54. The number of human rights violations decreased during the reporting period:
646 civilian casualties were reported, including 287 deaths and 359 injuries.
Overall, security forces were responsible for 150 civilian casualties, of which 54
deaths and 35 injuries were attributed to Somali security forces, while 20 deaths and
41 injuries were attributed to AMISOM.
55. Civilian casualties attributed to Al-Shabaab or unidentified persons totalled
134 deaths and 200 injuries, a 46.5 per cent increase from the pre vious reporting
period. Al-Shabaab abducted 36 persons, 15 of whom were later released.
56. The Puntland Military Appeals Court continued reviewing the cases of
Al-Shabaab and ISIL suspects sentenced to death by the First Instance Court. Since
January, 25 death sentences have been commuted, representing 66 per cent of the
death penalties pronounced in 2016. Fourteen death sentences were issued in the
first quarter of 2017, 11 by military courts. Eight of the defendants were affiliated
with Al-Shabaab, three were members of the Somali security forces and three were
civilians.
57. Twenty-eight cases of conflict-related sexual violence were documented, an
increase over the 13 cases reported during the previous reporting period. This is
likely to be related to the displacement of populations due to the drought and lack of
access to humanitarian assistance. Women and children are particularly vulnerable,
and the number of reports of sexual violence in internally displaced person camps
has increased.
58. Threats against freedom of expression increased: 61 persons were arrested,
including 35 protesting against a judicial decision in Puntland, and 13 were arrested
for criticizing decisions made by officials on the Berbera Port in “Somaliland”. Two
media workers were beaten by security forces in Gaalkacyo and one human rights
defender was charged with a criminal offence for collecting signatures demanding
an end to police impunity. Fourteen killings of individuals participating in the
electoral process were documented, three of which were claimed by Al-Shabaab and
11 attributed to unknown assailants. One of the incidents in the Lower Shabelle

17-07101

9/18

S/2017/408

region involved the public execution on 20 March of an elder captured by
Al-Shabaab, reportedly because of his participation in the electoral process in
Baidoa. Following UNSOM advocacy with the Director General of the Ministry of
Internal Security on 26 March, the National Intelligence and Security Agency
released a detainee held in custody without charge since 25 October 2016, fir st by
AMISOM in Beledweyne and then by the Security Agency in Mogadishu.
59. From 11 to 13 February, the Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights
visited Somalia to discuss the human rights situation, including implementation of
the human rights due diligence policy, and the centrality of human rights and
protection to political and security strategies.
3.

Gender equality and women’s empowerment
60. Women represent 23 per cent of the new Cabinet — 6 of 26 portfolios — a 100
per cent increase compared to the number of female ministers in the previous
Cabinet. Of the 329 members elected for the Federal Parliament, 80 (24 per cent)
are women.
61. With UNDP support, the first annual Somali Women Parliamentarians
Conference was held on 24 and 25 April. Women members of the Federal
Parliament and State Assemblies discussed how to fulfil their constitutional duties
and bring women’s issues to the national agenda.
62. On 8 March, with the support of the United Nations, women affairs ministries
and civil society observed International Women’s Day in Mogadishu, Garoowe,
Kismaayo, Baidoa, Beledweyne and Gaalkacyo. At an event in Mogadishu,
co-hosted by the Federal Government, the African Union, the European Union and
the United Nations, the Ministry of Women and Human Rights Development
recognized the contribution of the United Nations and AMISOM in attaining 24 per
cent representation of women in Parliament.
63. In Gaalkacyo, taking advantage of the occasion of International Women’s Day,
women leaders gathered authorities and citizens from both sides of the green line to
promote peace in the troubled region. Through a friendly football match, they
engaged youths to spread the message of peace and solidarity. The event paved the
way for further dialogue and underscored the important role of women in
peacemaking.

4.

Child protection
64. The country task force on monitoring and reporting documented 431 grave
violations affecting 397 children (332 boys and 65 girls) in 148 verified incidents.
Public executions of children and hand amputations continued: five children were
killed and three were maimed. Continued abductions by Al -Shabaab for recruitment
purposes were reported, and there was an alarming incident of “graduation” of
167 boys, aged between 10 and 13, from a training centre in Lower Shabelle region.
65. The country task force continued to support awareness-raising and screening
efforts by the Child Protection Unit of the Somali army. From 26 February to
2 March, a joint Federal Government, United Nations a nd United States mission to
Kismaayo and Dhobley screened 2,269 soldiers, including 1,569 Somali army
soldiers and 700 members of the Darawish forces, all of them adults.
66. On 26 January, a military court in Boosaaso reversed the death sentences of
10 children for their alleged association with Al-Shabaab and issued 20-year prison
terms instead. Following sustained advocacy with Puntland authorities, 36 children
sentenced to prison and detained in Boosaaso and Garoowe were transferred on
2 April to a reintegration centre supported by UNICEF.

10/18

17-07101

S/2017/408

5

Prevention of sexual violence
67. As the number of incidents of sexual violence often rises during emergencies,
the United Nations has scaled up relevant prevention efforts beyond its core
programming, through both advocacy with the Federal Government and training of
United Nations staff and AMISOM. The vulnerability of women and girls in
particular has been exacerbated by increased displacement of populations from rural
to urban areas. Between January and March 2017, the gender-based violence
subcluster partners reached a total of 17,353 beneficiaries (including 3,102 girls,
2,236 boys, 9,062 women and 2,953 men) with prevention, response and capacity building activities. Sexual and gender-based violence response services include
lifesaving medical assistance, such as post-rape treatment, legal, psychosocial,
material and livelihood assistance, and temporary protection accommodation for
survivors of sexual and gender-based violence. In an effort to foster a holistic
integrated medico-legal response to sexual and gender-based violence, the
“Somaliland” Ministry of Justice, in collaboration with the United Nations
Population Fund and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
organized training in March 2017 to strengthen capacity to implement the localized
medico-legal toolkit on sexual and gender-based violence as adapted from a global
one issued by the World Health Organization (WHO) and UNODC.

6.

Targeted sanctions
68. In his briefing to the Security Council on 13 April, the Chair of the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning
Somalia and Eritrea highlighted the latest findings of the Somalia and Eritrea
Monitoring Group, including the assessment that Al -Shabaab remained the main
threat to peace and security in Somalia. On 21 April, when presenting its midterm
update to the Committee, the Monitoring Group also highlighted its assessment that
the ISIL militant faction loyal to Abdulqadir Mumin and active in the Bari region of
Puntland has grown significantly in strength over the reporting period. The
Monitoring Group further drew attention to the peace a nd security threat posed by
illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, including the potential re -emergence of
piracy in Somalia.

G.

Humanitarian situation
69. The humanitarian situation deteriorated at an alarming pace and the risk of
famine continues in 2017. On 28 February, the President of the Federal Republic
convened a high-level round table on drought response and declared a national
disaster, urging international and national stakeholders to redouble efforts to avert a
catastrophe. The communique issued at the end of the meeting announced the
adoption of a policy of zero tolerance for any diversion of humanitarian assistance
and included a pledge to take firm action against anyone engaging in such corrupt
practices. It also highlighted the vital role of the private sector in supporting the
delivery of humanitarian supplies.
70. Some 6.2 million people face acute food insecurity, and nearly 3 million
require urgent life-saving assistance. The Protection and Return Monitoring
Network led by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
has recorded over 570,000 new drought-driven displacements since November
2016. As at 30 April, there were 36,066 cases of acute watery diarrhoea/cholera,
including over 697 related deaths; the case fatality rate was 1.2 per cent, above the
emergency threshold of 1 per cent. The recorded number of measles cases is also on
the rise. Prices of staple food surged in January, and declining livestock prices and

17-07101

11/18

S/2017/408

increasing cereal prices have sharply depleted terms of trade for pastoralists,
according to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
71. On 27 February, the Humanitarian Coordinator opened a drought operations
coordination centre in Mogadishu, bringing together cluster coordinators to
facilitate and coordinate response, strengthen information-sharing and address gaps.
In March, regional drought operations coordination centres were opened in Baidoa
and Garoowe.
72. Thanks to generous resources provided by donors, national and international
non-governmental organizations and United Nations agencies are massively scaling
up humanitarian response throughout Somalia in coordination with authorit ies. The
number of people reached with improved access to food has increased to
1.7 million, up by 62 per cent from 1.1 million people reached in February. A
significant scaling-up of nutrition services is also under way, and 332,000 children
and women were treated in March, including 69,000 children under 5 who were
severely malnourished. Humanitarian non-governmental organization and United
Nations partners have also scaled up delivery of safe water and reached nearly
1,150,000 people from January to March with water trucking and supplies of storage
tanks and bladders, more than doubling the number of people reached in February.
Water, sanitation and hygiene and health partners are working jointly with the acute
watery diarrhoea/cholera task force to contain the spread of the outbreak. More than
194,500 people, including 114,500 women, were provided with primary and
secondary health-care services, an increase by 65 per cent from the 126,000 reached
in February. However, while the scaling-up is significant, the overall targets have
not been met and the humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate.
73. Insecurity continued to impede access to people in need, mainly in southern
and central Somalia. More than 35 violent incidents affected humanitarian
organizations from January to March 2017 leading to two deaths, six injuries, five
abductions and three arrests of humanitarian workers. Humanitarian supplies were
looted in parts of “Somaliland”, HirShabelle and South-West states. Discussions are
ongoing with authorities to address the looting of aid.
74. On 7 March, I visited Somalia with the Emergency Relief Coordinator. We met
with the President and federal authorities to discuss the drought, and travelled to
Baidoa, where the crisis is most intense. The visit generated extensive international
and local media coverage.
75. On 18 February, the humanitarian country team issued an operational plan for
prevention of famine, requesting $825 million to reach 5.5 million people from
January to June 2017. Donors have moved quickly to contribute $580 million to
scale up humanitarian action.
76. Following lessons learned from the 2011 drought, robust risk management
capacity has been put in place to minimize diversion of humanitarian aid. An
increased use of cash assistance (constituting around 50 per cent of assistance in
major aid sectors), which draws on the strong private sector role, contributes to
stabilizing markets and has improved the ability to scale up assistance and reach
beneficiaries in remote areas. Access issues, including roadblocks and
administrative impediments, are more systematically mapped and addressed through
engagement with federal and local authorities, as well as traditional leaders.

12/18

17-07101

S/2017/408

H.

Support to the African Union Mission in Somalia, the Somali
national army and the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia
77. UNSOS continued to provide logistics support to AMISOM and the Somali
national army in Mogadishu and the sectors as mandated by the Security Council.
The support included training 736 AMISOM personnel in various areas, including
radio operations, countering improvised explosive devices, Internet protocol video
surveillance, gender, medical and predeployment training, with a view to improving
their effectiveness. UNSOS also provided logistics support for the electoral process
in Somalia, including support to AMISOM troops and police personnel deployed to
monitor the process in Cadaado, in Galmudug, where the United Nations previously
had no presence.
78. The United Kingdom contingent deployed in support of UNSOS, comprising
engineers, medical, logistics and equipment support, has proved useful in its
respective areas of expertise. The team has trained more than 1,000 AMISOM
troops in various fields. Of significance is the collabora tion with the Burundi
contingent, culminating in a two-month training and mentoring to launch
“Operation Antelope” in Sector 5 of the AMISOM operational area of responsibility.
79. UNSOS continued to operationalize the mission enabling units within
AMISOM, and has established a pilot mission enabling unit in Sector 5 under the
leadership of Burundian troops, with training and mentoring from the United
Kingdom contingent. As a result, the main supply routes in Sector 5 have been
significantly improved and secured. Once fully implemented across all AMISOM
sectors, the mission enabling units project is expected to improve the remaining
main supply routes and facilitate the transportation of supplies by road, as well as
trade and humanitarian access in the sectors.
80. The ongoing technical support and training of AMISOM troops by the Mine
Action Service is enhancing their efforts in finding and destroying a greater number
of improvised explosive devices on main supply routes than in previous years. This
has resulted in fewer deaths and injuries to personnel and less damage to assets.
Between January and March, there were 39 improvised explosive devices targeting
AMISOM, 13 of which AMISOM teams identified and destroyed.
81. On 24 January, the 22nd meeting of the AMISOM Military Operations
Coordination Committee was held in Addis Ababa, and discussed, inter alia, the
expansion of AMISOM and Somali national army offensive operations in Somalia.
Consequently, a planning meeting was held in Addis Ababa on 27 and 28 February
to review the operational plan for the conduct of the expanded offensive operations
in the Juba Valley corridor and north-eastern coastline areas. UNSOS continues to
participate in joint planning meetings led by the African Union aimed at develop ing
a comprehensive and sustainable plan to ensure that the security, political and
development tracks are aligned.
82. As part of its activities to commemorate the tenth anniversary of AMISOM,
the African Union conducted a comprehensive lessons learned exercise in Nairobi
on 9 and 10 March, which reviewed progress made by AMISOM since its inception,
challenges encountered and the way forward, including the Mission’s exit strategy.
A joint United Nations-African Union review of AMISOM is expected to contrib ute
to defining future cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union in
restoring peace and security, and advance a conditions-based transition of lead
responsibility for security to Somali institutions.

17-07101

13/18

S/2017/408

83. During the reporting period, Somalia experienced an outbreak of cholera,
including in areas where AMISOM personnel are located. While UNSOS informed
the African Union of its responsibility to ensure that uniformed personnel were
vaccinated prior to deployment, it provided urgent vaccination assistance, in
collaboration with WHO, to bridge the existing gap — 95 per cent of AMISOM
troops had not received a vaccination against cholera — given the potential for
exposure of AMISOM and United Nations personnel, especially in high -risk areas.
84. In addition, UNSOS took a series of measures to support efforts to mitigate the
effects of the drought, including installation and maintenance of the drought
operations coordination centre in Mogadishu. Efforts were undertaken to ensure that
those involved in drought response had access to UNSOS flights. UNSOS also
instituted water-rationing procedures as an internal measure to ensure judicious use
of water.
85. The United Nations human rights due diligence policy task force discussed the
draft risk assessment for the integration of Puntland defence forces into the Somali
national army. The approval of the risk assessment and proposed mitigation
measures was deferred, pending clarification of the modalities and specific areas of
United Nations support. The United Nations-AMISOM Joint Working Group on
human rights due diligence policy also reviewed the implementation of mitigation
measures and highlighted the response to allegations of violations by AMISOM as a
concern during its meeting on 14 February. AMISOM stated that it would provide
updates on alleged violations upon completion of its investigations.
86. Further to supporting AMISOM in developing standard operating procedures
for the Civilian Casualty Tracking, Analysis and Response Cell, UNSOS is
recruiting an international consultant to track and report on civilians affected in the
course of AMISOM offensive operations. This will help to enhance the Mission’s
compliance with human rights and international humanitarian law, in accordance
with the human rights due diligence policy.

I.

United Nations presence in Somalia
87. The security risk level for the area protected by AMISOM at Mogadishu
International Airport has remained high since the previous assessment was
conducted in February. UNSOS continued to implement recommended risk
mitigation measures to improve the safety and protection of all United Nations
personnel. Similar projects are continuing in the United Nations regional
compounds.
88. As at 30 April, there were 519 international and 1,149 national United Nations
personnel throughout Somalia. An increasing number of United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes operate and maintain a permanent presence of both
international and national personnel outside Mogadishu. This number is likel y to
grow further as a result of humanitarian response to the drought (the staff ceiling in
Baidoa was raised from 29 to 40 to facilitate humanitarian response). Insecurity
remains the biggest impediment to these operations. The restricted access to some
areas poses a challenge to the ability to respond to humanitarian and development
needs.
89. The Security Council in resolution 2275 (2016) requested the SecretaryGeneral to conduct a review of the United Nations presence in Somalia after the
2016 electoral process, to ensure that the United Nations is properly configured to
support the next phase of state-building in Somalia, and to present options and
recommendations to the Security Council. The United Nations initiated a strategic
assessment in November 2016 which included a thorough situation analysis,

14/18

17-07101

S/2017/408

stocktaking of the United Nations engagement and proposals for a way forward. The
proposals were reviewed jointly by Headquarters and the field during a strategic
assessment mission deployed from 5 to 15 March to Somalia, Kenya and Ethiopia. I
will transmit the results of the strategic assessment in a letter to the President of the
Security Council on 5 May.

IV. Observations
90. The current reporting period has seen a sequence of remarkable events, which
gives the people of Somalia and the international community considerable hope for
the future of the country. The peaceful election of a new President, widely accepted
as legitimate, and the relatively quick nomination and endorsement of a Prime
Minister and a Government set the course for political progress. The agreement
reached on 16 April by Somali leaders at both the federal and state level on the
architecture and accountability of Somali security forces should lay the ground for
the development of the Somali security sector. These developments provide a strong
basis for strengthening the Federal State and enable further progress towar ds peace,
security and stability. I commend the Somali federal and state authorities for these
important achievements.
91. The electoral process was far from perfect and reflected the absence of
institutional and accountability systems and the prevalence of corrupt practices.
However, it had strong electoral features and many contests were correctly
conducted, and the results were accepted as legitimate. The countrywide euphoria
greeting the election of the President of the Federal Republic on 8 February i s a
clear indication of the acceptance of the outcome as legitimate by the Somali
population.
92. Somalia now has a new Federal Government that has been welcomed across
clan lines. The Government must build on this vote of confidence in dealing with its
many urgent priorities, including drought response, security, public finance
management, fighting corruption, increasing revenues and advancing the
constitutional review. Its priorities also include institutional reforms which will help
to address some of the deficiencies witnessed during the electoral process.
93. I commend the former Federal President, Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, for
graciously conceding defeat and facilitating a smooth transition. The peaceful
transfer of office and absence of acrimony set an example that other countries in the
continent and beyond should follow.
94. I welcome the commitment of President Farmajo and the Prime Minister
Kheyre to work together harmoniously and to respect the division of responsibilities
between their offices. This is critical if Somalia is to avoid the power struggles
between President and Prime Minister that adversely affected stability and the
business of government during the previous administrations.
95. Somalia’s federal system is in its early stages and will need to be consolidated
over the coming years. This process may initially exacerbate long -standing
grievances. This, in turn, underscores the need, and the historic opportunity, to
clearly define the respective roles and responsibilities of the federal and state
governments. I call on the Federal Government and Parliament to advance the
constitutional review process including through meaningful and inclusive
participation of the regions, civil society and other stakeholders. If well managed,
the constitutional review process will promote national unity, address long -standing
drivers of conflict and instability and offer an important opportunity for
reconciliation.

17-07101

15/18

S/2017/408

96. The humanitarian situation remains deeply worrying and could become worse
still. It has the potential to derail political developments and the legitimacy, in the
eyes of the public, of federal and state institutions and office holders.
97. During my visit to Somalia on 7 March, I saw for myself both the promise that
Somalia holds and the enormous challenges that lie ahead. The people I met are in
dire need of support as humanitarian actors rush to scale up assistance made
possible through resources provided by donors. I was encouraged by the
engagement and commitment of the Somali authorities to accountability, and to
increasing access and removing obstacles to effective response. I was also
impressed with the measures taken by the humanitarian system under the leadership
of the Humanitarian Coordinator to adopt a famine prevention posture and rapidly
scale up assistance, as funds become available. Humanitarian actors are working in
one of the most difficult and dangerous environments globally. Resources are now
becoming available through the generous support of donors. Somali authorities at al l
levels have not only expressed but have also shown commitment to stem the slide
towards famine. This is essential to ensure that assistance is not diverted or misused
and reaches those in the greatest need.
98. The challenges are enormous. Top among them is access. Al-Shabaab
continues to restrict access to those in need of assistance and aid to populations in
areas under its control. It is unacceptable that humanitarian assistance, particularly
for women and children, is disrupted or denied as a means o f conflict.
99. Improving security for Somalia, including in the context of better responding
to the drought, is a major priority. In 2017, AMISOM reaches the tenth anniversary
of its deployment, and the Mission will not remain indefinitely in Somalia.
Therefore, progress in building Somali security institutions is urgent. I welcome the
political agreement reached on the national security architecture in April as a
milestone to accelerate implementation of wider security sector reform, to which the
international community should be ready to provide swift and coherent support.
Implementation of the agreement should start without delay, with enhanced and
better coordinated international support. Progress in the security sector should
ultimately allow the Somalis to take over security responsibilities, with a
conditions-based transition of AMISOM. At the same time, we must provide
AMISOM with predictable support in order to increase its effectiveness and
facilitate its joint operations.
100. Enabling the movement of AMISOM is key in that regard. I appreciate the
support provided by the United States and United Kingdom Governments towards
the establishment of the mission enabling units and call for additional donations to
accelerate establishment of the units in the remaining sectors. UNSOS capacity to
build on this momentum and establish the mission enabling units is reliant on the
troop-contributing countries providing requisite troops and appropriate capabilities.
More critically, it is essential that the troop-contributing countries work together
with UNSOS and the Mine Action Service to open the main supply routes, as
mandated by the Security Council.
101. I wish to extend my appreciation to those Member States that have contributed
to the Somali National Army Trust Fund, enabling UNSOS support to Somali troops
in joint operations with AMISOM. However, both the army and AMISOM trust
funds currently have very low balances, of just over $10 million and $387,000,
respectively. I urgently appeal to Member States to consider making contributions to
the trust funds.
102. Despite ongoing efforts by AMISOM and Somali security forces, Al -Shabaab
remains a potent threat. It has shown resilience and adaptability, recovering from
challenges and drawbacks while maintaining a united core in spite of internal
16/18

17-07101

S/2017/408

squabbles and fracturing. The group’s tactical evolution and growing level of
sophistication in its execution of complex terrorist operations in urban and rural
settings are a testament to that. Al-Shabaab has also exploited the drought to
promote its own propaganda objectives. I am especially concerned about the group’s
willingness to resort to violent means to hinder relief activities targeting civilians
and aid workers, including the United Nations.
103. While the human rights situation remains grave, I am encouraged that all death
sentences pronounced against children in Puntland have now been revoked. I am
deeply concerned, however, that the death sentences were transformed into long
prison terms. I urge the Puntland authorities to meet their commitments to overturn
the sentences, facilitate the release of the children and continue to work with the
United Nations on their reintegration. I also call upon the Puntland authorities to
revoke all death sentences against children issued by civilian and military courts
and urgently develop, with the support of the United Nations, a juvenile justice
system in accordance with the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
104. Infringement upon the freedom of expression continues to be of concern; there
is continuing harassment of journalists, politicians and human rights defenders
because of their criticism of government authorities. Freedom of expression is an
essential foundation of a democratic society and a fr ee media helps to foster
dialogue, peace and good governance, key imperatives for the new Somali
Government.
105. I call on the Federal Government and the “Somaliland” Administration to
resume talks and resolve issues that stand in the way of harmonious r elations. I am
concerned about continued delays in both the presidential and the parliamentary
elections in “Somaliland”. This is steadily eroding the promise and increased
credibility that “Somaliland” held in its democratization process. I call upon the
“Somaliland” Administration to revisit the electoral cycle and establish a timeline
through inclusive consultations.
106. I thank the African Union, AMISOM, IGAD, the European Union, Member
States, non-governmental organizations and other development partners for their
continued support for the peacebuilding and state-building process. I pay tribute to
AMISOM, the Somali security forces and allied militias for the sacrifices they
continue to make in Somalia in the interest of long -term peace and stability in the
country and beyond.
107. I pay tribute to my Special Representative, Michael Keating, my two Deputy
Special Representatives and the staff of UNSOM, the Head of UNSOS and his staff
and also the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes in Somalia for their
continuing hard work under challenging conditions.

17-07101

17/18

S/2017/408

18/18

17-07101
