S/2021/518

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 June 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 28 May 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 2577 (2021), in
connection with the agenda item “Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
and South Sudan”. The resolution was adopted on 28 May 2021 in accordance with
the voting procedure set out in the letter by the President of the Security Council
dated 27 March 2020 (S/2020/253), a procedure agreed in light of the extraordinary
circumstances caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Pursuant to that procedure, I enclose herewith copies of the related documents:
My letter dated 27 May 2021, addressed to the Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (annex 1), putting to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/2021/509 (enclosure to annex 1);
Letters in reply received from Security Council members indicating their
national positions on the draft resolution (annexes 2 to 16);
Statements subsequently submitted by Security Council members providing
explanations of their votes (annexes 17 to 22).
This letter and its enclosures will be issued as a document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Zhang Jun
President of the Security Council

21-07097 (E) 020621 180621

*2107097*

S/2021/518

Annex 1
Letter dated 27 May 2021 from the President of the Security Council
addressed to the Permanent Representatives of the members of the
Security Council
In accordance with the procedure agreed upon by the Members of the Security
Council in light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the COVID-19
pandemic, as set out in the letter dated 27 March 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to all members of the Council (S/2020/253), I would like
to draw your attention to the following.
The members of the Council have discussed a draft resolution, submitted by
the United States of America, in connection with the agenda item “Reports of the
Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan”. That draft resolution, contained
in document S/2021/509 and enclosed herein, has been put into blue.
In my capacity as President of the Security Council, I hereby put the abovementioned draft resolution to a vote. The non-extendable 24-hour voting period
for this draft resolution will begin at 4 p.m. on Thursday, 27 May 2021. The nonextendable 24-hour voting period will expire at 4 p.m. on Friday, 28 May 2021.
Please submit your vote (in favour, against or abstain) on the draft resolution,
as well as your possible explanation of vote, by sending the Director of the Security
Council Affairs Division of the Secretariat (egian@un.org) a letter signed by the
Permanent Representative or Chargé d’affaires a.i. within the non-extendable 24hour voting period set out above.
It is my intention to circulate a letter listing the outcome of the vote within
three hours of the conclusion of the 24-hour voting period. I also intend to convene
a video-teleconference of the Security Council to announce the outcome of the
vote shortly after the conclusion of the voting period, on the afternoon of Friday,
28 May 2021.
(Signed) Zhang Jun
President of the Security Council

2/29

21-07097

S/2021/518

Enclosure

S/2021/509

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional
27 May 2021
Original: English

United States of America: draft resolution
The Security Council,
Recalling its previous resolutions, statements of its President, and press
statements on the situation in South Sudan,
Affirming its support for the 2018 “Revitalised Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan” (the Revitalised Agreement), stressing
that the peace process only remains viable with the full commitment by all parties, and
welcoming in this regard encouraging developments in implementing the Revitalized
Agreement, including reconstituting the Transitional National Legislative Assembly,
in order to create the conditions necessary to advance the peace process,
Expressing appreciation for the leadership of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) in advancing the peace process in South Sudan, commending
the ongoing mediation by the Community of Sant’Egidio to foster political dialogue
between signatories and non-signatories of the Revitalised Agreement, and calling
on South Sudanese parties to demonstrate the political will to peacefully resolve the
outstanding differences that are driving continued violence,
Recognizing the reduction in violence between signatory parties to the
Revitalised Agreement and that the permanent ceasefire was upheld in most parts of
the country between those parties,
Reiterating its alarm and deep concern regarding the political, security,
economic, and humanitarian crisis in South Sudan, taking note of the impact of
the COVID-19 pandemic, and emphasizing there can be no military solution to the
situation in South Sudan,
Expressing deep concern at continued fighting in South Sudan, and condemning
repeated violations of the Revitalised Agreement and the Agreement on Cessation of
Hostilities, Protection of Civilians and Humanitarian Access (ACOH);
Expressing concern regarding the delays in implementing the Revitalised
Agreement, and stressing the need to expeditiously finalize security arrangements,
establish all institutions of the Revitalised Transitional Government of National
Unity (RTGNU), and make progress on transitional reforms,
Strongly condemning past and ongoing human rights violations and abuses
and violations of international humanitarian law, further condemning harassment
and targeting of civil society, humanitarian personnel and journalists, emphasizing
that those responsible for violations of international humanitarian law and violations
21-07097

3/29

S/2021/518

and abuses of human rights must be held accountable, and that the RTGNU bears the
primary responsibility to protect its population from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing, and crimes against humanity,
Expressing deep concern at reports of misappropriation of funds that
undermine the stability and security of South Sudan, and stressing that these activities
can have a devastating impact on society and individuals, weaken democratic
institutions, undermine the rule of law, perpetuate violent conflicts, facilitate illegal
activities, divert humanitarian assistance or complicate its delivery, and undermine
economic markets,
Also expressing grave concern at the threat to peace and security in South
Sudan arising from the illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation and misuse of
small arms and light weapons,
Strongly encouraging the South Sudan authorities to improve their engagement
with the Panel of Experts and prevent any obstruction to the implementation of
its mandate,
Taking note of the Final 2021 report (S/2021/365) of the United Nations Panel
of Experts,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan arms
embargo benchmarks (S/2021/321).
Determining that the situation in South Sudan continues to constitute a threat
to international peace and security in the region,
Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,

Arms Embargo and Inspections
1. Decides to renew until 31 May 2022 the measures on arms imposed by
paragraph 4 of resolution 2428 (2018), and reaffirms the provisions of paragraph 5
of resolution 2428 (2018);
2. Expresses its readiness to review arms embargo measures, through inter
alia modification, suspension, or progressive lifting of these measures, in the light
of progress achieved on the following key benchmarks:
(a) the completion, by the RTGNU, of Stages 1, 2, and 3 of the
Strategic Defense and Security Review (SDSR) process contained in the
Revitalised Agreement;
(b) the formation, by the RTGNU, of a unified command structure for
the Necessary Unified Forces (NUF), the training, graduation, and redeployment
of the NUF, and allocation by the RTGNU of adequate resources for the planning
and implementation of the redeployment of the NUF;
(c) progress, by the RTGNU, on the establishment and implementation of
the disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration (DDR) process, and in particular
the development and implementation of a plan for the collection and disposal of long
and medium range heavy weapons, and the development of a time-bound plan for the
complete and verifiable demilitarization of all civilian areas;
(d) progress by the South Sudanese defense and security forces on properly
managing their existing arms and ammunition stockpiles, including by establishing
the necessary planning documents, protocols, and training for the recording, storage,
distribution and management of the weapons and ammunition;
(e) the implementation of the Joint Action Plan for the Armed Forces on
addressing conflict-related sexual violence, with an emphasis on the training,
sensitization, accountability, and oversight of the defense and security forces;
4/29

21-07097

S/2021/518

3. Calls on the RTGNU to make progress on implementation of public
finance management reforms in the Revitalised Agreement, including by making
information on all revenues, expenditures, deficits, and debts of the RTGNU
accessible to the public; and further calls on the RTGNU to establish the Hybrid
Court for South Sudan, and set up the Commission for Truth, Reconciliation, and
Healing and the Compensation and Reparation Authority;
4. Requests in this regard the Secretary-General, in close consultation
with UNMISS and the Panel of Experts, to conduct, no later than 15 April 2022, an
assessment of progress achieved on the key benchmarks established in paragraph 2;
5. Requests the South Sudan authorities to report, no later than 15 April
2022, to the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning
South Sudan (“the Committee”) on the progress achieved on the key benchmarks in
paragraph 2, and invites the South Sudan authorities to report on progress achieved
on implementation of reforms in paragraph 3;
6. Stresses the importance that notifications or requests for exemptions
pursuant to paragraph 5 of resolution 2428 (2018) should contain all relevant
information, including the purpose of the use, the end user, the technical specifications
and quantity of the equipment to be shipped and, when applicable, the supplier, the
proposed date of delivery, mode of transportation and itinerary of shipments;
7.
Underscores that arms shipments in violation of this resolution risk
fueling conflict and contributing to further instability, and strongly urges all
Member States to take urgent action to identify and prevent such shipments within
their territory;
8. Calls upon all Member States, in particular States neighboring South
Sudan, to inspect, in accordance with their national authorities and legislation
and consistent with international law, in particular the law of the sea and relevant
international civil aviation agreements, all cargo to South Sudan, in their territory,
including seaports and airports, if the State concerned has information that provides
reasonable grounds to believe the cargo contains items the supply, sale, or transfer
of which is prohibited by paragraph 4 of resolution 2428 (2018) for the purpose of
ensuring strict implementation of these provisions;
9. Decides to authorize all Member States to, and that all Member States
shall, upon discovery of items the supply, sale, or transfer of which is prohibited by
paragraph 4 of resolution 2428 (2018), seize and dispose (such as through destruction,
rendering inoperable, storage or transferring to a State other than the originating or
destination States for disposal) of such items, and decides further that all Member
States shall cooperate in such efforts;
10. Requires any Member State when it undertakes an inspection pursuant
to paragraph 7 of this resolution, to submit promptly an initial written report to the
Committee containing, in particular, explanation of the grounds for the inspections,
the results of such inspections, and whether or not cooperation was provided, and, if
prohibited items for supply, sale, or transfer are found, further requires such Member
States to submit to the Committee within 30 days a subsequent written report
containing relevant details on the inspection, seizure, and disposal, and relevant
details of the transfer, including a description of the items, their origin and intended
destination, if this information is not in the initial report;

Targeted Sanctions
11. Decides to renew until 31 May 2022 the travel and financial measures
imposed by paragraphs 9 and 12 of resolution 2206 (2015), and reaffirms the provisions
21-07097

5/29

S/2021/518

of paragraphs 10, 11, 13, 14 and 15 of resolution 2206 (2015), and paragraphs 13, 14,
15 and 16 of resolution 2428 (2018);
12. Decides to keep the measures renewed in paragraph 10 under continuous
review in light of progress achieved implementing all provisions of the Revitalised
Agreement and developments related to human rights violations and abuses, and
expresses its readiness to consider adjusting measures in paragraph 10, including
through modifying, suspending, lifting or strengthening measures to respond to
the situation;
13. Underscores its willingness to impose targeted sanctions in order to
support the search for an inclusive and sustainable peace in South Sudan, and notes
that the Committee can consider requests for delisting of individuals and entities;
14. Reaffirms that the provisions of paragraph 9 of resolution 2206 (2015)
apply to individuals, and that the provisions of paragraph 12 of resolution 2206 (2015)
apply to individuals and entities, as designated for such measures by the Committee,
as responsible for or complicit in, or having engaged in, directly or indirectly, actions
or policies that threaten the peace, security or stability of South Sudan, and further
reaffirms that the provisions of paragraphs 9 and 12 of resolution 2206 (2015) apply
to individuals, as designated for such measures by the Committee, who are leaders
or members of any entity, including any South Sudanese government, opposition,
militia, or other group, that has, or whose members have, engaged in any of the
activities described in this paragraph;
15. Expresses concern at reports of misappropriation and diversion of public
resources which pose a risk to the peace, security, and stability of South Sudan,
expresses serious concern at reports of financial impropriety, lack of transparency,
oversight and financial governance, which pose a risk to the peace, stability, and
security of South Sudan, and are out of compliance with Chapter IV of the Revitalised
Agreement, and in this context, underscores that individuals engaged in actions or
policies that have the purpose or effect of expanding or extending the conflict in
South Sudan may be listed for travel and financial measures;

Sanctions Committee and Panel of Experts
16. Emphasizes the importance of holding regular consultations with
concerned Member States, international and regional and subregional organizations,
as well as the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), as may be
necessary, in particular neighboring and regional States, in order to ensure the full
implementation of the measures in this resolution, and in that regard encourages the
Committee to consider, where and when appropriate, visits to selected countries by
the Chair and/or Committee members;
17. Decides to extend until 1 July 2022 the mandate of the Panel of Experts
as set out in paragraph 19 of resolution 2428 (2018), and decides that the Panel of
Experts should provide to the Council, after discussion with the Committee, an
interim report by 1 December 2021, a final report by 1 May 2022, and except in
months when these reports are due, updates each month;
18. Requests the Secretariat to include the necessary gender expertise on the
Panel of Experts, in line with paragraph 6 of resolution 2242 (2015), and encourages
the Panel to integrate gender as a cross-cutting issue across its investigations
and reporting;
19. Calls upon all parties and all Member States, especially those neighboring
South Sudan, as well as international, regional and subregional organizations to
ensure cooperation with the Panel of Experts, including by providing any information
on illicit transfers of wealth from South Sudan into financial, property and business
6/29

21-07097

S/2021/518

networks and further urges all Member States involved to ensure the safety of the
members of the Panel of Experts and unhindered access, in particular to persons,
documents and sites in order for the Panel of Experts to execute its mandate;
20. Requests the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and the Special Representative for Sexual Violence
in Conflict to share relevant information with the Committee in accordance with
paragraph 7 of resolution 1960 (2010) and paragraph 9 of resolution 1998 (2011), and
invites the High Commissioner for Human Rights to share relevant information with
the Committee, as appropriate;
21. Encourages timely information exchange between UNMISS and the
Panel of Experts, and requests UNMISS to assist the Committee and the Panel of
Experts, within its mandate and capabilities;
22. Invites the Revitalised Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission
(RJMEC) to share relevant information with the Council, as appropriate, on its
assessment of the parties’ implementation of the Revitalised Agreement, adherence
to the ACOH, and the facilitation of unhindered and secure humanitarian access;
23. Decides to remain seized of the matter.

21-07097

7/29

S/2021/518

Annex 2
Letter dated 28 May 2021 from the Permanent Representative
of China to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I would like to thank you and your team for the strong support in facilitating
the voting procedure.
Please be kindly informed that China votes in favour of the draft resolution
(S/2021/509) submitted by the United States of America on the agenda item “Reports
of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan”. Attached herewith is the
explanation of vote.
(Signed) Zhang Jun
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of China to the United Nations

8/29

21-07097

S/2021/518

Annex 3
Letter dated 28 May 2021 from the Permanent Representative of
Estonia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I have the honour to inform you that, in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the United Nations Charter, my delegation votes in favour of the Security Council
draft resolution (S/2021/509) on the agenda item “Reports of the Secretary-General
on Sudan and South Sudan”.
(Signed) Sven Jürgenson
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Estonia to the United Nations

21-07097

9/29

S/2021/518

Annex 4
Letter dated 28 May 2021 from the Permanent Representative of
France to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
[Original: French]
I refer to the letter dated 27 May 2021 from the Chinese presidency of the
Security Council, calling on the members of the Security Council to vote on the draft
resolution submitted by the United States of America in connection with the agenda
item “Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan”, put into blue
under the symbol S/2021/509. France votes in favour.
(Signed) Nicolas de Rivière
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of France to the United Nations

10/29

21-07097

S/2021/518

Annex 5
Letter dated 28 May 2021 from the Permanent Representative
of India to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I have the honour to acknowledge receipt of your letter of 27 May 2021 on the
beginning of the voting procedure for the draft resolution contained in document
S/2021/509 in connection with the agenda item “Reports of the Secretary-General
on the Sudan and South Sudan”.
In accordance with the procedure for adoption of resolutions of the Security
Council being in place during the restrictions on movement in New York due to
the COVID-19 pandemic outlined in the letter dated 27 March 2020 (S/2020/ 253)
by the President of the Security Council, I have the honour to inform you that
India abstains in the voting on this draft resolution. Our explanation of vote is also
attached herewith.
(Signed) T.S. Tirumurti
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of India to the United Nations

21-07097

11/29

S/2021/518

Annex 6
Letter dated 28 May 2021 from the Permanent Representative of
Ireland to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I have the honour to acknowledge receipt of your letter of 27 May 2021, on
the beginning of the voting procedure for the draft resolution in connection with
the agenda item “Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan”,
document S/2021/509.
In accordance with the procedure for the adoption of resolutions of the
Security Council for the duration of the restrictions of movement in New York due
to the COVID-19 pandemic, outlined in the letter of the President of the Security
Council of 27 March 2020 (S/2020/253), I have the honour to inform you that Ireland
votes in favour of the draft resolution contained in document S/2021/509.
(Signed) Geraldine Byrne Nason
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Ireland to the United Nations

12/29

21-07097

S/2021/518

Annex 7
Letter dated 28 May 2021 from the Permanent Representative
of Kenya to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the draft resolution (S/2021/509) submitted by
the United States of America in connection with the agenda item “Reports of the
Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan”.
In this respect, I wish to inform you that Kenya abstains in the voting on the
above-mentioned draft resolution.
(Signed) Martin Kimani
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Kenya to the United Nations

21-0709713/29

S/2021/518

Annex 8
Letter dated 27 May 2021 from the Permanent Representative of
Mexico to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I refer to the letter dated 27 May 2021, regarding the draft resolution in
connection with the agenda item “Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
and South Sudan”, submitted by the United States and contained in document
S/2021/509.
In accordance with the procedure outlined in the letter dated 27 March 2020
of the President of the Security Council (S/2020/253) for the adoption of resolutions
of the Security Council, I have the honour to inform you that Mexico votes in favour
of the aforementioned draft resolution.
(Signed) Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Mexico to the United Nations

14/29

21-07097

S/2021/518

Annex 9
Letter dated 28 May 2021 from the Permanent Representative of
the Niger to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I am writing in response to the letter of the President of the Security Council
dated 27 May 2021, calling on the members of the Council to express their votes on
the draft resolution (S/2021/509) presented by the United States of America under
the item “Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan”.
In accordance with the agreed temporary procedures for the adoption of
resolutions during the COVID-19 pandemic restrictions, I have the honour to indicate
that the Republic of the Niger decides to vote in favour of the said draft resolution.
(Signed) Abdou Abarry
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of the Niger to the United Nations

21-0709715/29

S/2021/518

Annex 10
Letter dated 28 May 2021 from the Permanent Representative of
Norway to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I refer to the President of the Security Council’s letter of 27 May 2021, relating
to the draft resolution contained in document S/2021/509 in connection with the
agenda item “Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan”.
In accordance with the procedure set forth for the adoption of resolutions
under the current circumstances caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, I am pleased to
inform you that Norway votes in favour of this draft resolution.
(Signed) Mona Juul
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Norway to the United Nations

16/29

21-07097

S/2021/518

Annex 11
Letter dated 28 May 2021 from the Permanent Representative
of the Russian Federation to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council
I have the honour to acknowledge receipt of your letter of 27 May 2021, on
the beginning of the voting procedure for the draft resolution in connection with
the agenda item “Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan”
(S/2021/509).
In accordance with the procedure for the adoption of resolutions of the
Security Council being in place during the duration of the restrictions on movement
in New York due to the COVID-19 pandemic outlined in a letter by the President of
the Security Council of 27 March 2020 (S/2020/253), I have the honour to inform you
that the Russian Federation votes in favour of draft resolution S/2021/509.
(Signed) Vassily Nebenzia
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to the United Nations

21-0709717/29

S/2021/518

Annex 12
Letter dated 28 May 2021 from the Permanent Representative of
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the draft resolution (S/2021/509) submitted by
the United States of America in connection with the agenda item “Reports of the
Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan”.
In this respect, I wish to inform you that Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
votes in favour of the above-mentioned draft resolution, and attaches herewith its
explanation of vote.
(Signed) Inga Rhonda King
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to the
United Nations

18/29

21-07097

S/2021/518

Annex 13
Letter dated 28 May 2021 from the Permanent Representative of
Tunisia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
Further to the letter dated 27 May 2021 emanating from the Permanent
Representative of China, in his capacity as President of the Security Council,
regarding the draft resolution submitted by the United States of America in
connection with the agenda item “Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
and South Sudan”, as contained in document S/2021/509, I would like to inform you
that Tunisia votes in favour of that draft resolution.
(Signed) Tarek Ladeb
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations

21-0709719/29

S/2021/518

Annex 14
Letter dated 28 May 2021 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
With reference to the letter from the President of the Security Council of 27
May 2021, the United Kingdom votes in favour of the draft resolution (S/2021/509)
on “Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan”.
(Signed) Jonathan Allen
Ambassador
Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland to the United Nations

20/29

21-07097

S/2021/518

Annex 15
Letter dated 27 May 2021 from the Permanent Representative of
the United States of America to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council
On the draft resolution submitted by the United States of America in
connection with the agenda item “Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
and South Sudan” (S/2021/509), the United States of America votes in favour.
(Signed) Linda Thomas-Greenfield
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations

21-0709721/29

S/2021/518

Annex 16
Letter dated 28 May 2021 from the Permanent Representative of
Viet Nam to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
In reference to the letter of the President of the Security Council of 27 May
2021 relating to the draft resolution under the agenda item entitled “Reports of
the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan”, as contained in document
S/2021/509, I would like to hereby inform you that Viet Nam votes in favour of the
said draft resolution.
(Signed) Dang Dinh Quy
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the United Nations

22/29

21-07097

S/2021/518

Annex 17
Statement by the Permanent Mission of China to the United Nations
[Original: Chinese]
The political process in South Sudan has made positive progress recently
and the security situation has also greatly improved. As the primary body for
the maintenance of international peace and security, the Security Council should
send positive messages, lift sanctions against South Sudan as soon as possible and
encourage the parties in South Sudan to pursue their active engagement in the
political process in order to maintain the current good momentum.
China has noted that resolution 2577 (2021) sets a benchmark for reviewing
the arms embargo on South Sudan. It is hoped that the Secretariat and all parties
concerned will, in a constructive spirit, objectively and fairly assess the situation on
the ground based on these benchmarks and lift the arms embargo as soon as possible.
It should be stressed that China does not support the arms embargo on South
Sudan, and this position remains unchanged. We hope that the Security Council will
make timely and effective adjustments to the relevant measures taken against South
Sudan in the light of the changes in the situation in the country, help all parties
in South Sudan advance the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, and promote governance
and security capacity-building in South Sudan.

21-0709723/29

S/2021/518

Annex 18
Statement by the Permanent Mission of India to the United Nations
The Republic of South Sudan is a young sovereign nation emerging from the
ravages of civil war. Progress has been slow but steady since the signing of the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan
in September 2018. In recent months, there have been appointments to gubernatorial
positions and the constitution of regional administrative structures. There has also
been notable improvement in the functioning of important Government institutions.
The Council of Ministers is meeting regularly and national institutions have begun
to show their presence at the ground level. Protection of Civilian sites have also seen
a smooth transition to internally displaced persons camps. The appointments by the
opposition have also adhered to the 35 per cent quota for women. South Sudan has
also been playing an important role in bringing about peace in the Sudan. South
Sudan has been seeking the easing and lifting of the arms embargo imposed in 2018.
This request has been supported by the African Union as well.
In this context, we note that resolution 2577 (2021) has imposed certain
benchmarks for the lifting or easing of the arms embargo, without taking into
consideration positive developments in South Sudan. Some of these benchmarks are
administrative in nature and disregard the genuine challenges that South Sudan is
currently faced with. The linking of legislative and administrative measures to the
lifting of the arms embargo would need to be carefully evaluated as it is restrictive.
However, we also recognize that the security situation continues to remain fragile.

24/29

21-07097

S/2021/518

Annex 19
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Kenya to the United Nations
Kenya’s commitment to the South Sudan peace process needs no explanation.
Kenya hosted and facilitated the protracted negotiations culminating in the historic
2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement that eventually led to the birth of the South
Sudan as a country in 2011.
Kenya has faithfully stood with the people of South Sudan since the start of
the conflict in 2013. As a guarantor of the Revitalized Agreement for the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, we continue to walk with the
Revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity and all the stakeholders
towards sustainable peace and stability. In this process, we have partnered with
neighbouring countries within the framework of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD), the African Union (AU), the United Nations and other
partners, including the troika — the United States of America, the United Kingdom
and Norway — which have made a significant contribution to this endeavour.
Having walked this journey, we have a clear understanding of the strides that
South Sudan has achieved towards peace and stability. We appreciate that much
ground remains to be covered and that South Sudan requires more continued support
from the region and the international community.
It is Kenya’s belief that the arms embargo and targeted sanctions have not
been effective tools in support of the South Sudan peace process. Indeed, they have
in certain cases been counterproductive. In this regard, IGAD and the African Union
have repeatedly called for the lifting of all sanctions on South Sudan.
During the negotiations for the renewal of the South Sudan sanctions resolution,
we reiterated the position of the African Union, insisting that any edits of the draft
(S/2021/509)should be aimed at their eventual lifting. Kenya highly appreciates the
patience, flexibility and the accommodation demonstrated by the penholder and
all members.
The new resolution 2577 (2021) is an improvement on the preceding resolution.
However, Kenya strongly believes that more flexibility could have been extended
to make the eventual lifting of the sanctions realistic and certain. For this reason,
Kenya has chosen to abstain in the voting to demonstrate our keen interest in seeing
the arms embargo and targeted measures lifted, as called for by the AU and IGAD.
Kenya reaffirms its intention to continue working with the penholder and the
members of the Council on the South Sudan peace process. We will redouble our
efforts in supporting the Government and the people of South Sudan to consolidate
the peace in the country and to put more effort into expeditiously attaining all the
benchmarks so that it will no longer be necessary to extend the arms embargo and
targeted sanctions when the resolution comes up for review.

21-0709725/29

S/2021/518

Annex 20
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines to the United Nations
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines thanks the United States of America for its
efforts in preparing resolution 2577 (2021).
My delegation welcomes the progress in South Sudan during the last year,
as highlighted in the Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2021/172). The formation
of the Revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity, the reduction in
political violence, the maintenance of the ceasefire and the renewed commitment
to implementing the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan to advance the peace process are encouraging.
South Sudan is moving in the right direction, as exemplified by its mediating
role in the Juba Peace Agreement. We therefore encourage the Revitalized
Transitional Government of National Unity to continue to stay the course during
this delicate transitional phase so as to enable the full implementation of the
revitalized agreement.
Undoubtedly, numerous challenges linger. The international community has
a responsibility to continue accompanying South Sudan, especially through the
provision of technical assistance, capacity-building and financial support to assist in
addressing security and socioeconomic deficiencies.
From our perspective, the positive political developments we are witnessing
are not attributable to the sanctions — multilateral nor unilateral — imposed on the
youngest nation amongst us. They are consequences of the political will and resolve
of the South Sudanese people to transform their country. We continue to appeal for
the lifting of these measures, underscoring particularly that unilateral sanctions are
incompatible with international law and further undermine the country’s capacity to
respond appropriately to the socioeconomic challenges and the pandemic.
We also share the perspectives of the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, which are closest to the situation, and encourage the
Council to consider the views of these regional partners, which that are, have been
and continue to be key to the peace process in South Sudan.
The continuation of sanctions on South Sudan without any cogent efforts
towards eventually lifting them would have grave ramifications for the entire peace
process. This was our position on this very renewal a year ago, and we strongly
uphold the same views today. United Nations sanctions regimes should be continually
reviewed and amended, and once the purposes for which they were created are
fulfilled — or beyond this, if there is no positive impact of the sanctions on the
ground — they should be effectively terminated. They should also benefit the entire
political process.
The recent improvements in the political and security situation compel the
Council to evaluate the effectiveness of the entire sanctions regime imposed on
South Sudan, not only the arms embargo.
The resolution at hand initiates a process. It provides benchmarks that will
evaluate the arms embargo on South Sudan with the view that they will be lifted as
soon as possible. This posture guided our decision to vote in favour of the resolution.
To be very clear, our vote should in no way be construed as endorsement of the
status quo regarding the sanctions regime on South Sudan.
Finally, we encourage the Council to consider the historical context of South
Sudan going forward, as well as its socioeconomic realities in determining the
renewal of the sanctions regime.
26/29

21-07097

S/2021/518

We remain in full solidarity with the Government and the people of
South Sudan.

21-0709727/29

S/2021/518

Annex 21
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the United States of America
to the United Nations
In less than two months, South Sudan will celebrate the tenth anniversary
of its independence. The date of 9 July 2011 marked a milestone in the aspirations
of the South Sudanese for greater stability and prosperity for all its people. Much
more needs to be done to achieve these goals. Resolution 2577 (2021), which the
Council adopted today to renew the United Nations sanctions regime for South
Sudan — to include an arms embargo, targeted measures, and the mandate of the
Panel of Experts — continues to play a critical role in decreasing conf lict and
promoting peace.
The United States thanks members of the Security Council for their
constructive engagement on this resolution, including on the creation of benchmarks
that can guide the Council in reviewing sanctions measures. We hope that these
benchmarks encourage will South Sudan’s Revitalized Transitional Government
of National Unity to make important progress on implementing the Revitalised
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, and
ultimately ending the conflict that has been so devastating for South Sudan.
The United States welcomes progress in South Sudan’s peace process and
we encourage South Sudan’s leaders to build on recent efforts to reconstitute the
Transitional National Legislative Assembly. The implementation of security sector
reforms is essential, including the establishment of a unified command structure and
the redeployment of trained, unified forces.
We continue to recognize the dedicated diplomacy of the region, which
is working to build peace in South Sudan. The role of the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and other regional players has been
and will remain essential.
We urge South Sudan’s leaders to remain focused on addressing the
urgent humanitarian needs of their people, respecting human rights and ensuring
accountability, including for sexual and gender-based violence. Too many people —
especially women and children — continue to suffer from ongoing violence. This
resolution works to safeguard their rights, as we retain the ability to designate
individuals and entities for human rights violations and abuses and to deter efforts
of spoilers to the peace process.
The United States looks forward to continuing its close cooperation with the
Security Council, South Sudan, the United Nations and other stakeholders in support
of peace, stability, justice and development in South Sudan.

28/29

21-07097

S/2021/518

Annex 22
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Viet Nam to the
United Nations
Viet Nam welcomes the continued encouraging developments in South Sudan
since the beginning of 2021, particularly with the reconstitution of the Transitional
Legislative National Assembly. At the same time, we are aware of the difficulties
and challenges that this young nation is facing, particularly in the need to address
intercommunal violence issues and to make more concrete progress on the transitional
process and the security arrangements.
As Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan, Viet Nam has closely cooperated with members
of the Committee, South Sudan, the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) and the Panel of Experts with the goal of facilitating the
effective implementation of relevant Security Council resolutions and contributing
to peace, stability and development in South Sudan.
Viet Nam reiterates its position that Security Council sanctions should only be
a tool to promote sustainable peace, security and development, and shall not affect
the development of a country or the livelihood of its people. Sanctions should be
lifted as soon as the conditions are met.
In this regard, we acknowledge that resolution 2577 (2021) recognizes the
need to continuously review the measures and established benchmarks for the review
of the arms embargo, with a view to lifting it based on progress on the ground. We
would like to thank the penholder for incorporating inputs to that effect put forth by
Viet Nam and other members.
Therefore, after careful consideration, Viet Nam decided to vote in favour of
resolution 2577 (2021). We sincerely hope that the adoption of this resolution will
contribute to the achievement of long-term peace and stability in South Sudan.
Viet Nam will continue to work closely with relevant Member States, the
United Nations, IGAD and the African Union in providing support to the transitional
process in South Sudan, with the aim of facilitating the review and subsequent lifting
of the sanctions measures. We call on all other Council Members to do the same.

21-0709729/29
