UNITED

NATIONS

T

SE
ICIAL
TWENTY-

FIFTH

1541

CI
R

CORDS

YEAR

st

MEETING:

NEW

15 MAY 1970

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l541)

. . .. . . . . . , , . . . . . I . . . . . , . . . , . . , . , . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . , . . . . . , . , , . . . , . , , . . . , . . . . . . . , , . . . , , . . . . , . , . , .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 May 1970 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council,
(S/9794) . * , . , , , . . , , . , , , , . . , , . . , . . . . . * . . . . , * . . . . . . , . . . , , , . , , . , . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 May 1970 from the Permanent Representative of Israel to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9795) * , . . . * , , , , , , . . . . . . . , . . . , * , . . * . . , . I . . . . . * * I . . , . . . . . . , . . . I . . 1

SlPV.1541

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters conzbirzed with $gures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . . ) are normally published
in quarterly Supplements of the OfJicial Records of the Security Council. The
date of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions
of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 196.5, became fully operative
on that date.

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND FORTY-FIRST

MEETING

Held in New York on Friday, 15 May 1970, at 10.30 a.m.
Mr.

Presidcrrt:

Jacques KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET
(France).

Presenr: The representatives of the following States:
Burundi, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Spain, Syria, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
and Zambia.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l541)
I.

Adoption

2.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 May 1970 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9794)

3.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 May 1970 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9795)

I

of the agenda

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 May 1970 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9794)

reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber
on the understanding that they will be invited to sit
at the table when it is their turn to address the Council.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. E. Ghoua,
representative of LeDamn, and Mr. Y. Tekoah, representative ofIsrael, took places at the Secur-ity Council table, and Mr. A. T. Benhinm, sepresentative of
Morocco, and Mr. J. M. Baroody, representative of
Saudi Arabia, took the places reserved for them.

2.

Mr.

VALLEJO-ARBELAEZ
(Colombia) (interfrom Spanish): Mr. President, the need
for me personally to make a statement in the Preparatory Committee
for the United Nations Second
Development Decade made it impossible for me to be
present at the first meeting over which you presided
in the Council, and I was therefore unable to welcome
you and express my appreciation to the colleagues who
were good enough to speak generously regarding the
Colombian presidency of the Council.

pretation

3. The traditional friendly relations between France
and Colombia make it a special pleasure for Colombia
to work with you this month.
4. This week with deep concern we have carried out
an analysis of the situation in the Middle East.
5. Not only are we perturbed over the loss of lives
and of course the material damage caused, but also
at the proof of the impotence of the organs responsible
for the maintenance of peace and security.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 May 1970 from the Permanent Representative of Israel to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9795)

6. An objective analysis of the facts must obviously
take into account the complaints voiced from both sides
of the Israeli-Lebanese frontier. But that analysis must
also not be circumscribed to the present conflict, for
that would be to overlook the more complex causes,
some of historic nature, both recent and remote, others
of the alien interests which extend over the region but
primarily the lack of effective instruments wherewith
to guarantee international public order.

I. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
In accordance with decisions taken previously by the
Council [1537th meeting], I invite the representatives
of Lebanon, Israel, Morocco and Saudi Arabia to participate in the debate without the right to vote. In
accordance with the practice followed in the past, I
propose to invite the representatives of the parties
directly concerned, that is, the representatives of Lebanon and Israel, to take seats at the Council table. The
other representatives will be invited to take the seats

7. It is true that the United Nations marks indisputable progress when it allows the facts to be examined
at meetings such as these of the Security Council,
where the presence and co-operation of other representatives of peace-loving States allow the explosive tension of many conflicts to be released. And it is also
true that at times moral force can be wielded to impose
certain measures, such as was the case with the
recently unanimously adopted provisional resolution
1279 (1970)].

8. But it is precisely this interim or provisional nature
that forces us to consider stable solutions, since Article
40 of the Charter, on which provisional measures rest,
implies that those measures extend to all the parties
concerned, and not only to one of them. It is obvious
that the withdrawal of the armed forces of Israel cannot
by itself eliminate the causes which that country has
submitted as justification for procedures which we cannot condone but to which that country had to resort
when confronted with frontier violations by Palestine
commandos in incursions and shellings,

in the military operations which are now being resorted
to in order to solve what should have been solved
under the aegis of the United Nations.
1.5. My delegation has been weighing the possibility
of submitting a formula flowing from ideas of this
nature, and if those views were to commend themselves
to the members of the Council we would be willing
to consider the matter more thoroughly and to prepare
such a proposal.
16. Lately we have heard statements from the
Governments of Israel and the United Arab Republic
in which possibilities of peace are opened up, although
some of them are still overshadowed by threats. Surely
the positive aspects of these offers should not fall on
deaf ears, But my delegation considers that, together
with any efforts made for peace, we must continue
to ponder the need to open up some forum in which
to review the flaws in our own United Nations institutional system, flaws that stand in the way of our tackling
the causes of the war in their origins dr effectively
defusing the political movements which generate international tension.

9. Thus a judgement of responsibilities must be set
up within the legal framework created by the Security
Council resolution of 1967 and by the Charter of the
United Nations in general. It is a known fact that these
resolutions have not been complied with and that the
six-day war has now in fact been prolonged for three
years. Not only do we not glimpse any possibility of
an end to it, but it constantIy threatens to spread both
in time and in space.
10. The
Secretary-General
has perseveringly
struggled to reestablish peace in the Middle East. Very
often, he raises a concerned voice to the world: he
addresses the belligerents;
he sets up observation
bodies to detect the movement and sense of the violence; he shelters refugees, and he exercises good
offices through his Special Representative,
Ambassador Jarring.

17. Colombia
is a peace-loving state. It enjoys
friendly relations with both parties to the conflict
because, among other reasons, it has welcomed immigrants from both those regions and, in turn, has
received from them the benefit of their work and
wisdom. We do not want formulas to be adopted that
will be the seeds of future conflicts, and we hope that
we will be able to offer our co-operation as a mediating
Power in the study of just and realistic solutions.

11. The four great Powers have endeavoured to
devise compromise
political
soIutions, and in the
course of the debates of this week they have allowed
us to see how far they still are from an agreement
that would allow the Security Council to expect a
speedy solution. Proof of this is the fact that this meeting is being held today.

18. The Colombian delegation deplores the fact that
by gradual steps we have arrived at the present point
in this conflict. The United Nations was created to
preserve and guarantee peace. Very often in the past
those objectives were successfully achieved for the
benefit of the international community, but what we
are confronting at the moment is a sratus qsro declared
on a state of war, with academic proposals of condemnation of one side or the other.

12. Perhaps there might be other formulas and, even
should they be as precarious as negotiations by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General or as
elusive as the fencing between the great Powers, the
Council should not hesitate to explore them.
13. On a personal basis, the representative of Brazil,
Mr. Araujo Castro, recently voiced an idea for ad lzoc
committees. We know that in the present case there
is already in existence a special committee-the
committee of Four-but
it has its own specific features,
those of political negotiations among the guarantors
of peace: tiamely the permanent representatives on the
Council.

19. Colombia has supported those condemnations but
we are not unaware of the fact that, far from drawing
closer to what should be our ultimate goal, namely
peace, we are indefinitely admitting the existence of
a state of war as though our role were that of ensuring
that war take place within the framework of international conventions, like so many umpires that must
ensure compliance with the ground rules of war games.
No. Our role is not to regularize war but to seek peace
and the initiative I have hinted at wquld have precisely
that purpose: to rescue the Organization from a role
for which it was not created.

14. Hence we might consider the possibility of setting
up another committee composed of three members of
the Council that are not directly linked to the conflict
to hear the parties, to take note of the efforts at negotiation made by the Secretary-General and be given access
to the political formulas of the great Powers and then,
within a reasonable period of time, to present to the
Council a series of solutions covering all aspects of
the problem-namely,
the refugees, the frontiers,
Jerusalem, disarmament, etc. This would allow a truce

20. So we would echo the voices that have been raised
here in the Council, particularly, Mr. President, Your
own, voices that have appealed to the peace-loving
spirit of nations to seek solutions that will not Perpetuate a state of war.
2

members or the two super-Powers for the purpose of
solving the conflict in the Middle East. Yesterday we
heard important statements on behalf of the United
States and the Soviet Union and we would hope that
goodwiI1 on all sides might allow us to find a just solution to this grave situation.

21.
Mr. DE PINIES
(Spain) (interpret&m from
SpoGsh): On 12 May[I537th rneeting]when my &legation submitted the draft resolution which was adopted
unanimously as resolution 279 (1970), demanding the
immediate withdrawal of the armed forces of Israel
from the territory of Lebanon, we announced that we
intended at some forthcoming meeting to make known
OUI' views regarding the subject on the agenda of the
Security Council.

27. My delegation considers that the creation of the
necessary climate is not furthered by violations of the
cease-fire. However, how can we consider that the
temporary
nature of those resolutions
can be
indefiniteiy extended, and that mention is even made
in the Council of a so-called cease-fire line? This concept is non-existent. There is no such line. Resolutions
234 (1967) and 235 (1967) should already have been
superseded by the implementation
of resolution 242
(1967). Resolution 242 (1967), which was unanimously
adopted and sponsored by the United Kingdom, surely
contains the necessary bases for a solution of the conflict.

22. First and foremost, my delegation is gratified at
the compliance by Israel with the terms of the abovementioned resolution and we feel that this may well
be a happy omen allowing us finally to solve the serious
crisis besetting the Middle East.
23. Today we have to consider the aggression committed by Israel. Let us recall that in August this Council had to meet to weigh a complaint by Lebanon of
the shelling with the most modern weapons by the
Israeli Army of Lebanese villages. These facts, reprehensible by their nature, caused victims, and the
moment has now arrived for the necessary measures
to be adopted to avoid so much shedding of blood
and so much violence.

28. Now, how can we expect the parties victims of
the aggression to yield territories occupied by force
and by the violence of arms? How can we expect that
a resolution imposing a purely provisional cease-fire-l
would even say a temporary cease-fire-can then be
given long-range validity? Let us not deceive ourselves.
To try indefinitely to maintain what is of a transitory
and temporary nature is to expect the impossible, and
it is not that my delegation does not deplore this, but
by the very nature of things and because of the events
that constantly recur and that are brought to our notice
daily through our information
media and by the
documentation
circulated by the United Nations Secretariat, we could hardly expect other results.

24. Consistent with this view, my delegation wishes
to stress some aspects of the matter: the delegation
of Israel alleges that it suffers constant aggression from
the Palestinian guerrillas; it very often refers to bombings, shellings, armed attacks and aggression of all
kinds. My delegation laments the fact that there are
constant violations of the cease-fire resolution, with
the inevitable victims. Yesterday [1540th meeting] the
representative
of Syria recalled how, after having
approved resolutions 233 (1967) and 234 (1967) the
Israeli army proceeded to occupy the Golan Heights.

29. Once again my delegation reiterates that the main
cause that gives rise to this situation is the lack of
compliance with resolution 242 (1967) of the Security
Council. We cannot continue to allow the occupation
of territories by force to be perpetuated, nor the decisions of this organ of the United Nations to remain
unfulfilled.
The longer we take to comply with the
decisions of the principal organs of the United Nations
the more we are contributing to the weakening of our
Organization.

25. However, let us see what the nature of those
resolutions is. We believe that they are purely temporary resolutions intended, by holding up a grave
situation, to allow the cessation of hostilities and give
the Security Council sufficient time to prepare a final
resolution. From June 1967, when the first resolutions
on the cease-fire were adopted, until resolution 242
(1967) was approved, five months elapsed. Once that
last resolution was adopted it was only natural to hope
that since it called for immediate implementation,
or
at least implementation
within a prudent length of time,
it might have been followed up. However, two and
a half years have eIapsed since the approval of resolution 242 (1967) and all efforts made to ensure compliance with it have Failed. The debate that has taken
place in the last few days has brought out facts that
we may well have suspected or whose existence we
may have imagined, but with the statements made to
this Council an official stamp has been placed upon
the desire to maintain unde- the military occupation
of Israel certain portions of what is indisputably Arab
territory.

30. My delegation must condemn energetically the
latest action undertaken by Israel against Lebanon.
We in no way condone any of the attacks 1evelIed
against the former, but let us note that in the majority
of cases they are violent acts carried out by guerrilla
groups belonging to a people that has been displaced
and that thej, are directed against a zone militarily
occupied by Israel by force.
31. The fact that resolution 242 (1967) provides for
a political solution satisfying all States of the area
should stand as adequate guarantee for restoring peace
in that sorely afflicted region. My delegation trusts
that the meetings of the four permanent members and
the resumption of the Jarring mission will allow, in
this year of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the United
Nations, a re-establishment of peace, so that all the
States in that region will be able to live free from

26. It is only too well-known that the non-permanent
members of the Security Council have been deeply
concerned at noting a lack of progress in the conversations which have been held among the four permanent
3

and we trust that, without excuses or pretexts,
there will be compliance as speedily as possible with
resolution 242 (1967). Let us not forget that almost
three years have elapsed since the six-day war, and
the prestige of our Organization cannot be constantly
eroded without the rest of the Members trying to fulfil
our duties and ensure compliance with its decisions.
Let us not forget that paragraph I of article 24 of the
Charter states:
“In order to ensure prompt and effective action
by the United Nations, its Members confer on the
Security Council primary responsibility
for the
maintenance of international peace and security, and
agree that in carrying out its duties under this responsibility the Security Council acts on their behalf.”

Armistice Commission [see 1540th meetirzg, para. 843
that the withdrawal of the Israeli forces has been officially confirmed by the Lebanese authorities and that
the decision of the Council has thus been carried out.
The Council must, therefore, at this time Iook beyond
the current conflict and search for an acceptable final
settlement of the Middle East problem, It is sad to
reflect that almost three years after the war of June
1967 the prospects for peace are as bleak as ever. In
fact the situation has been steadily deteriorating. A
state of active warfare now prevails on all fronts. The
cease-fire established by the Security Council as a first
step towards the restoration of stability has become
totally ineffective. The principles laid down in Security
Council resolution242(1967)forajustand
lastingpeace
remain unimplemented.
The talks engaged in by the
four interested Powers have so far proved unproductive. As matters now stand, there is little room for
optimism.

threats,

32. One may criticize this Council as one wishes but,
when it acts, it does so on behalf of all Members of
the Organization, including those who censure and vilify the Council.

38. Yet sooner or later a way must be found to resolve
the present deadlock which has already caused so much
misery and suffering. We therefore appeal to the parties
concerned for compromise and conciliation. We are
sure that all of them want peace. What is required
is to do the hard things that are essential to that end.
My delegation supports all efforts, including the talks
of the four interested Powers, to bring about a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East. Above all, we
hope that the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative, Mr. Jarring, will be enabled to continue his consultations with the parties immediately concerned, for
the understanding and consent of those who control
the destinies of the area are absolutely essential to
any meaningful and durable settlement.

33. The PRESIDENT
(intc/p/‘ctatio/l
$*om Fre,zcl?):
As President of the Security Council I now call on
the representative of China.
34. Mr. LIU (China): The situation in the Middle East
was last discussed in the Security Council in August
1969 [/49&h to 15021~1 ~~rri 15’04th mccrings].
At that
time the Council was called upon to deal with the bombing of Lebanese villages by units of the Israeli Ail
Force. Now, more than eight months after that
meeting, the Council has been convened on an urgent
basis to consider a similar incident. This time the case
involves a massive incursion by Israeli armed forces
into south Lebanon. Now, as then, Israel has justified
its action on the ground of self defence. Its purpose,
according to the statement of the Israeli representatige,
was to destroy the bases on Lebanese territory used
by Palestinian guerrillas to conduct raids on Israel.
In other words, the Israeli action was in the nature
of military retaliation.

39. THE PRESIDENT
(irzte~pretntiorzfr’onz
Fwnch):
I should now like to address the Council as the representative of FRANCE.
40. My dear colleagues, I am perfectly well aware
of the restraint imposed upon the representative of
France by his position as President of the Security
Council. Although in this case the dual personality is
authorized and even traditional, the Council expects
from the man who presides over its proceedings that
he will search for what unites rather than for what
divides. This will be all the easier for me because that
general policy, the policy of peace and international
co-operation, is precisely what we believe France
stands for.

35. My delegation has in this Council on a number
of occasions voiced its disapproval of the policy of
military retaliation, a policy which is as dangerous as
it is futile. It cannot achieve the purposes for which
it was intended. It can only accelerate the vicious circle
of violence and counter-violence,
36. The Israeli military action is all the more regrettable in view of the fact that it was directed against
a country whi?h did not participate in the June 1967
war and which has played a moderating role in the
affairs of the Middle East. Admittedly,
the Palestinian
guerrillas have been using the territory of Lebanon
to launch attacks on IsraeI. It is a well-known fact,
however, that the Government of Lebanon has tried
to use every means at its disposal to restrain the guerrillas. It is for this reason that my delegation welcomed
the unanimous action taken by the Council on 12 May
in demanding the immediate withdrawal of al1 Israeli
forces from the territory of Lebanon.

41. I should like first of all to do justice to the SecuritY
Council. It,has often been reproached for a lack of
impartiality.
Reference has been made to one-sided
resolutions. No doubt there is some passion in our
statements; the discussions are lively and sometimes
what is said is less than courteous. I am the first to
realize that. As President, I am the one who is supposed
to keep order in our debates and who is supposed to
see to it that everyone’s rights are respected and to
conduct our proceedings to their conclusion in good
order and calm; a calm which is sometimes only
relative. But the very diversity of the composition of
the Council-geographic,
political and ideological-is

37. My delegation is gratified to have the report of
the Acting Chairman of the Israeli-Lebanon
Mixed
4

a,guarantee of the representation of all tendencies. I
would add that, while we naturally express the points
of view of our Governments, our responsibilities go
beyond that, We are the guardians of the United
Nations Charter, its principles and their application.
I know no member of the Council who is not profoundly
convinced of that-not
only the permanent members,
whose special duties have been so aptly pointed out
just recently by the Ambassadors of Zambia and Finland, but also the non-permanent
members who,
through their election, have been delegated by the
whole United Nations to work for the maintenance
of international peace and security. A resolution unanimously adopted is not a one-sided resolution. It is the
expression of the collective will. And that is why we
should strive to bring about agreement between us,
agreement which is the proper way of strengthening
our action and, unquestionably, is a way of fulfilling
the mission entrusted to us by the United Nations
Charter,

carried out with effect from 1030 hours GMT Wednesday, 13 May. But that is not the end of our concern.
Those events form part of a whole: the Middle East
conflict, which is something which can have no solution
but a political one.
46. We are not among those who resign themseIves
to the prolongation and the exacerbation of a war which
is half latent and half over, Some peopIe simply say:
“It is insoluble. Confrontation is inevitable. The Jews
will never come to an understanding with the Arabs.
The Arabs hate the Jews and the Jews hate the Arabs.”
These ominous platitudes are nothing but an alibi for
an ignorance of history and for an abdication of the
spirit and the will. Ambassador Baroody, with his
vast erudition and his great talent, quite rightly pointed
out that for centuries Jews and Arabs lived and worked
side by side without any prob1e.n. Is it worth
remembering,
for example, the tenth century when the
Jews alone provided a link between the Moslem orient
and the Christian west? To our great shame, we must
say that the scourge of racism and of anti-Semitism
was much more widespread in Europe than it was in
the east, And to come to more recent times and even
to personal memories-and
I apologize for this-1
should Ii!<-, to say that I have had the privilege of having
comrades in arms who were Arabs and comrades in
the resistance who were Jews, and I never found among
them any one but men who hated oppression, who
wanted to fight for a world without hatred, men who
loved liberty and dignity. What we must overcome
today here in the Security Council and in the United
Nations is the frightful historical inevitability
which
pits against each other peoples and men who should
be brought close by every possible tie; the community
of suffering and of humiliation, of destroyed and abandoned homes, of wandering and of persecution, and
over and above those tribulations and those dispersals,
the courage to persevere and the hope of a motherland.

42. When on the morning of 12 May the Council was
faced with the situation in the Middle East and the
serious events which occurred in southern Lebanon,
I could not help being struck, like so many members,
at the contrast between the understanding sealed the
day before in the Security Council, which augured so
well for the independence of Bahrain, and the military
operations conducted against a pre-eminently peaceful
and moderate country, Lebanon, a country with which
we in France are united by so many links of history,
culture and feeling. We cannot remain indifferent to
what affects Lebanon,
its independence,
its
sovereignty and its integrity. Two important communities liye in Lebanon in equilibrium and and harmony, a rare and one would like to believe, an exemplary phenomenon.
In expressing once again our
friendship to the people of Lebanon, we would express
the hope that its unity will emerge strengthened from
this new test.
43. Let us say clearly: the Israeli intervention is inadmissible. And not simply because it was against
Lebanon, not simply because it is contrary to the spirit
and the letter of the Charter to assure the right to
send to a neighbouring country troops and armour,
even to carry out what is called in military terminology
a “hit and run raid”-if
we are not to use the frightful
term “sweep” -but also and particularly because this
operation, which has no future militarily,
constitutes
an act of escalation which makes even more difficult
the bringing about of a peaceful settlement.

47. We have never ceased to proclaim-and
we are
not in the habit of using different language in Paris,
New York, Cairo, Amman, Beirut, Damascus and Tel
Aviv-that
Israel has the right to existence, to recognition and to security. Israel has the right to secure and
guaranteed frontiers, and its neighbours must undertake clearly and unequivocally to live in peace with
Israel. But those frontiers cannot be the frontiers of
occupation or annexation. Our Foreign Minister, Mr,
Maurice Schumann, stated recently in our National
Assembly:

44. We have heard the reasons alleged, Violations
of the cease-fire are unfortunately a fact on both sides.
And we deplore violations on both sides, because
nothing but blood, tears and mourning can emerge from
this exchange of raids and counter-raids, strikes and
reprisals.

“The essential difficulty stems from what I would
call a certain incapacity on the part of Israel to take
a definite decision with regard to its fundamental
problem: namely, what to do with the occupied territories and a million Arabs.
“How, in these circumstances, can Israel hope
to convince those with whom it wants to deal directly
and without any pre-condition that it is not thinking
of taking advantage of the occupation to impose an
expansion of its territory? How can it in this way
ensure its own security?”

45. Without any doubt, in unanimously adopting the
proposal of our Spanish colleague the Council has
abided by the principle of doing first things first, and
we have learned with satisfaction that the withdrawal
Of Israeli armed forces from Lebanese territory was
5

48. We have been reading recently that one of the
most authoritative spokesmen of the Tel Aviv Government is reported to have stated that Israel was ready,
in order to assure peace, to make concessions which
would surprise the world. I do not know if that is exactly
what he said, but we certainly do not ask so much.
Let Israel, which owes its foundation to the United
Nations, undertake simply and unreservedly to apply
the terms of the unanimous resolution of 22 November
1967 of the Security CounciI of this same United
Nations, and I think a great step forward will have
been taken towards peace and towards the solution
of the Palestinian problem, which grows more acute
every day.

cannot but wonder how far one can go in disregarding
basic concepts of law, justice and humanity. Thethesis
propounded today by the representative of Spain can
be summed up simply as follows: as the unconditional
cease-fire established by the Security Council has
unfortunately not yet brought about peace, it is all
right to revert to war and to condone violations of
the cease-fire. Of all the inequitable, one-sided, disastrous contributions to the present situation in the Middle East, this is one of the worst.
56. Mr. DE PINIES
(Spain) (i!zte!pr’elntio/~ fr~nl
Spa/z&/z): I believe that the representative of Israel
has not understood my statement. I shali reiterate what
I said: “My delegation laments the fact that there are
constant violations of the cease-fire resolution, with
the inevitable victims” [see above, prim. 243. This will
be found in the records and on the tape of my statement
and anyone who wishes to refer to it can do so.

49. A year ago my Government took the initiative
in convening a meeting of the permanent members of
the Council in order to seek ways and means of facilitating an implementation
of a settlement on the basis of
resolution 242 (1967), and to enable Ambassador Jarring to resume his mission.

57. What I have contended, and again I shall quote
myself, is:
“Yesterday we heard important
statements on
behalf of the United States and the Soviet Union
and we ‘would hope that goodwill on all sides might
allow us to find ajust solution to this grave situation.
“My delegation considers that the creation of the
necessary climate is not furthered by violations of
the cease-fire. However, how can we consider that
the temporary nature of those resolutions con be
indefinitely extended, and that mention is evenmade
in the Council of a so-called cease-fire line? I . .
Resolutions 234 (1967) and 235 (1967) should already
have been superseded by the implementation of
resolution 242 (1967).” [See nDuve, pnras. 26 od

50. Despite the protracted nature of this work and
the paucity of the apparent results, I think, as Lord
Caradon does, that this effort of reflection was not
futile, and the statements made here in the Council
itself by tlie representatives of the United States and
the Soviet Union have convinced me that if, in good
faith, we abide by the resolution which we all voted
for, we can find, on the essential matters and rapidly,
a large field of agreement.
51. If the distressing events in Lebanon could make
it possible for us, with the encouragement and the support of the Council, to advance more boldly upon the
only possible course at the present time, the course
of peaceful settlement, then it will be a case of an
ill wind having blown somebody some good. I would
hope that the Government of Israel, like all interested
Governments, would be convinced of this. Today, we
have a unique opportunity once again, a unique opportunity for peace and security, which for the time being
is the only constructive path, and certainly does not
exclude any initiative or proposal which has the same
end in view.

27.1
58. My delegation feels that those resolutions are
valid until resolution 242 (1967) is complied with and
deplores the fact that two and a half years have elapsed
and that that resolution, which provides for a political
solution to the conflict, has not as yet been put into
effect.

59. I presume that the representative
of Isreal Will
agree with me that when that resolution has been
implemented we will not have to recall cease-fires or
the cessation of hostilities. The cause that created this
grave conflict will I believe have disappeared. That
is why my delegation again restates its desire to see
resolution 242 (1967) complied with as soon as possible,
for that will have solved a conflict which I believe
has already gone too far.

52. It is in the light of this fundamental
necessity
that we shall take our stand on any possible resolutions.
This is no longer the time for pronouncing anathemas.
Let us realize that we should not do anything to earn
the condemnation of Guglielmo Ferrero: “We are a
civilization
which knows how to make war but
no longer knows how to make peace.”
53. Speaking again as PRESIDENT:
There are no
further speakers on my list for the moment. If everybody agrees, I shall set the next meeting for Monday,
18 May, at 3 p.m.

60. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): I had occasion yesterday
Ll540t11 meeting] and the day before [1539th r?leetid
to quote the most important paragraphs of the two
resolutions, resolution 235 (1967) and 236 (19671, which
were unanimously adopted by the Council following
the occupation by Israeli troops of Syrian territory.
During the debates following the adoption of resolution
236 (1967) on 11 June, an interpretation of the cease-fire
was givenin the Security Council and never challenged,
At that time, the representative of a non-permanent

54. The representative of Isreal has asked for the
floor and I now call upon him,
55. Mr. TEKOAH
(Israel): I have just one word. I
feel that I cannot pass over in silence the statement
we heard today from the representative
of Spain. I
6

member of the Security Council, the Ambassador of
Nigeria, said the following:
“A cease-fire, as we understand it, mu& mean
that the guns must be silenced and that the troop
movements must be halted wherever they are. Any
attempt to gain legal and geographical advantages
from the current situation must therefore be
deplored. ” 11357th meeting, pam. 176.1
61. I wish to repeat the sentence: “Any attempt to
gainlegal and geographial advantages from the current
situation must therefore be deplored.” The representative of Nigeria went on to say:
“I have one last point. In the course of the debate
this evening, a new phrase has gradually come into
circulation, that is the phrase ‘cease-fire line’. Lest
it be accepted merely by default, let me say, for
my delegation at least, that we do not understand
that there is a cease-fire line. There are the armistice
lines. There is the cease-fire order which means that
troops should stay where they are and that any movement, north, south, east or west, except such movement as to return from the scene of battle to one’s
own home ground, is a violation of the cease fire.”
[Ibid., para. 177.1

fire. The second point is the confirmation that there
are the armistice lines. The armistice lines are the result
of the armistice agreements concluded in 1948 and
1949. The armistice agreements are still valid. The
Secretary-General
and the United Nations are on
record as declaring that they cannot be denounced
unilaterally as they were by Israel, and that the armistice agreements provide all the machinery to preserve
the peace in the area.
64. One last point. I listened carefulIy this morning
to the statement made by our colleague and friend,
the very distinguished representative of Colombia, who
is a well-known and great statesman in his own country.
I shall of course read the full text of his statement
in the verbatim record, and if I misunderstood what
he said I apologize in advance. But if, as I gathered,
the represtntative
of Colombia was saying that the
solution to the problem arising from the complaint of
Lebanon of an attack on Lebanese territory-and
this
is the third complaint by Lebanon, the first relating
to the attack on Beirut and the second to an attack
on southern Lebanon, not to speak of all the other
attacks-is
to have more observers, that is provided
for by an agreement and a machinery that already exist,
namely, the armistice agreement. Does a larger number
of observers prevent Israel from continuing and perpetuating its attacks. 3 The answer is in the records
of the Security Council and of the United Nations.

62. Following that, the representative of the United
Kingdom, Lord Caradon, commented on the explanation of the cease-fire by the representative of Nigeria
in the following words:
“I have only one point which I wish to make,
very shortly. I wish to express my gratitude to the
representative of Nigeria for raising an important
point. I think that when I was speaking earlier I
referred to the cease-fire line. If 1 did so, I did SO
inadvertently. I entirely agree with the important
point which he has put to us. It is well, I think,
to refer back to the actual :vords of the agreement
reached by General Bull, I refer to the record of
yesterday’s meeting, the actual words of General
Bull were: , . . ‘I proposed a cease-fire together
with no further movement of troops to be effective at
1630 GMT 10 June,’ That is the proposal which he
made to both parties, and it was accepted by both
parties,

65. The number of observers in the cease-fire sector
between the United Arab Republic and Israel, or
between Syria and Israel, has not prevented Israel from
carrying out attacks daily against those two countries
and against Jordan. Indeed, if I may, I shall only remind
the Council of the number of violations against Syria
alone, which I reported yesterday and which in 1969
amounted to 509, and in the first three months of 1970
to 1,045 plus those mentioned in the nineteen reports,
which I read, covering the period from 8 April to 8
May.
66. The question is not a quantitative one; it is a
qualitative one; it is the respect of the agreement-the
armistice agreement is still valid-it
is the respect of
the principles of the Charter, more specifically Article
2, which among its principles states in paragraph 4
that:
“All Members shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any
state . . , ”

“I am very glad that I can confirm that, and if
previously I used the word ‘cease-fire line’, I was
mistaken.” Dbid., paras. 204 and 205.1
63, Now what do we conclude from this definition
of the cease-fire, which was never challenged by the
Security Council because the Council accepted that
interpretation? What we conclude is the following:
first, that no party-and
in this case the party is the
one that occupies the territory of the other State-can
gain legal and geographical advantages from the current
situation and, if any party can that must be deplored.
But what is the situation now? Israel has, contrary
to the Geneva Convention,l
bulldozed villages and
established settlements-twelve
of them in the Syrian
occupied territory, a large number in Jordan and in
the Sinai-which
is in full contradiction to the cease-

67, This is a principle, and a principle cannot be compromised with. As to the actuality of the situation the
armistice agreements are still valid and they provide
the machinery. What the Security Council is seized
with now is the complaint by Lebanon for which a
very urgent solution and action by the Council is
requested.

’ Geneva Convention Relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75 (1950), No.

68. The PRESIDENT
(i/zterpretcrtiorz from French):
I call on the representative of Israel.

9731,

7

69. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I should like to make only
a brief wise uzl point following upon the words of the
representative of Syria. I should simply like to recall
that on 13 June 1967 the representatives of the Government of Syria signed a document and a map, not only
accepting the cease-fire but establishing the cease-fire
lines as they were on that date-about
seven days after
the end of the six-day war. Those documents are of
course reproduced in various official United Nations
documents distributed at the time by the SecretaryGeneral to members of the Security Council.

problem that is weighing so heavily upon the entire
situation in the Middle East, and conduct a thorough
study of the problem of the frontiers and of the fulf$
ment of resolutions still pending. Then, from the formulas that would be submitted to the Security Council,
there might be devised a formula for peace. This would
not differ from the work being done by the Four nor
be contrary to the work that the Secretary-General
is engaged in. It is not incompatible with these nor
does it conflict with them-they
complement one
another-and
we would use these elements ofjudgement.

70.

Mr. VALLEJO-ARBELAEZ
(Colombia) (irzterfrom
Spanish):
I should like to explain
to the representative of Syria that Colombia’s proposal
was not a formal one. I merely hinted at the possibility
of considering a formula similar to that suggested by
Mr. Araujo Castro of Brazil in an academic meeting
in California, regarding the setting-up of small nn hoc
committees. This is different from the group that
already exists in the Security Council, composed of
four permanent members of the Security Council-the
four great Powers, as we term them-and also different
in function from the action which the SecretaryGeneral is at present carrying out through Ambassador
Jarring.

74. We find that the situation of the four great Powers
is very different; they have to defend their dangerous
political positions concerning the balance of power in
the world to discuss a concrete problem of the Middle
East. On the other hand, these three countries, which,
as I said, are not linked to the conflict, might with
greater freedom of action be able to devise generous
formulas which the Security Council might be in aposition to consider.

pr’etation

75. What I asked on behalf of the delegation of Colombia was whether the Security Council felt that a formula
of such a nature might be viable, so as to study it
thoroughly. I am not making a formal proposal, It is
not a question of replacing the armistice commissions
nor the observers that the Secretary-General has sent
to the Middle East to do their duties, nor is it the
suggestion of Colombia that there should be set up
a group of amicable negotiators for it will not act as
intermediary
between the parties. It would be, as
Ambassador Araujo Castro has called it, an nd hoc
committee that would draw up an entire system of
solutions to the problems besetting the countries of
the Middle East.

71. In the first of these cases, the committee of the
Four, there is political work being done which goes
beyond the direct interests of the countries concerned
and touches upon world peace, the balance of world
forces. It is the four countries which are the guarantors
of peace in the Security Council that have to speak
of this balance of forces in the world. They are carrying
out their duties in doing so, and I believe that, as
the President has himself told us, they are progressing
effectively. Some day, perhaps unexpectedly, we shall
get results-I hope so.

76. I think I have explained to Ambassador Tolneh
the purport of the Colombian suggestion. However,
I too intend to revise the interpretation of the statement
I have made in order to make sure that it is correct
and to see if we can find some path, Colombia would
be ready to serve in a body of that nature. It would
be a neutral, impartial ad hoc committee not linked
to the conflict itself.

72. Then, again, we know that Ambassador Jarring
is carrying out his good offices of amicable negotiator
between the two parties, and we trust too that at some
time we may obtain some formula that will allow us
to weigh the proposals that we have lately heard from
the Prime Minister of Israel and the President of the
United Arab Republic: both generous proposals for
a peaceful settlement.

77. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): I wish to express my most
sincere thanks and appreciation to the representative
of Colombia for the very constructive explanation that
he has given me in his reply.

73. However, we felt that neither of these two systems had itself been entirely exhausted; that the matter
could still be considered along those lines but that the
Security Council should not reject the goodwill of three
small countries that are not linked directly to the conflict and want to offer their services not as observers
at the place of conflict but to hear the views of the
Arab side and those of the Israeli side-a group of
three that would have available to it the information
,received from the Special Representative
of the
Secretary-General and would also have access to the
political formulas that are being discussed in the Four,
In possession of all the historic factors and bearing
in mind Security Council resolution 242 (1967) and
those th+t preceded it, which have been cited, and
which are still to be complied with, this group of three
countries might then present a complete formula, a
study, in which it would consider the very grave refugee

78. With regard to the remarks made by Mr. Tekoah.
I wish to make two points: first, that agreeing on a
cease-fire arrangement does not mean at all that we
agree on the cease-fire line becoming the frontier of
a new and greater Israel; secondly, the interpretation
of the cease-fire line! as 1 read it verbatim from the
records of the Security Council, stands and remains
unchallenged.
79. Mr. Tekoah has attempted time and again, as he
has done today, to make the Council accept as an international concept what the Council itself has denounced
as a fraud. Therefore the members of the Council and
the Council itself, in the spirit of respect for the law,
8

should accept what the Council has already interpreted
to be the cease-fire line. Furthermore, on the cease-fire
arrangement, as in the armistice agreement, the reservation has always been made that that arrangement
does not prejudice in any way the legal rights of any
party concerned. This remains the case, but it is known

to all of us that there is already a map of greater Israel,
officially published by the Israeli Government, including all the occupied territories behind the cease-fire
line, and that is what we deny to Israel.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

9

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may
bookstore

COMMENT

LES PUELICATIONS

SE PROCURER

be obtained
or write

from baokrlores
and dlstributorr
IOI United
Notions,
Sales Sectlon,

DES NATIONS

throughout
Now York

UNIES

Ler publications
der Notions
Unier
sent en vente dons 10s librairiec
et ICI ogencer
ddpositoires
du monde enticr.
Informez-vous
ouprbs de votre librairia
ou odresrorhvous
6:
Notions
Unier, Section
des venter,
New York ou GenBve.
HAH
,

IlOJlY’iMTb

MSAAHMH

OPrAHM3AQMM

06bEAMHEHHblX

HA~MR

IIn~ar~rrnOprnnnanqnnOdao~nrmw~h~x
Hqnfi ~~o~it110
KynnPbn x~rwtatix
;\~aran~~~~r?x n
arcmc~n~x
DO nccs pnllonanwpn. Ifnna@rrc cnpnnrcn06 113,7a11nnx n B~III~I I~;KIION
~IIl~Il3IiIlC

11411 IllIIlIlITC

PO flapOCj’
nnn

: opKtlIll3~~llJI

O6’bCAIIIICLIIiblX

llpoj(axieRa@wnI”l,Hamnop1c

3ICelrcnn.

COMO

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

o su librero

o: Naciones

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

portes
del mundo.
Conrulte
en todar
Ventar,
Nuevo York o Ginebro.

Price:

SU.S.

o dirfjase

I .OO (or cquiwlent

in other

I&@,

currencies)

Unidor,

fihKqMl

II0

Secci6n

de

R?O70-June

1973~-?.o.co
