A/RES/68/1

United Nations

Distr.: General
13 December 2013

General Assembly
Sixty-eighth session
Agenda items 14 and 118

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 September 2013
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/68/L.2)]

68/1. Review of the implementation of General Assembly
resolution 61/16 on the strengthening of the Economic
and Social Council
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 45/264 of 13 May 1991, 48/162 of 20 December 1993,
50/227 of 24 May 1996, 52/12 B of 19 December 1997, 57/270 B of 23 June 2003,
60/265 of 30 June 2006, 61/16 of 20 November 2006 and 65/285 of 29 June 2011,
Recalling also its resolution 66/288 of 27 July 2012, by which it endorsed the
outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development,
entitled “The future we want”,
Recalling further its resolution 67/290 of 9 July 2013,
Reaffirming the role that the Charter of the United Nations and the General
Assembly have vested in the Economic and Social Council, and recognizing the
need for a more effective Council as a principal body for coordination, policy
review, policy dialogue and recommendations on issues of economic and social
development, as well as for implementation of the international development goals
agreed at the major United Nations conferences and summits, including the
Millennium Development Goals,
Reaffirming also the commitment to and emphasizing the need to strengthen
the Economic and Social Council, within its mandate under the Charter as a
principal organ of the United Nations, in the integrated and coordinated follow-up
of the outcomes of all major United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social, environmental and related fields, and recognizing the key role of
the Council in achieving a balanced integration of the three dimensions of
sustainable development,
Recalling its resolution 67/199 of 21 December 2012, including the decision to
hold open, transparent and inclusive consultations to review and explore the
modalities of the financing for development process, including possible
arrangements to strengthen the process, as well as options for bringing together the
various processes covering development financing in an integrated manner, taking
13-43951

*1343951*

Please recycle

Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 61/16
on the strengthening of the Economic and Social Council

A/RES/68/1

into account the recommendations contained in the report of the Secretary-General
on modalities of the financing for development follow-up process, 1
Noting the processes related to the implementation of the outcome of the
United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, the acceleration of the
implementation of the Millennium Development Goals and the elaboration of the
post-2015 development agenda,
1.
Takes note of the note by the President of the General Assembly on the
review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 61/16 on the
strengthening of the Economic and Social Council; 2
2.
Also takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of General Assembly resolution 61/16 on the strengthening of the
Economic and Social Council; 3
3.
Adopts the text contained in the annex to the present resolution, and calls
upon the Economic and Social Council and other relevant bodies of the United
Nations system to implement the measures contained therein in an expeditious
manner;
4.
Decides that the arrangements contained in the present resolution and its
annex will be reviewed at its seventy-second session.
2nd plenary meeting
20 September 2013

Annex
Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 61/16
on the strengthening of the Economic and Social Council
1.
In accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations, the Economic and Social Council should continue to strengthen its role as
the central mechanism for coordination of the activities of the United Nations
system and its specialized agencies and supervision of subsidiary bodies in the
economic, social, environmental and related fields. It should provide overall
guidance and coordination to the United Nations development system and promote a
coordinated follow-up to the outcomes of major international conferences and
summits in the economic, social, environmental and related fields. The working
modalities of the Council should be guided by the principles of inclusiveness,
transparency and flexibility. The Council should aim at creating synergy and
coherence as well as avoiding duplication between its deliberations and those of the
high-level political forum on sustainable development.
2.
The Economic and Social Council shall continue to consider reports of
intergovernmental and inter-agency bodies and mechanisms for coordination and
recommend ways to enhance their efficiency, accountability, interaction and
complementarity of efforts.
3.
In the follow-up to United Nations conferences and summits, the Economic
and Social Council should ensure the harmonization and coordination of the agendas
_______________
1

A/67/353.
A/67/975.
3
A/67/736-E/2013/7.
2

2/7

Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 61/16
on the strengthening of the Economic and Social Council

A/RES/68/1

and work programmes of the functional commissions by promoting a clearer
division of labour among them and providing clear policy guidance to them. To that
end, better preparation of the meetings of the Council should be pursued.
4.
The arrangements set forth in the present annex should not lead to an increase
in the number of meeting days currently provided for the Economic and Social
Council.
5.
The Economic and Social Council shall adjust its programme of work to a
July-to-July cycle with immediate effect and is invited to consider transitional
arrangements for the election of its Bureau, taking into account the relevant rules,
regulations and practices with regard to the work of the Council, its subsidiary
bodies and United Nations funds and programmes.
6.
The Economic and Social Council needs a strengthened issues-based approach
to enhance its lead role in identifying emerging challenges and promoting reflection,
debate and innovative thinking, as well as in achieving a balanced integration of the
three dimensions of sustainable development.
7.
The Economic and Social Council shall base its annual programme of work on
a main theme that will:
(a)

Be determined at the beginning of its cycle;

(b) Be selected taking into account the role of the Council in promoting the
balanced integration of the economic, social and environmental dimensions of
sustainable development, as well as the post-2015 development agenda;
(c) Be decided by the Council based on inputs from its subsidiary bodies, as
well as Member States;
(d) Provide guidance to the work of its entire system while respecting the
agenda, diversity of mandates and specialized expertise of the various subsidiary
bodies;
(e) Enable the Council to promote system-wide coherence and coordination
of issues requiring the effective response of the United Nations system.
8.
The Economic and Social Council shall invite its subsidiary bodies and the
governing bodies of the funds, programmes and specialized agencies to contribute,
as appropriate, to its work in keeping with the agreed theme.
9.
A proposal for the annual theme will be made by the President of the
Economic and Social Council in consultation with the subsidiary bodies and
Member States, initially for the two following cycles and subsequently for the
following year, in order to give ample time for input from subsidiary bodies and
Member States.
10. The Economic and Social Council shall continue to have one substantive and
one organizational session. To ensure a more responsive Council, it may convene
special sessions in accordance with its rules of procedure. The Council, as a
principal organ of the United Nations, is also entitled to hold ad hoc meetings as and
when needed to address urgent developments in the economic, social, environmental
and related fields.

3/7

A/RES/68/1

Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 61/16
on the strengthening of the Economic and Social Council

11. The current segment structure of the substantive session of the Economic and
Social Council will be revised, with a redistribution of working days, as outlined
below:
(a) An operational activities for development segment will be held
immediately following the first regular sessions of the executive boards of the funds
and programmes of the United Nations system. Through this segment the Council
should provide overall coordination and guidance for operational development funds
and programmes on a system-wide basis. Such guidance should include objectives,
priorities and strategies in the implementation of the policies formulated by the
General Assembly, including the quadrennial comprehensive policy review, and
should concentrate on cross-cutting and coordination issues related to operational
activities. Efforts should focus on improving the overall impact of operational
activities of the United Nations system in support of national development
priorities. With a view to avoiding repetition of discussions, the governing boards
that report to the Council should be requested to highlight in their reports to the
Council the issues requiring examination and identify actions to be taken, guided by
the chosen main theme. National officials directly involved in the implementation of
national development strategies, as well as field-level representatives of the United
Nations system, should be encouraged to participate in the segment in order for their
contributions to be taken into account. Contribution of the segment to the
preparations for the quadrennial policy review of operational activities, through
which the Assembly establishes key system-wide policy orientations for the
development cooperation and country-level modalities of the United Nations
system, should be continued;
(b) A humanitarian affairs segment will be held in June, through which the
Council should continue to contribute to strengthening the coordination and
effectiveness of United Nations humanitarian assistance and support and
complement international efforts aimed at addressing humanitarian emergencies,
including natural disasters, in order to promote an improved, coordinated response
by the United Nations. The Council should also continue to hold a special event to
discuss the transition from relief to development, to be convened immediately
preceding the humanitarian affairs segment and following the annual session of the
executive boards of the funds and programmes of the United Nations system;
(c) A high-level segment will be held in July. It will continue to discharge
the functions of the high-level segment of the Council as provided for in General
Assembly resolutions 45/264 of 13 May 1991, 48/162 of 20 December 1993, 50/227
of 24 May 1996 and 61/16 of 20 November 2006, in particular the biennial two-day
Development Cooperation Forum, unless otherwise indicated in the present
resolution or in resolution 67/290 of 9 July 2013. The segment will include the
three-day ministerial meeting of the high-level political forum on sustainable
development provided for in resolution 67/290. The outcome of the segment will be
a ministerial declaration;
(d) Dedicated coordination and management meetings will be held regularly
to perform the functions of the coordination and general segments as provided for in
the General Assembly resolutions mentioned in paragraph 11 (c) above. The timing
of these meetings shall be decided by the Council;
(e) An integration segment shall be held annually, the timing and modalities
of which shall be decided by the Council. The main functions of the segment will be
to consolidate all the inputs of Member States, the subsidiary bodies of the Council,
the United Nations system and other relevant stakeholders and to promote the
4/7

Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 61/16
on the strengthening of the Economic and Social Council

A/RES/68/1

balanced integration of the three dimensions of sustainable development. The
integration segment will bring together the key messages from the Council system
on the main theme and develop action-oriented recommendations for follow-up.
12. The Economic and Social Council should conduct an annual dialogue with the
Executive Secretaries of the regional commissions.
13. The Economic and Social Council should continue to strengthen and further
promote dialogue on and implementation of the financing for development agenda,
inter alia, by strengthening existing arrangements, including the special high-level
meeting with the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, the World Trade
Organization and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, to be
held immediately following the annual spring meeting of the Joint Ministerial
Committee of the Boards of Governors of the Bank and the Fund on the Transfer of
Real Resources to Developing Countries held in Washington, D.C. The Council
should also continue to allocate specific time for deliberation and consideration of
the follow-up to the International Conference on Financing for Development.
14. The Economic and Social Council should promote interaction with relevant
international and regional forums, organizations and groupings that make policy
recommendations or take policy decisions with global implications, as appropriate.
15. In scheduling the above-mentioned sessions, meetings and consultations, the
Economic and Social Council should take into consideration meetings of other
bodies dealing with economic, social and environmental issues to avoid unnecessary
overlapping and overburdening of their agendas.
16. The Economic and Social Council shall hold the regular meetings of its
substantive sessions in New York and the humanitarian affairs segment shall continue
to alternate between New York and Geneva. On an ad hoc and cost-effective basis,
another United Nations location could be decided upon if that would contribute to a
better discussion on the chosen main theme.
17. With a view to continuously improving the interaction with and follow-up to
the work of its subsidiary bodies, the Economic and Social Council should conduct
action-oriented reviews of the activities, reports and recommendations of its
subsidiary bodies, avoiding a repetition of the debates held in those bodies and
focusing attention on issues that require a prioritized and coordinated substantive
response from the United Nations system as a whole. The subsidiary bodies should
include in their reports an executive summary, and the reports should be concise,
clearly identifying the conclusions and recommendations and issues that may
require attention and/or action by the Council.
18. The Economic and Social Council should make transitional arrangements for
holding the annual ministerial review during the high-level segments in 2014 and
2015.
19. The Economic and Social Council should devote time to the specific needs of
countries in special situations, namely the least developed countries, the landlocked
developing countries, the small island developing States and Africa and integrate
their concerns into all segments as cross-cutting priorities. It will continue to
address the particular development challenges of middle-income countries.
20. In line with its earlier decision, the Economic and Social Council will include
in its annual ministerial review in 2015 a review of the implementation of the

5/7

Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 61/16
on the strengthening of the Economic and Social Council

A/RES/68/1

Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020
(Istanbul Programme of Action). 4 The Development Cooperation Forum should
continue to take into consideration the Istanbul Programme of Action when it
reviews the trends in international development cooperation, as well as policy
coherence for development. The Council also should continue to review and
coordinate the implementation of the Istanbul Programme of Action.
21. The Economic and Social Council should take steps to strengthen the
consideration of issues affecting small island developing States in keeping with the
mandate of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small
Island Developing States (Barbados Programme of Action) 5 and the Mauritius
Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States. 6
22. The Economic and Social Council has an important role as a platform for
multi-stakeholder participation and for engaging all relevant stakeholders in the
work of the Council, particularly with respect to its function related to the
integration of the three dimensions of sustainable development.
23. While retaining its intergovernmental nature, the Economic and Social Council
shall seek to promote the active participation of major groups, non-governmental
organizations, other relevant stakeholders and regional organizations in the
activities of the Council and its functional and regional commissions, in accordance
with the provisions of their respective rules of procedure and the provisions of
General Assembly resolution 67/290 insofar as it pertains to the meetings of the
high-level political forum on sustainable development under the auspices of the
Council.
24. The Economic and Social Council should further promote the integration of
youth into its deliberations, building on the past positive experiences of the informal
youth forums. The Council should also continue with the informal partnership forum.
25. The Secretary-General should make proposals to promote collaboration across
the United Nations system, taking account of the functions of a strengthened
Economic and Social Council, with the Department of Economic and Social Affairs
of the Secretariat serving as a central hub of support for the Council, in order to
better utilize existing resources of the United Nations system to broaden support to
the Council and its Bureau. The proposals should include measures to enable the
Secretariat to better support the implementation of a unified development agenda.
Similarly, the Secretary-General should explore proposals to strengthen support to
the Council, including to the office of the President of the Council.
26. The Secretary-General should take steps to enable adequate institutional focus
on the needs of small island developing States and provide effective support for the
third International Conference on Small Island Developing States.

_______________
4
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey,
9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7), chap. II.
5
Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States,
Bridgetown, Barbados, 25 April–6 May 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18 and
corrigenda), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
6
Report of the International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, Port Louis, Mauritius, 10–14 January 2005
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.05.II.A.4 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.

6/7

Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 61/16
on the strengthening of the Economic and Social Council

A/RES/68/1

27. The annual programme of work of the Economic and Social Council should
provide for enhancing regular dialogue with the United Nations System Chief
Executives Board for Coordination, taking into account relevant Council and
General Assembly resolutions, including Assembly resolution 67/226 of 21 December
2012 on the quadrennial comprehensive policy review.
28. Resolutions and decisions of the Economic and Social Council should be
implemented and followed up fully by all relevant parts of the United Nations
system. This process should be monitored by the Council and the General Assembly
on a regular basis, as appropriate.
29. The Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly, especially its
Second and Third Committees, need to consider and take steps towards the
rationalization of their agendas, with a view to eliminating duplication and overlap
and promoting complementarity in the consideration and negotiation of similar or
related issues.
30. The Presidents of the Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly
are requested to coordinate with the bureaux of relevant organs and
intergovernmental bodies of the United Nations, including the Peacebuilding
Commission, in order to achieve maximum synergy and effectiveness.
31. The Bureau of the Economic and Social Council should convene regular openended informal consultations of the Council to improve organizational and
procedural as well as substantive aspects of the sessions of the Council, with a view
to highlighting the issues and recommendations that require consideration and
action by the Council in order to have more focused and well-prepared substantive
sessions. This may involve, as appropriate, dialogues with the chairs and the
secretariats of the relevant functional commissions, other subsidiary and related
bodies and executive boards.
32. The Bureau of the Economic and Social Council should continue to meet on a
regular basis to consider issues such as recommendations on agenda items and
subjects, the structure of meetings and lists of guest participants for panel
discussions, and should be kept informed, when appropriate and in the context of its
organizational efforts, of the deliberations of relevant intergovernmental mechanisms
outside the United Nations system. The Bureau shall regularly brief the Council on
its deliberations.
33. Members of the Bureau should communicate to the next session of the
Economic and Social Council the working methods that have proved successful and
the overall experience acquired.
34. The Economic and Social Council should further consider ways to improve its
public profile, including by effectively communicating its role, work and
achievements to the public in a compelling manner.

7/7
