S/PRST/2006/22

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 May 2006
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5438th meeting of the Security Council, held on 15 May 2006, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The question
concerning Haiti”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council congratulates René García Préval on his
inauguration as President of Haiti. The Council also congratulates all newlyelected parliamentarians and calls upon them to recognize the importance of
the mandate given to them by the Haitian people to work constructively to
build a better future for their country. To this end, the Council urges the
executive and legislative powers to establish a fruitful and collaborative
relationship. The Council stresses that the timely holding of municipal, local
and remaining parliamentary elections is fundamental to democratic
governance.
“The Security Council underlines that many challenges remain to be
tackled, including the need to ensure a secure and stable environment in Haiti,
strengthen its democratic institutions, foster national reconciliation,
inclusiveness and political dialogue, promote and protect human rights and the
rule of law, and build governmental capacity, and welcomes Mr. Préval’s
commitment in this regard. The Council also emphasizes the need to reform
and strengthen Haiti’s police, judiciary, and correctional systems, and, in this
regard, looks forward to the results of the discussions between MINUSTAH
and the new authorities on how to address these and other security related
issues. Recognizing that development remains essential to Haiti’s stability, the
Council calls on donors and relevant stakeholders to continue to assess and
coordinate assistance priorities, in close cooperation with the new government,
taking into account existing mechanisms such as the Interim Cooperation
Framework. The Council reiterates the need for the quick implementation of
highly visible and labour intensive projects that help to create jobs and deliver
basic social services. In this regard, the Council looks forward to the upcoming
meeting to be held in Brasilia on May 23.
“The Security Council welcomes CARICOM’s intention to reintegrate
Haiti fully into the activities of the Community. The Council also expresses its
appreciation for the contribution of the Organization of the American States to
the electoral process. In this regard, the Council supports the commitment of

06-34908 (E) 150506

*0634908*

S/PRST/2006/22

the new Haitian authorities to enhance cooperation with regional partners in
order to address issues related to regional stability.
“The Security Council expresses its full support for the continued efforts
by MINUSTAH and the international community to assist Haiti in its ongoing
transition, and requests that MINUSTAH work closely with the new authorities
in the implementation of its mandate. The Council looks forward to the report
of the Secretary-General requested in resolution 1658 (2006) on whether to
restructure MINUSTAH’s mandate and reiterates its willingness to cooperate
with the newly-elected authorities to address the long-term challenges facing
Haiti. The Council would like also to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his tireless efforts and dedication to the success of the
United Nations presence in Haiti.”

2
