S/PV.6778

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6778th meeting

Tuesday, 5 June 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Li Baodong . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Karev
Mr. Mashabane
Mr. Menan
Mr. McKell
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan

12-35975 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1235975*

S/PV.6778

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in Chinese): As this is the first
meeting of the Council for the month of June 2012, I
should like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on
behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Ambassador
Agshin Mehdiyev, Permanent Representative of
Azerbaijan, for his service as President of the Security
Council for the month of May 2012. I am sure I
speak for all members of the Council in expressing
deep appreciation to Ambassador Mehdiyev and his
delegation for the great diplomatic skill with which they
conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
The President (spoke in Chinese): Under rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of the Sudan to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. Moreno-Ocampo.
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo: As former Costa Rican
Minister for Foreign Affairs Bruno Stagno Ugarte stated
in the Security Council in 2008, the “never again”
promise is being tested in the Sudan (see S/PV.5905).
With resolution 1593 (2005), the Council took the
initiative to refer a situation involving ongoing atrocities
to a permanent, existing court. That was a conscious
decision, namely, that a judicial investigation of the
facts and the identification of those responsible should
not wait for the end of the conflict. In fact, the ability of
the Court to implement its mandate immediately was a
crucial factor mentioned by members of the Council in
adopting that resolution.
Investigating Darfur was an enormous challenge for
the Court. There were serious allegations of thousands
of crimes committed in a vast territory by different
parties. The Office of the Prosecutor conducted an

2

impartial investigation, receiving documents collected
by the United Nations Commission of Inquiry, as well as
reports from the Government of the Sudan itself, which
even authorized us to interview a general as a suspect
in Khartoum. To respect its duty to protect witnesses,
my Office has had to investigate the crimes without
visiting the crime scene. Members of the Office of the
Prosecutor have travelled around the world collecting
hundreds of testimonies of victims and eyewitnesses
who had escaped from the Sudan. Most of our evidence
is confidential so as to protect the lives of the witnesses
and their relatives.
During the previous briefing (see S/PV.6688), the
Sudan challenged the value of the evidence. My Office
is prepared to discuss the matter in the courtroom, at
The Hague, or before the judges. That is where we
discuss evidence.
Ten judges, members of the Pre-Trial and Appeals
Chambers, discussed the value of the evidence collected
by the Office of the Prosecutor. They concluded that the
forces of the Government of the Sudan had committed
war crimes and crimes against humanity in Darfur
following a strategy adopted in the higher echelons of
the State apparatus. The Pre-Trial Chamber identified
the individuals who would have to face justice and
issued arrests warrants against a militia/Janjaweed
leader, Ali Kushayb, who reported to the then Minister
of State for the Interior, Ahmed Harun, who in turn
reported to the then Minister of the Interior, Abdelrahim
Mohamed Hussein, who ultimately reported to President
Al-Bashir. I would like to clarify that the responsibility
of those individuals is not a simple consequence of
their official roles. In all the cases, the Office collected
information and there are witnesses that describe in
detail their active participation in the strategy to commit
crimes — in the gathering of forces, in the financing,
in actually committing the attacks, in supervising
operations and in protecting the attackers.
The charges against President Al-Bashir include the
crime of genocide. The Pre-Trial Chamber concluded
that Omar Al-Bashir acted with specific intent to destroy
in part the Fur, Masalit and Zaghawa ethnic groups. In
all of those cases the Pre-Trial Chamber considered that
arrests were necessary in order to stop the commission
of crimes.
The Court fulfilled its judicial mandate. The
evidence collected uncovered the functioning of a State
apparatus used to commit genocide, crimes against

12-35975

S/PV.6778

humanity and war crimes. Those who bear the greatest
responsibility have been indicted. The current challenge
is their arrest.
In accordance with resolution 1593 (2005), the
Government of the Sudan has the legal obligation to
implement the arrest warrants. However, President
Al-Bashir is taking advantage of his position of power
to continue with his strategy and to ensure his own
impunity and that of those who follow his instructions.
There is no information to believe that the crimes against
humanity and genocide have stopped.
The report is clear that President Al-Bashir’s strategy
includes, first, threats to the international community to
commit new crimes in other areas of the Sudan.
The second element includes the denial of those same
crimes and of the rapes in the villages and in the camps,
attributing the killings to banditry and sporadic clashes
between rebel groups or reducing their relevance through
statistical comparisons and attributing conditions in
the camps to different factors, such as drought, lack of
proper seeds or inability to access farm land.
The third factor I would like to mention in the
strategy of President Al-Bashir is the forcing of the
international community into a never-ending negotiation
in order to gain access to displaced victims.
The fourth factor is the permanent promise of
peace negotiations. The international community chases
promises of peace agreements that are systematically
ignored while President Al-Bashir’s force commits more
attacks and creates the conditions for new promises of
peace agreements.
The fifth aspect is the announcement of justice
initiatives that are followed only by new announcements,
not by action. After more than seven years of instituting
judicial mechanisms, the Government of the Sudan
has conducted no proceedings relevant to the crimes
committed in Darfur.
The sixth element entails open defiance of the
authority of the Security Council, including through
public announcements that Council resolutions will not
be implemented.
The Council is well aware of this situation.
Recently, on 17 February, resolution 2035 (2012) was
adopted, demanding an end to military action, including
aerial bombardments, and an end to sexual violence and
indiscriminate attacks on civilians. The resolution also

expressed concerns about obstacles deliberately placed
in the way of the work of the Panel of Experts and that
of the United Nations Mission in Darfur (UNAMID).
The resolution also called for the Government of
the Sudan to undertake effective efforts to ensure
accountability for serious violations of international law
and to ensure unrestricted humanitarian access. A few
months ago, the Council also expressed regret that some
individuals affiliated with the Government of the Sudan
and armed groups in Darfur had continued to commit
violence against civilians, impede the peace process and
disregard the demands of the Council.
The situation is therefore clear. Implementing
the arrest warrant issued by the Court will produce a
dramatic change in Darfur. Interestingly, in a normal
criminal case, it is difficult to locate the fugitives; in this
case it is easy. The whereabouts of the four fugitives in
Darfur cases are known. Ali Kushayb remains in Darfur,
Ahmad Harun can be found in the Governor’s residence
in Southern Kordofan, Abdelrahim Mohamed Hussein
sits in his office at the Ministry of Defence in Khartoum,
and Al-Bashir can be found in the Presidential Palace in
Khartoum. The next phase in these Darfur cases is to
arrest those indicted.
The failure to arrest and surrender Mr. Harun,
Mr. Kushayb, Mr. Hussein and President Al-Bashir is
a direct challenge to the Council’s authority. It is for
the Council to determine the measures to be adopted
to ensure the compliance of the Government of the
Sudan with Security Council resolutions. The reality is
that Council members have to reconcile their national
interests with their responsibilities for peace and
security. I have witnessed where they have done so. I
have witnessed the impact of the Security Council acting
with consensus. My Office would like to contribute by
presenting an option that the Council could explore in
due time.
The execution of the arrest warrants on Sudanese
territory is the primary responsibility of the Government
of the Sudan. UNAMID should not be authorized to carry
out, or assist in securing, arrests. Instead, the Council
can in due course evaluate other possibilities, including
asking United Nations States Members or regional
organizations to execute arrest operations in furtherance
of the arrest warrants issued by the International
Criminal Court. I understand that such decisions would
be problematic, but the victims will receive a message,
namely, that they are not being ignored. The perpetrators

12-359753

S/PV.6778

will receive a different, clear message, that is, that there
will be no impunity.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Prosecutor
Moreno-Ocampo for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Sudan.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to extend my thanks to your predecessor,
Mr. President, the Permanent Representative of
Azerbaijan, and to congratulate him on his exemplary
conduct of the work of the Council last month. I would
also like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency for this month. We are confident that,
with your well-known expertise, you will conduct the
work of the Council in all impartiality and justice.
I should like to begin by putting on record the
fact that our participation in this meeting does not in
any way indicate recognition of or interaction with
the International Criminal Court (ICC). The Sudan is
not party to the Court. We would like to reiterate that
we are compelled to participate in order to correct the
fallacious information included in the fifteenth report of
the Office of the Prosecutor, information also included
in his previous reports. That is the sole reason for our
participation.
Establishing a link between a judicial entity and
a political entity, as is the case between the Security
Council and the International Criminal Court, is not a
step that serves to ensure justice, and perhaps I should
not speak at length on this issue. Legal experts have
always spoken of the independence of the judiciary, in
particular from political powers. That is a fact that any
first-year law student would know. Also, the contractual
relationship between the Security Council and the Court
should be confined to the parties to the Rome Statute
only. I do not need to remind those who represent the
Court of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties,
which is a cornerstone of international law. A State that
is not a party to a convention does not have obligations
under it.
I would like to add that the Council’s referral of
the conflict in Darfur to the Court through resolution
1593 (2005), calling it a threat to international peace
and security, was not based on any sound logic, since it
is an internal conflict not reaching outside the borders
of the Sudan. It is therefore not a threat even to regional
peace and security, to say nothing of international

4

peace and security. The whole issue is therefore based
on merely political motives and is being implemented
by individuals within the Court who are serving the
political agendas of certain States.
The Court is not one of the entities established by
the United Nations Charter. Consequently, it is not a
judicial arm of the United Nations. It is a court of the
States parties to the Rome Statute. As I have said, the
Sudan is not a party to that Statute, which founded the
Court. In the same way, eight members of the Council,
primarily among the non-permanent members, are not
parties to the Statute.
I would like to shed some light on what is for us
the most important issue regarding the International
Criminal Court, namely, the behaviour of the Prosecutor.
In that context, I would like to quote, for a second time
(see S/PV.6688), the words of Condoleezza Rice, former
Secretary of State of the United States of America, on
this subject.
(spoke in English)
“We opposed the ICC on the grounds, among
others, that its prosecutor is not accountable to any
Government. For us this was an issue of sovereignty
and a step that looks a bit too much like ‘world
government’.” (No Higher Honor: A Memoir of My
Years in Washington, p. 188.)
(spoke in Arabic)
What we heard only moments ago from the
Prosecutor reaffirms Ms. Rice’s words. He speaks as if
he were president of the world, issuing his instructions
to the Security Council and suggesting options about
which he will speak at a later time. Even a cursory
evaluation of Ms. Rice’s words about the Prosecutor
shows her to be correct, because it has been proved that
in practice there is no system providing accountability
on the part of the Prosecutor, leading him to stray from
legitimacy and legal professionalism. All the claims
he has levelled — based on political motives — that
what happened in Darfur was ethnic cleansing have
been refuted by testimony from prominent international
figures, who have denied that the crime of ethnic
cleansing took place in Darfur.
In the most recent Council meeting on this subject
I outlined that testimony in detail (see S/PV.6688).
However, for the record, since the Prosecutor is repeating
the same claims, I too would like to repeat some of
those who have refuted those claims. Among them is

12-35975

S/PV.6778

the late Judge Antonio Cassisi, expert on international
law and head of the International Commission of
Inquiry on Darfur, who denied the commission of the
crime of ethnic cleansing. Compare that denial by such
a prominent legal expert with the statements made by
people on the Court who are just beginning their careers
and learning the basics of the law.
Also among those refuting the claims are
Dr. Mercedes Taty and Dr. Jean-Hervé Bradol of
Médecins sans frontières — neither of whom is from
the Sudan, or Africa or Asia — who worked in Darfur
for over 10 years. They stated that ethnic cleansing
was not committed in Darfur. The former United States
Special Envoy for Peace in Darfur, Mr. John Danforth,
said that the repeated claims that ethnic cleansing had
been committed in Darfur were nothing but an excuse
for United States interference in the internal affairs of
the Sudan. He, too, is neither Sudanese nor African.
He commands credibility, and his statement will be
remembered by history and the whole of humankind.
The official spokesperson of the European Union
fact-finding mission — a European — has also denied
the commission of ethnic cleansing in Darfur.
All of those statements are documented. In
addition to them, former Nigerian President Obasanjo
and the former United Nations Special Rapporteur
on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions,
Ms. Asma Jahangir, have also stated that ethnic cleansing
was not committed in Darfur. I leave it to the wisdom of
the members of the Council to compare the testimony
of such prominent figures with false claims driven by
political and personal motives.
Further proof of the Prosecutor’s lack of credibility
is that a reader of his report would feel that he is speaking
of a Darfur other than the one that is currently enjoying
stability and security. We now see a Darfur in which
the Sudan has gone a long way towards implementing
the Doha Document for Peace, a Darfur in which the
authorities have begun to carry out their duties in
accordance with that agreement.
The report before the Council reiterates erroneous
information whose value has been superseded by
events on the ground in Darfur. For example, I would
like to mention here what the report calls the lack of
national judicial measures. That is incorrect. The Doha
Document for Peace, which includes straightforward
provisions on justice and reconciliation, is the best
evidence of the Sudan’s commitment to implementing

the national judicial measures required to investigate
the crimes perpetrated in Darfur. The Doha Document
even stipulates, in paragraph 295, that
“immunities enjoyed by persons by virtue of their
official status or functions shall not obstruct the
speedy dispensation of justice nor shall they prevent
the combating of impunity.”
That provision is in addition to other commitments
set forth in the Doha Document designed to bring about
justice and reconciliation as the two main vectors for the
establishment of peace in Darfur.
Those mechanisms have begun to work in the
general context of launching the work of the Transitional
Darfur Regional Authority headed by Mr. Tijani
el-Sissi, who represents the coalition of 11 factions that
had previously engaged in armed struggle against the
Government. They have all been involved in running
Darfur; the leaders in Darfur are thus sons of Darfur.
They have been involved in the work of reconstruction
and in the return of the displaced.
In the light of all those positive tangible
developments on the ground, it is now necessary for
those who speak of Darfur to call upon the international
community to assist in completing the march towards
peace and not to throw more fuel on the fire, cause
instability or intimidate the inhabitants of the region.
The Doha Document also addresses other issues
related to Darfur, laying out a road map for their
solution. The cessation of violence and the return of the
displaced, the establishment of stability and peace and
the resumption of reconstruction are all results of the
Doha Document. In that regard, I would like to quote
Mr. Dan Smith, the United States envoy for Darfur,
who visited Darfur a few days ago. He actually goes to
Darfur almost every month. He said,
(spoke in English)
“Darfur is quite a different place from 2003 [when]
18 per cent of the population lived in urban areas.
Now about 50 per cent of the population is living in
urban areas.”
(spoke in Arabic)
When we present such facts and quote the United
States envoy, who visits Darfur monthly, who has
greater credibility? Is it the person I have just quoted or
the person who has never visited Darfur? Who has more
credibility in this case?

12-359755

S/PV.6778

The positive developments in Darfur were
recognized in a recently completed review undertaken
by the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID), which concluded that the
military units should be reduced, leading to a savings of
$79.9 million in the 2012-2013 budget.

We condemn and denounce in the strongest terms the
recommendations of the Prosecutor asking the Security
Council to take other legal measures to implement what
he calls arrest warrants, as well as his incitement of the
Council to call on States Members of this Organization
and regional organizations to do the same.

In view of everything to which I have referred,
would it not have been better for the Prosecutor to
take the right and optimistic path that is strewn with
positive developments, instead of dwelling on the past,
inciting the Security Council to take action against the
Government of the Sudan and beating the drums of
war and interference, which would only lead to further
instability? Law can never be established except where
there is stability and security, not war.

We would recall that the President of the Republic,
Omer Hassan Ahmed Al-Bashir, was elected by the
Sudanese people in elections whose free and democratic
nature was recognized by the United Nations, regional
organizations, European observers and the Carter
Centre. We would recall also that other Sudanese
leaders accused by the Prosecutor are members of an
elected Government and that the people of the Sudan
will therefore not think twice about defending the
sovereignty of their country and the symbols of its
dignity and independence.

The Prosecutor has today devised a new approach
through which he attempts to instigate the Council to take
action the Government of the Sudan. In his arguments,
he relies on the Council’s resolutions on the conflict in
Darfur. In that regard, two other United Nations bodies
charged with the implementation of those resolutions,
the foremost of which, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO), has not presented to the Council
such flagrantly provocative reports. The Council has
before it the two latest reports of the Secretary-General
on the situation in Darfur and the implementation of
the UNAMID mandate, which speak of the reduction of
violence and the drop in crime rates.
The Prosecutor, in mentioning what he calls the lack
of cooperation by the Government of the Sudan and its
non-compliance with Security Council resolutions, has
deliberately ignored the United Nations Charter and its
provisions for the respect of the legitimacy of States and
their sovereignty. He has also ignored the provisions of
the Vienna Convention, as I mentioned earlier, which
hold that any State that is not party to a convention is
not bound by it.
If the Prosecutor wishes to speak of law, he should
really speak of the law. But if he is speaking of politics
and not of law, or if he has other motives, then that is
another story. Why does the Prosecutor continue to
confuse the issues and incite the Security Council to take
action against the Government of the Sudan, which has
been able to turn the page of war in Darfur and devote
all its potential and resources to developing that region
and to rebuild it and restore peaceful coexistence among
the different tribes that live there.

6

We would also remind the Prosecutor that
threatening to interfere in the affairs of States by force
will not break the determination of free people, and that
contemporary African history offers ample testimony
to that effect. We would like also to draw the attention
of the new Prosecutor of the Court to the serious and
dangerous nature of her predecessor’s approach.
I reiterate that the Government of the Sudan will
continue to cooperate with the Council and with the
mediators, particularly the brotherly country of Qatar,
in the continuing efforts to establish fully the peace
and stability process in Darfur, taking into account
the fact that peace is a necessary foundation for
stability and justice, and recognizing the importance
of ensuring justice, reaching settlements and providing
compensation in accordance with the stipulations of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.
I should like to conclude by saying that the people of
Darfur are dear to the hearts of the people of the Sudan
and that the Government of the Sudan is more concerned
than anyone else with realizing their aspirations, tending
to their wounds and easing their bitterness. We hope that
the Council will give precedence to the voice of wisdom
and logic and act on the basis of the key principles upon
which the United Nations was founded — to bring about
justice and to assist States in their efforts to bring about
peace and security.
I appeal to the Council to bring pressure to bear,
and even to take punitive measures, against the rebel
armed movements in Darfur that have refused to listen
to reason or sit at the negotiating table. That should be

12-35975

S/PV.6778

the substance of our efforts: to continue on the path that
we have chosen and to sit with those who have rejected
peace and negotiate with them, with a view to turning
a new page instead of opting for the culture of war
and conflict, which does not lead to peace, justice or
stability.
I call on the Council to disregard calls for measures
that do not serve to bring about stability and peace,
which is the main objective of the United Nations. I am
confident that it will do so.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now give
the floor to the members of the Council.
Mr. McKell (United Kingdom): I thank
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo for his report, for setting out
the action that the International Criminal Court (ICC)
has taken over the past seven years on Darfur and for
briefing us on the latest developments in the work of
the Court on this matter. The United Kingdom continues
to support that work and, as his time in office comes
to an end, I commend the Prosecutor and his team for
their efforts in pursuit of justice for the victims of this
conflict.
The last six months have not seen as much progress
in Darfur as we had hoped. The inauguration of the
Darfur Regional Authority in February was an important
step towards the implementation of the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur, as was the establishment of the
Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission, the
Darfur Land Commission and the National Human
Rights Commission. We welcome those developments.
Implementation, however, has not progressed as
planned, and those authorities are not yet functioning
institutions. The people of Darfur have yet to see
tangible improvements to their lives as a result.
We once again look to the Government of the Sudan
to demonstrate its commitment to the Doha Document.
We hope that the high presidential committee will
expedite its implementation. We urge the Government to
deliver its funding commitments to the Darfur Regional
Authority, allowing it to establish well-structured and
well-resourced institutions, delivering for the people of
Darfur before they lose hope in the Doha Document.
We urge those movements that have not signed the
Doha Document to support its implementation and to
engage constructively in the peace process. We hope that
all Darfuris will engage in an internal dialogue, and, as
set out in the African Union-United Nations framework

for facilitation of the Darfur peace process, will
themselves determine the nature of those consultations.
Those developments, however, are marred by the
continuing reports of violence in Darfur. The human
rights situation is deteriorating, with continuing reports
of violence against women and children, often of a
sexual or gender-based nature. Ground attacks targeting
civilians, humanitarian workers and peacekeepers
continue. In the past year, 10 peacekeepers have
died and 20 injured in nine attacks against the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). That is outrageous and must be
condemned. It is unacceptable that UNAMID continues
to be prevented from accessing and investigating such
attacks. The Government and the armed movements
must stop preventing access by humanitarian agencies
to those most in need of assistance.
Given these ongoing and deeply concerning issues,
the continuing jurisdiction of the Court in Darfur is
all the more relevant, and the Prosecutor’s continued
efforts to monitor and investigate allegations are vital.
The arrest warrant issued against the Sudanese
Defence Minister, Abdelrahim Hussein, for crimes
against humanity and war crimes means that there are
now four outstanding arrests that the Government of the
Sudan has failed to take action to enforce. Instead, it
continues to obstruct the pursuit of justice for the people
of Darfur. The Government of the Sudan is bound to
comply with the obligation laid down by the Council
in resolution 1593 (2005) to cooperate fully with the
ICC and its investigations. No citing of the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties or quotations from
other people alter that fact. It remains their obligation.
The United Kingdom has repeatedly asked the
Government of the Sudan to comply with that obligation,
and we repeat that call today. Indeed, we call on all
States to cooperate with the ICC to end impunity.
In conclusion, we want once again to thank
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo for his efforts to achieve justice
for the victims of this conflict over the past seven years
and, indeed, to thank him for all his efforts to end
impunity while in the Office of the Prosecutor at the
International Criminal Court.
Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Allow me, first of all, to join my colleagues in thanking
the representative of Azerbaijan for the outstanding
work carried out in the month of May, as well as to

12-359757

S/PV.6778

congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council. We wish you every success in
carrying out your duties. I would also like to welcome
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo and to congratulate Ms. Fatou
Bensouda. Her election to the post of Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) was welcomed with
great pride across our continent.
Morocco supports a political solution among all
the parties involved in order to reduce the suffering of
civilians. We reiterate our commitment to respecting the
principles of international humanitarian law and human
rights. We also reiterate our commitment to respecting
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Sudan.
Since the adoption of resolution 1593 (2005), the
ICC has regularly provided the Council with reports
on the implementation of that resolution. The fifteenth
report submitted by the ICC enumerates the main
actions undertaken by the Court since resolution 1593
(2005) was adopted, on 31 March 2005, and evaluates
its actions.
Today we can affirm that the situation in Darfur is
developing and that significant efforts have been made
to resolve the conflict. That progress must be encouraged
and supported.
Morocco welcomed the signing of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur and the launching of the
implementation of the provisions contained therein. That
ambitious agreement tackles all of the issues that gave
rise to the conflict, such as measures for an equitable
redistribution of power and resources, compensation,
the return of displaced persons, reconciliation and the
maintenance of dialogue.

The Sudan has made important sacrifices for
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur. The decision of the ICC
to indict President Al-Bashir is not based on international
consensus. The Organization of Islamic Cooperation and
the Non-Aligned Movement have called into question
such an approach. The cooperation of States not parties
to the Rome Statute is also a complex issue in many
respects.
The League of Arab States clearly expressed its
position with regard to the indictment of President
Al-Bashir only a few days after the decision of the ICC,
at its twenty-first Summit, held in Doha in March 2009.
The League of Arab States has since then reiterated its
position several times.
We believe that the long process that will enable
a return to peace and stability in Darfur cannot be
achieved without effective and coordinated cooperation
on the part of all those involved, regional organizations
and the mediation mechanisms involved.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): Let
me start by thanking the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo, for
his informative briefing today on the situation in Darfur,
as well as for his contributions over the past nine years
to the cause of ending impunity for the most serious
crimes of concern to the international community.
The United States is gravely concerned about the
situation in the Sudan and the role that continuing
impunity for crimes committed in Darfur has played in
forestalling a just and enduring peace for the people of
the Sudan and the region.

The failure of several rebel movements to subscribe
to the agreement and the resulting instability make its
implementation difficult. In addition, the main structure
arising from the agreement, namely, the Darfur Regional
Authority, has been established. However, the lack of
funds available to it currently prevents it from becoming
operational.

This is the Prosecutor’s fifteenth and final report
to the Security Council on the situation in Darfur,
which the Council referred to the ICC in 2005. He has
come before us many times to describe the work of his
Office in seeking to address the atrocities suffered by
the victims of genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity in Darfur.

The Sudan is an ancient African nation that, with
the richness of its history, culture and civilization, has
contributed to the history of the entire African continent.
The history of the Sudan did not begin with the conflict
that has ravaged the country; its history goes back
centuries and is intimately linked to the history of the
continent.

Indeed, since the adoption of resolution 1593 (2005)
and the initiation of these periodic reports, copious
evidence has been collected and arrest warrants sought
and granted. The most recent development has been
the arrest warrant for Minister of Defence Abdelrahim
Mohamed Hussein. Most important, promises have been
made to the victims that the crimes they suffered will

8

12-35975

S/PV.6778

not go unpunished and the justice they seek will not go
undelivered.
But as of today, justice has not been served. The
ICC’s prosecution of the key architects of the atrocities
in Darfur is critical. But, as the Prosecutor has stressed,
the individuals subject to the ICC arrest warrants in
Darfur continue to remain at large.
We have consistently called on the Government of
the Sudan and all parties to the conflict to cooperate fully
with the ICC and its Prosecutor. Yet there is persistent
failure to meet obligations under resolution 1593 (2005).
Local accountability initiatives, particularly those agreed
to in the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, remain
largely unfulfilled, and the violence continues in Darfur
and in other areas of the Sudan, where these patterns
repeat themselves and similarly go unaddressed.
Today’s report offers us an opportunity to reflect
on what steps we can take to strengthen international
efforts to hold accountable those who have committed
atrocities in Darfur. We agree with the Prosecutor that
the lack of progress to date in executing the arrest
warrants and bringing those most responsible to justice
merits renewed attention by the Council.
We think it is a serious cause for concern that the
individuals subject to outstanding arrest warrants in the
Darfur situation remain at large and continue to travel
across borders. This is an area where cooperation is
particularly crucial.
To that end, we continue to urge all States to
refrain from providing political or financial support to
the Sudanese suspects subject to ICC arrest warrants
and to bring diplomatic pressure to bear on States that
invite or host these individuals. We stand with the many
States that refuse to welcome the ICC indictees to their
countries, and we commend those that have spoken out
against President Al-Bashir’s continued travel, including
to next month’s African Union Summit.
For our part, the United States has continued to
oppose invitations, facilitation or support for travel by
those subject to ICC arrest warrants in Darfur and to
urge other States to do the same. We would welcome
additional efforts by, and better coordination with, other
members of the international community on these issues.
We encourage the Council to consider creative
approaches and new tools. As members of the Security
Council, we can and should review additional steps that
could be taken to carry out the ICC’s work in Darfur,

execute outstanding arrest warrants and ensure States’
compliance with relevant international obligations.
Continued impunity and a lack of accountability for
heinous crimes fuel resentment, reprisals and conflict
in Darfur.
We are deeply troubled by the increased violence
in three of the five Darfur states since the Prosecutor’s
last briefing in December (see S/PV.6688). Once again,
we note that the Sudanese Government continues its use
of aerial bombardments, including of civilian areas, in
violation of resolutions issued by the Council. We are
also deeply concerned about sexual and gender-based
violent crimes there.
We are also deeply troubled that impunity continues
for those who attack peacekeepers from the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). Since the Prosecutor’s last report, UNAMID
has been attacked four times, and three peacekeepers
have been killed in those attacks. We reiterate our
calls on the Government of the Sudan to investigate
the attacks and bring those responsible to justice. We
note the progress made in the two cases ongoing against
Darfur rebels, as described in the Prosecutor’s report.
We are extremely concerned about the recurring
violence in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile states.
Unfortunately, we have seen concrete illustrations in
those two areas that those who evade accountability all
too often contribute to further cycles of violence. As the
Prosecutor has reminded us, Ahmed Harun is the subject
of an outstanding arrest warrant for alleged crimes
committed in Darfur. Yet, rather than facing justice, he
has been entrusted by the Government of the Sudan with
the duty of serving as Governor of Southern Kordofan,
where he engages in inflammatory rhetoric reminiscent
of the kind he employed in Darfur, pursuing policies
that in recent weeks have led to the displacement of
nearly 700 people per day, while continuing to block
humanitarian access to those remaining. We will continue
to push for a credible, independent investigation into
violations of international law there and to demand that
those responsible be held to account.
We continue to urge the Government of the Sudan
to make good on its commitments in the July 2011
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur in order to make
local justice and accountability mechanisms a reality,
including by empowering its special prosecutor for
crimes in Darfur, establishing special courts for Darfur
and inviting observers from the African Union and the

12-359759

S/PV.6778

United Nations to monitor the proceedings of those
courts.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate our thanks
to Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo and his Office for the
work they have done to advance the cause of justice
for the people of Darfur. We call on the members of the
Security Council and the international community to
take concrete steps to ensure that justice in the Sudan
is indeed served and that the cycle of violence and
impunity there comes at last to a close.
Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): We would like
to take this opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of June, and would equally like to express our
sincere gratitude to the delegation of Azerbaijan for the
manner in which it steered the work of the Council in
May.
Let me offer our sincere gratitude to Mr. Luis
Moreno-Ocampo for his progress reports. As this is
his final report to the Council, I would also like to join
others in expressing my delegation’s appreciation for his
tireless efforts over the past nine years. I wish him well
in his future endeavours. Allow me also to congratulate
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, who will soon take over the hot
seat of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC). I am confident that she will lead the fight
against impunity with fearlessness and integrity.
As a State party to the ICC, South Africa is fully
committed to all the objectives of the Rome Statute
system, particularly the dual purpose of fighting impunity
while promoting the preservation of peace, security and
the well-being of the world. We are convinced that,
when all is said and done, those who have committed
international crimes must be held accountable. We are
also very much aware that the victims on whose behalf
all our actions are taken will find little comfort if we do
not do all that is politically feasible to facilitate an end
to the conflict. It is only by ending that conflict that the
people of Darfur will find security and be able to live in
dignity. With that in mind, we believe that the Council
should utilize the Court as a tool to promote political
dialogue in the search for peace and justice in Darfur,
and indeed in the whole of the Sudan. The efforts of the
African Union (AU) in particular should be supported.
We have taken note of the decision of the Pre-Trial
Chamber to issue an arrest warrant against Abdelrahim
Mohamed Hussein, Minister of Defence of the
Government of the Sudan, on 51 counts of crimes against

10

humanity and war crimes. We note that this has resulted
in an increase in the number of outstanding warrants. We
have also noted the decision of the Pre-Trial Chamber
on 13 December 2011 concerning the non-cooperation
of two African States in relation to the President of the
Sudan. In that connection, we have had the opportunity
to study an AU communiqué of 14 December 2011 on
the Pre-Trial Chamber’s decision that raises a number
of legal questions.
South Africa remains very concerned about
the report’s allegations about continuing genocide,
aerial bombardments, attacks on civilians, sexual
and gender-based crimes and the recruitment of child
soldiers. Such allegations serve to strengthen our
resolve that a political solution to ending the violence
must be found as a matter of urgency. South Africa has
always advocated a two-track approach to the Darfur
situation, one that recognizes not only a judicial track,
aimed at ensuring accountability and justice for crimes
committed, but also a political track, designed to find
lasting peace.
Our search for that peace is inspired by the desire
to ensure that the crimes that have been committed
and are allegedly still being committed cease, and that
the people of Darfur can find security and be able to
live in a dignified way. In our search for justice and
accountability, that political track should be kept
constantly in mind. It is, after all, for the victims that
we are expending all these efforts. Relieving their plight
should therefore be at the forefront of our concerns.
The Council, as the organ with primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
should utilize all the tools at its disposal for promoting
political dialogue in the search for a comprehensive
solution to the conflict in Darfur. It is only through a
comprehensive political solution that peace will be
found. In that regard, the Council should support the
framework for facilitation by the AU and United Nations
of the Darfur peace process. The framework represents a
key initiative aimed at addressing the pertinent issues of
supporting the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur and
bringing non-signatory participants to the negotiating
table in order to promote a cessation of hostilities.
Furthermore, it addresses the importance of supporting
internal dialogue and consultation among Darfuris.
By the same token, efforts towards peace cannot
ignore the requirements for justice. We therefore call
for implementation of the recommendations of the

12-35975

S/PV.6778

AU High-level Implementation Panel on Darfur, and
particularly of the methods for ensuring accountability
that they contain. It is important that the Council take a
strategic approach in dealing with the challenges faced
by the Sudan, as we believe that will advance the cause
of long-term peace and justice there.
We understand the Prosecutor’s frustration at the
number of arrest warrants issued against indictees that
have gone unenforced. Nonetheless, we wish to warn
against the possibility referred to in the Prosecutor’s
report of using the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) as an enforcement tool
for effecting ICC arrest warrants. Not only would that
be inconsistent with UNAMID’s mandate, it would
also have a negative effect on UNAMID’s credibility
and threaten its important peace-related objectives,
including the promotion of a peace agreement. While
the report purports not to suggest that as an option, the
mere mention of the possibility is cause for concern
to us. The report does not mention the possibility of
asking Member States or regional organizations to
execute arrest warrants. In the current state of affairs,
the ICC States parties have an obligation under the
Statute to cooperate, while the Government of the Sudan
has an obligation to comply under resolution 1593
(2005). Owing to the limited scope of that resolution,
no other State is obliged to cooperate with the ICC
in relation to the situation in Darfur. We note that the
limited scope of the duty to cooperate, as laid out in
resolution 1593 (2005), was specifically designed in
order to accommodate the interests of some permanent
members of the Council that have misgivings about
the ICC. The Council is therefore unlikely to adopt a
resolution requiring all Member States to cooperate in
the enforcement of arrest warrants.
Moreover, given that regional organizations are
not party to either the United Nations Charter or the
ICC Statute, it is difficult for us to conceive the legal
possibility of obliging regional organizations to enforce
arrest warrants issued by the ICC. If by regional
organization the Office of the Prosecutor is suggesting
that regional security arrangements be activated to effect
the arrest of persons under arrest warrants, my delegation
would view such a process as a dangerous proposal that
could add fuel to an already volatile situation.
Let me conclude by recalling that our overall
objective should be to alleviate the hardship of the men,
women and children engulfed by violence in the Sudan.

It would be a travesty if our actions resulted in the
worsening of conditions for the people in Darfur.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I would
first of all like to thank Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for his report. Since 2005, he has briefed the Council
in a transparent way on the judicial work carried out by
his Office and the Court. As he steps down on 18 June,
I would like to take this opportunity to extend to him
France’s gratitude for his outstanding commitment to
the fight against impunity, in particular in Darfur. I also
congratulate Ms. Fatou Bensouda on her election to the
office of Prosecutor. We have every confidence that,
under her stewardship, the International Criminal Court
will continue its work with the same independence and
impartiality.
First of all, a reminder — it was the Council that
referred the situation in Darfur to the International
Criminal Court through a resolution under Chapter
VII of the United Nations Charter. The International
Criminal Court did not take it on by itself. It was the
Council that decided that the Sudan and other States
Members of the United Nations should cooperate with
the International Criminal Court on the case.
The Council did that for two reasons. The first
reason was the extent of the crimes committed in Darfur,
some of which were crimes against humanity and
crimes of genocide. The second reason was because the
Council gives still greater importance to responsibility
for crimes committed and the fight against impunity.
Returning to the report, in it the Prosecutor recalls
that four people indicted for war crimes and crimes
against humanity, one of whom is accused of genocide,
continue openly and publicly to evade the Court
despite the arrest warrants issued against them by the
International Criminal Court. President Al-Bashir,
former militia commander Mr. Kushayb, Minister
of Defence Mr. Hussein and the current Governor of
Southern Kordofan, Mr. Haroun, are free. Sought for the
massacre of thousands of civilians or accused of having
carried out genocide, they retain key offices and are in a
position to order new killings.
As the report underscores, impunity encourages
them to continue the same methods in Southern
Kordofan, where a serious humanitarian crisis is taking
place behind closed doors. Despite the Government’s
efforts to ban observers, everyone is well aware of
the aerial bombings, the lack of basic health care, the

12-3597511

S/PV.6778

arbitrary arrests, the gender-based violence and the
blocking of humanitarian aid amid widespread famine.
Just because the Sudanese authorities are doing their
utmost to conceal that situation does not mean that we
should allow ourselves to be deceived and to ignore our
responsibilities. International justice must run its course,
show that the threat against the perpetrators of crimes is
not in vain, and deter others from taking the same path.
In order to justify the failure to execute arrest
warrants, some people have invoked the primary role
of the Sudanese national jurisdiction. Moreover, the
Prosecutor, Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, since taking oath, has
always demonstrated his attention to the primary role of
national jurisdictions in the situations before the ICC.
He has reviewed the work of all special jurisdictions
established in the Sudan since the 2005. The conclusion
is nothing. They have done nothing, and they cannot
do anything since all perpetrators of the crimes enjoy
complete immunity. That also, I recall, is President
Mbeki’s conclusion in the report of the African Union
High-Level Implementation Panel on the Sudan (see
S/2011/816).
Today, only the case against the leaders of rebel
groups, Mr. Abdallah Banda and Mr. Saleh Jerbo, the
perpetrators of the attack on the African Union base
in Haskanita, is under way. They gave themselves up
voluntarily and have agreed to suffer the consequences
of their crimes.
As the Prosecutor’s report points out, the international
community’s inability to bring to trial the four indictees
is a challenge to the authority of the Security Council,
which, with the adoption of resolution 1593 (2005),
demanded that justice for the crimes committed in
Darfur be done. The obligation to cooperate decided
by the Council has not been respected. As a result, the
Prosecutor has called on the Council to undertake fresh
consideration, including by asking Member States to
prepare for arrest operations. That is nothing new. That
has already been done for the International Criminal
Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda.
As the Prosecutor proposes, the Council could
effectively consider new legal or operational measures
so as to ensure that its resolutions are implemented.
The Council, as well as the States parties to the Rome
Statute, must demonstrate consistency. They cannot
host on their territory an individual under an ICC arrest
warrant without moving towards his arrest. Let us recall

12

that such a duty to cooperate derives not only from the
Rome Statute, but also from resolution 1593 (2005).
Mr. Cabral (Portugal): Allow me first of all to
thank Ambassador Agshin Mehdiyev of Azerbaijan
and his team for the efficient presidency for the month
of May. I also take this opportunity to convey to you,
Mr. President, the full support of my delegation for your
presidency for this month.
I wish to thank Mr. Moreno-Ocampo for his
participation here today, as well as for his report on the
situation in Darfur pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).
As mentioned in the report, the cases of genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes presented to
the International Criminal Court (ICC) illustrate the
worst incidents that occurred within Darfur.
As we consider the fifteenth report, however,
we continue to see, with real concern, that the same
obstacles and difficulties reported in previous reports
still persist. Arrest warrants issued by the Court in two of
the three cases have still not been executed. Only in the
third case does justice seem to be under way, since the
trial of Mr. Banda and Mr. Jerbo, alleged commanders
of the rebel forces, is planned to start in July, following
the recent confirmation of charges by the Court.
Also, on the domestic front, no significant efforts
appear to have been undertaken to investigate crimes
that come under the ICC’s jurisdiction. As highlighted
in the report, after more than seven years of instituting
several judicial mechanisms, the Sudan has conducted
no credible national proceedings relevant to those
crimes. That is despite the concerns clearly expressed
by the African Union High-Level Implementation Panel
regarding the lack of political will and the persistent
obstacles to domestic investigation and prosecution.
Moreover, the dire humanitarian situation on the
ground persists following the expulsion of humanitarian
organizations ordered by the Government. As reported,
there are fewer institutions now helping the victims of
rape because of the expulsion, or threat of expulsion, of
organizations working in the area of sexual violence.
However, as stressed in the latest report to the Council
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict (S/2012/33), today
such types of crimes continue to be perpetrated and
unpunished, as do other crimes of the same pattern
identified by the ICC judges, as recent reports of the
Secretary-General unfortunately testify.

12-35975

S/PV.6778

With its independent judicial nature, the ICC
remains unique as a tool in conflict prevention, as well
as in ensuring both justice and peace in the region. To
achieve those goals, the international community, on
behalf of which the Security Council referred the case to
the ICC, has a strong interest in ensuring that the Court
plays its role fully. Cooperation is therefore essential.
Without the cooperation of all Member States, the Court
cannot fulfil that role.
However, we are concerned about the continuous
lack of cooperation displayed by the Sudanese authorities
on outstanding arrest warrants. We again stress the need
for all States to strengthen cooperation with the Court in
order to enforce those warrants.
Finally, we would like to thank the Prosecutor,
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, for his efforts during his tenure at
the head of the Office of the Prosecutor. We also want
to thank him for the role he has played in strengthening
the Court and in promoting a better understanding of the
Court’s potential, thus enhancing the awareness by the
international community of the Court’s indispensable
contribution to the maintenance of peace and security.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to express my congratulations to
you, Sir, and your entire delegation on assuming the
presidency of the Council for the month of June. The
experience of your previous presidencies tells us that
we are in very good hands. I would also like to thank
the Ambassador and delegation of Azerbaijan for the
serious and calm way in which they conducted our work
during the month of May.
I would like to welcome Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, to the
Council Chamber. This may well be the last time that he
addresses members of the Council in that capacity and
with regard to the issue of Darfur. That is why I would
like to reiterate something that I have said on various
occasions, namely, that the positive outcome of the first
decade of activities of the International Criminal Court
is very closely related to the responsible, diligent and
impartial manner in which Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo
has understood and carried out his functions as Chief
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court since the
beginning. His successes in leading that Office have
contributed to implementing the principle of individual
criminal responsibility for the most serious crimes of
undoubted significance to the international community
as a whole.

We know that under the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court the Court may only deal
with atrocious crimes that have been designated to
be international crimes and may only intervene when
the Court has ascertained that the domestic judicial
authorities are not in a position or do not have the
intention to carry out the prosecutions themselves.
That is exactly the situation that we see today when
we acknowledge the unavoidable fact that the criminal
proceedings begun by the Office of the Prosecutor, at
the express request of the Council, against four indictees
have not been implemented because those people have
not been handed over to the Court. We are referring here
to the acts of genocide, the crimes against humanity and
the war crimes that were committed in Darfur during the
period indicated in resolution 1593 (2005) and which
clearly correspond to the level of seriousness required
by the Rome Statute.
After an arduous investigation and careful evaluation
of the evidence, a chamber of the Court concluded that
there was sufficient basis to proceed with the prosecution
of the persons who bear the greatest responsibility for the
commission of such crimes. The situation is also one in
which the Office of the Prosecutor, after weighing all of
the pertinent information, has arrived at the conclusion
that, at this point in time, there are no credible criminal
proceedings in the Sudan that could call into question
the admissibility of the grounds adduced, nor is there
any other form of objection that could be raised to the
jurisdiction of the Court in this matter.
On the contrary, according to the report of the
Prosecutor, a deliberate policy has been adopted to
hide those crimes, grant effective immunity to those
who have been accused by the Court and distract the
attention of the international community. That situation
has opened the way for the Court to assume jurisdiction
based on the principle of complementarity.
One of the declared purposes of the Rome Statute
and for the creation of the International Criminal Court
is to provide a disincentive to potential perpetrators of
horrendous crimes in the context of generalized violence
or armed conflict. The importance of the creation of
the Court lies not only in the specific prosecutions it
carried out but also in the very strong message it sends
out to deter those who are in positions of leadership or
Government throughout the world and to warn them that
atrocities, which in the past have moved the conscious
of the international community, such as ethnic cleansing
or genocide, will not go unpunished and that the United

12-3597513

S/PV.6778

Nations and its Member States will spare no effort to
bring those responsible for such crimes to justice.
In that framework, we are sorry to see that, although
at the end of its first decade of operation the overall
assessment of the Court is positive, when it comes to
Darfur, international justice has not been served. The
arrest warrants against those accused have not been
carried out and the judicial and extrajudicial proceedings
cannot, therefore, move forward.
In its historic resolution 1593 (2005), the Security
Council, after determining that the situation in the Sudan
continued to represent a threat to international peace and
security, specifically invoked Chapter VII of the Charter
and decided to refer the situation in Darfur to the Court
and, furthermore, decided,
“that the Government of Sudan and all other parties
to the conflict in Darfur, shall cooperate fully with
and provide any necessary assistance to the Court
and the Prosecutor pursuant to this resolution”.
(resolution 1593 (2005), para. 2)
In the opinion of my delegation, the obligation to
cooperate with the Court certainly includes a positive and
unavoidable duty to carry out the arrest warrants issued
on a regular basis by the Office of the Prosecutor. To do
otherwise, demonstrates an ignorance of the mandatory
nature of the decisions adopted by the Council under
Chapter VII of the Charter and of the Charter itself.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): On behalf of the Pakistan
delegation, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on
China’s assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for June. Let me also express our appreciation
for the able manner in which Azerbaijan led the Council’s
work last month. We would like to acknowledge the
presence of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo, in the Council
today. We take note of his briefing as well as of his
fifteenth report submitted pursuant to resolution 1593
(2005).
Objectivity, not politicization, should guide these
reports and briefings. Let me state at the outset that
Pakistan, like about half of the current membership of
the Council, including three permanent members, is not
a State party to the Rome Statute establishing the ICC.
Nevertheless, we acknowledge the rights and obligations
of the States parties to the ICC.
The Sudan is an important country in the African
continent. Durable peace and stability in the Sudan is

14

not only a desire of the Sudanese people but also an
imperative for regional peace and security. Achieving
that objective requires serious and genuine support
and the understanding of the international community.
The situation in Darfur in the Sudan, in particular the
unfortunate suffering of the people, has been a matter of
concern for several years now. We must do more to help
resolve this complex problem in a holistic manner and
to bring an end to the pain and agony of the population.
Addressing the situation in Darfur is also integral
to the efforts for a comprehensive peace in the Sudan,
an objective that Pakistan supports. The international
community and the Council have recognized that
comprehensive peace entails progress on multiple tracks,
notably a political process aimed at promoting a peaceful
solution through dialogue, justice and reconciliation,
efforts to improve security, and addressing the human
rights and humanitarian aspects. It is in that regard that
we reiterate our support for the efforts of the United
Nations, as well as the African Union, particularly its
High-level Implementation Panel, towards achieving
peace, stability, justice and reconciliation in Darfur.
We believe the search for justice in Darfur should
be pursued in a way that does not impede or jeopardize
efforts aimed at promoting lasting peace in the region.
In that context, the positions of the African Union, the
League of Arab States and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation should also be duly considered.
Pakistan firmly believes in the obligation of all
States to guarantee and protect the right to life of all
their citizens. Having the primary responsibility, the
Government of the Sudan must take all measures to
investigate human rights violations in Darfur and bring
to justice their perpetrators.
We take note of the steps of the Government of
the Sudan towards the implementation of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur and welcome the
establishment of the Darfur Regional Authority, as well
as the National Human Rights Commission.
It is also imperative for all signatory parties to Doha
Document for Peace to implement their commitments
under the Document for lasting peace and stability in
Darfur. On its part, the United Nations-African Union
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) has an important
role in the maintenance of peace and security in Darfur,
particularly with regard to facilitating the political
process in Darfur. Pakistan underscores the need for the
full implementation of the UNAMID mandate.

12-35975

S/PV.6778

Let me conclude by reiterating that the overall
objective of the international community and the
Council is the attainment of durable peace and stability
in the Sudan. We should harmonize and consolidate our
efforts for the early achievement of that objective.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): As
this is our first intervention under your presidency of
the Security Council, Sir, allow me to wish you every
success in your efforts. You can count on our support
and full confidence that with your wisdom, you will
conduct our work successfully. I would also like to
thank Ambassador Agshin Mehdiyev for his excellent
presidency during the month of May.
We thank Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), for his briefing
and for the report presented to the Council. As this is
the last report that he will present in his capacity as
Prosecutor, we would like to take this opportunity to
express to him our deepest gratitude for his exceptional
performance and professionalism at the Court. We would
have still done so without having been a State party to
the Court. However, now that we have finally completed
all the steps necessary to deposit our accession to the
Rome Statue, barely two months ago, we do this with an
even greater sense of ownership. Likewise, we wish the
Prosecutor every success in his future endeavours.
As set out in paragraph 2 of resolution 1593 (2005),
the Government of the Sudan and all other parties to
the conflict in Darfur shall cooperate to assist the Court
and the Prosecutor in their activities. On that legally
binding basis, investigations and activities related to the
investigations of war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide are being carried out, in accordance with
the scope of the Rome Statue.
We understand the extreme sensitivity that those
investigations represent for the Government of the
Sudan. However, from our perspective, there continue
to be enormous shortcomings related to the lack of
cooperation of the Sudanese Government with the
International Criminal Court with regard to investigating
the cases under its jurisdiction. The absence of internal
processes of the special courts created in 2005 and the
failure of the Government of the Sudan to implement the
resolutions that have been adopted by the Council, above
all the most recent resolutions, including resolution
2035 (2012), in our view reflect the ongoing obstacles
to guaranteeing effective accountability with regard to
the crimes committed since 2003.

We view with concern that the judicial investigations
mentioned in the Prosecutor’s report have shown that
there have been specific orders to attack civilians,
including aerial bombardments and the deliberate
maintenance of conditions hostile to the living conditions
of the displaced population, which will lead to severe
damage in the long term. The information presented
with respect to the constant restrictions standing in the
way of the distribution of humanitarian assistance and
to alleviating the suffering of the vulnerable population
is something that we fail to understand.
It is in that same context that, as members of the
Council and from our national perspective as a State
party to the Court, we cannot turn a blind eye to the
suffering caused to the population and the serious acts
committed in Darfur since 2003, as well as to the recent
investigations that detail systematic and lamentable
facts, which by any measure constitute crimes against
humanity.
While I underscore that we understand the
complexity involved in bringing to justice those parties
indicated in the Prosecutor’s report as responsible
for the crimes committed in Darfur, we believe that
the evidence collected and the judicial investigations
carried out adhere to the principles of impartiality,
independence and non-interference in politics. If we
accept the premise, and we do, that there can be no
peace without justice, then the atrocities committed
cannot remain unresolved.
As members of the Council, we are certain we will
be able to resolve internal differences that may exist
and, in that context, renew institutional cooperation
between the International Criminal Court and the
Security Council. Likewise, we recognize that efforts
are being undertaken in the current peace process being
implemented in Darfur, in particular the implementation
of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur and the
establishment of institutions tasked with monitoring
respect for human rights and the crimes committed in
Darfur since 2003, all of which we think is commendable.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): At the outset,
on behalf of the delegation of Togo, I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on China’s assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of June. I would also like to thank the delegation of
Azerbaijan for its excellent work last month.
I should also like to thank Prosecutor Luis
Moreno-Campo for his presentation of the report of

12-3597515

S/PV.6778

the International Criminal Court (ICC) pursuant to
resolution 1593 (2005), as well as for the work he has
done in keeping with that resolution.

2035 (2012), of 17 February, on the work of the Panel
of Experts and the need to end all violations of human
rights.

The report provides an overview of the
implementation of resolution 1593 (2005), notably
in terms of the indictments against those suspected
of crimes and serious human rights violations and the
efforts to bring them before international justice or
national tribunals as well as the cooperation of the Court
with the Sudanese Government and the other States
Members of the United Nations.

Through the Security Council, the United Nations
has demonstrated its will to create conditions in Darfur
conducive to peace and peaceful development, as
evidenced in the recent renewal of the mandate of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur. My country welcomes the Operation’s critical
contribution to the protection of civilians, humanitarian
assistance, intelligence and implementation of the
ceasefire and security measures. The Council should
remain engaged, so that its resolutions on the conflict in
Darfur can be fully implemented. Non-compliance by
internal or external actors will only perpetuate violence,
violations of human rights and threats to peace and
security.

On all those matters, the Prosecutor’s report
indicates that no progress has been made and that
the Sudanese authorities have not expressed their
willingness to work towards the implementation of the
resolution. The establishment of special courts in Darfur
and the appointment of a number of prosecutors were
signs that were positive and welcome, but that came
to nothing, because, as the report makes clear, neither
the courts nor the prosecutors fulfilled their duties. The
Togolese delegation hopes, therefore, that the demands
of the relevant Security Council resolutions as well
as the calls from other bodies, including the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel, will spur the
Sudanese authorities to take national steps to administer
justice and cooperate with the Court.
Togo believes that the conflict in Darfur will never
come to a conclusive end unless the fight against impunity
prevails and those who have been indicted answer for
their crimes according to the norms of international
law. Political will on the part of the highest Sudanese
authorities to put an end to impunity remains the key to
a lasting solution to the conflict in Darfur. We reiterate
that no conflict is resolved nor genuine reconciliation
achieved unless impunity ends and perpetrators are tried
in courts of law. Nor can the ICC deliver justice without
receiving cooperation from States, whose discretionary
right to pursue perpetrators on their own initiative
should encourage them to take independent measures,
so as to avoid any foreign intervention.
While it is clear that violence in Darfur has greatly
diminished, the conflict is not over and the humanitarian
situation is still worrying. Barriers to humanitarian
efforts, the expulsion of some non-governmental
organizations and restrictions on the delivery of
medicine and supplies to outlying regions must stop, in
compliance with resolution 1556 (2004). The Sudanese
Government should also fully implement resolution

16

Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to congratulate China on assuming the
presidency of the Council for the month of June,
and we wish Ambassador Li Baodong and his
team much success in their work. Allow me also to
thank Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for his briefing and
for presenting the fifteenth report of the Court to the
Security Council pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).
While Azerbaijan is not a signatory to the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court, we do
strongly believe that the protection of civilians and
respect for international human rights and humanitarian
law are among the responsibilities of the international
community. All of those elements doubtlessly constitute
important pillars of international accountability and
carry their own weight. We note the efforts of the
International Criminal Court to investigate all those
who are responsible for crimes in Darfur.
It is also important to ensure that the ICC Prosecutor
acts strictly within the mandate of resolution 1593 (2005).
Effective measures for preventing serious human rights
violations in the Sudan, including the establishment of
a proper national judicial system, are indispensable for
enforcing the rule of law in the country. In that sense,
the international community’s assistance to Sudan is
much needed.
The implementation of the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur and an all-inclusive Darfur-based
internal dialogue are of the utmost importance for
bringing durable peace to the region. We welcome

12-35975

S/PV.6778

the steps taken so far, especially the establishment
of regional autonomy in Darfur and of the National
Human Rights Commission, as well as the appointment
of a prosecutor for a special court for Darfur, with
jurisdiction to investigate all human rights violations
committed since 2003.
We are concerned about the activities of non-State
armed groups, which are the main obstacles to the peace
process. In that respect, the recent news about clashes
between the Sudanese army and rebel groups is deeply
alarming. It is important that the non-signatory parties
join the peace process without preconditions. We also
deplore the criminality and banditry in Darfur, which are
the most significant threats to civilians and humanitarian
workers.
In conclusion, we note with approval some positive
developments in the overall security environment in the
region and we hope to see further improvements in that
regard.
Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We are grateful to the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, for his
fifteenth report to the Security Council and for his
briefing today. As he is the first ICC Prosecutor and he
is preparing to step down, we would like to recognize
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo’s work in that post and to wish
him every success in his future endeavours.
Russia supports the work of the ICC in ensuring the
irreversibility of sanctions for the most grievous crimes
that trouble the whole of the international community.
We believe that in order to strengthen the authority
of the ICC it is critical that ongoing investigations
objectively assess foul play committed by all sides in
any given situation, while avoiding politicization in the
work of the Court.
Since the adoption by the Council of resolution
1593 (2005), almost seven years ago, the ICC has
made significant progress in investigating Sudanese
crimes — so much so that further progress is impossible
without those indicted being tried in The Hague. Many
attribute that state of affairs to the unsatisfactory level
of cooperation on the part of States with the Court,
especially the Sudan itself.
Of course, the situation requires analysis and a
search for new approaches to the problem of combating
impunity. However, we would like to stress that, in that
context, invoking enforcement capacities under Chapter

VII of the Charter with a view to carrying our arrest
warrants for Sudanese officials is unlikely to solve
problems arising for the ICC in the Sudan. We continue
to closely track efforts to bring to justice those guilty of
the attack on African Union peacekeepers in Haskanita.
We note yet again that that 2007 attack was not the only
episode of destructive acts by rebel groups that merit the
attention of the Prosecutor.
Russia continues to believe that the administration
of justice should take place within a general framework
for a settlement to the problems in Darfur. In supporting
the decision of the Security Council to refer the situation
in Darfur to the ICC Prosecutor, in accordance with
the Rome Statute, we continue to believe that work in
that area should not stand in the way of the process of
restoring peace and post-conflict normalization.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): As this is the first time that
I take the floor in the Security Council this month, let
me express our congratulations to you, Mr. President,
for your delegation’s assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the month of June. We trust, Sir, that
you will guide us with your wisdom through all the
challenges presented by what looks like a very busy
month. You can count on Germany’s support.
At the same time, I would like to warmly commend
and thank our colleague from Azerbaijan, Ambassador
Mehdiyev, for his very effective stewardship of the
Council in the month of May.
Since this is the last time that Prosecutor Luis
Moreno-Ocampo is addressing the Council, I would
like to start by thanking him, not only for his report and
statement today, but for his many years of hard work,
dedication and commitment to international justice.
His contribution has been instrumental in the efforts
undertaken by the International Criminal Court (ICC)
to bring to justice perpetrators of atrocities committed
in various parts of the world. We are of course very
grateful to him for the work he has done in following
up on resolutions 1593 (2005) and 1970 (2011), which
referred the situations of Darfur and Libya, respectively,
to the ICC. As he leaves his present functions, we wish
him all the best for the future.
We noted the arrest warrant issued against
Mr. Abdelrahim Mohamed Hussein, the current Sudanese
Minister for Defence, on 1 March, and we understand the
deep sense of frustration expressed in the Prosecutor’s
report before us. Ahmed Haroun, indicted for war crimes
and crimes against humanity, is Governor of Southern

12-3597517

S/PV.6778

Kordofan state; Ali Kushayb, indicted for war crimes
and crimes against humanity, is at large in the Sudan;
and President Omer Hassan Al-Bashir, indicted for war
crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide, has
been re-elected and defies the authority of the Council.
Unfortunately, some of the indictees continue to incite
Government forces to commit atrocities in defiance of
Security Council resolutions, most recently resolution
2035 (2012), of 17 February 2012. In short, unlike the
case of Libya, open conflict, and therefore impunity,
continues to characterize the situation in the Sudan.
In the light of that deplorable situation, I would
like to reiterate that it is the prime responsibility of
the Government of the Sudan to comply with the
Council’s resolutions, cooperate with the Court and
surrender indicted persons to the authority of the Court.
As the Prosecutor’s report makes clear, no such will to
cooperate currently exists at the relevant levels of the
Government of the Sudan.
However, that does not mean that justice will not
be done at some point in time. Eventually, the Sudanese
will have to decide what is ultimately best for them and
their country. The recent sentencing of Charles Taylor
by the Special Court for Sierra Leone to 50 years in
prison is a clear sign that the age of accountability is
neither a dream nor a mere concept, but is becoming a
reality. We must not waver in our determination to foster
that reality. Perpetrators of genocide, crimes against
humanity and other serious crimes must not and cannot
be allowed to avoid justice.
Notwithstanding the Sudan’s primary responsibility
to cooperate, we have taken full note of the Court’s
findings regarding the non-cooperation of countries
when they have been visited by President Al-Bashir.
The non-execution of Court requests severely affects its
ability to fulfil its mandate. Germany therefore reiterates
its call upon all State parties to the Rome Statute to fully
honour their obligations under the Statute, in particular
the obligation to cooperate with the Court and execute
any warrant of arrest issued by it. We also support
ongoing action by the ICC Assembly of States Parties to
encourage full cooperation with the Court.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, and the delegation
of the People’s Republic of China, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
June. We wish you success, Sir, and assure you of my
delegation’s full support and cooperation. I would also

18

like to thank the Permanent Representative of Azerbaijan
and his delegation for their successful stewardship of
the Council during the month of May.
I also want to thank the Prosecutor, Mr. Luis
Moreno-Ocampo, for his briefing today. We have taken
note of his fifteenth report on the situation in the Sudan
submitted pursuant to paragraph 8 of resolution 1593
(2005), of 31 March 2005.
India is neither a signatory to the Rome Statute nor
a member of the International Criminal Court (ICC) for
reasons that are well known. I will not reiterate them.
India strongly condemns all acts of violence
committed against civilians. We believe that the right to
life is one of the fundamental rights and the foundation
of any social order. It is the obligation of all States to
take appropriate measures to protect the lives of their
citizens while maintaining social order. The States
concerned must also bring to justice those responsible
for violations of that right.
The continuing conflict in Darfur is one of serious
concern. We support all efforts to bring the conflict to
an end. We also support the activities of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) aimed at protecting civilians and the
efforts made, in cooperation with the African Union’s
High-level Implementation Panel led by President Thabo
Mbeki, to restore an enduring environment of peace and
stability in Darfur. An inclusive political process to
address the legitimate aspirations of all sectors of the
Darfuri population will go a long way towards resolving
the conflict.
All parties have to accept that there is no military
solution to the conflict in Darfur. We call upon all parties
to join the political process without preconditions
and without any further delay. In that connection, it is
necessary that the Council seriously consider measures
against those who have so far refused to join the peace
process.
It is also important that the proceedings at the ICC
be undertaken in a manner consistent with its obligations
and that they contribute to the efforts aimed at ending
the conflict in Darfur. Any suggestion that has the effect
of creating new obligations for States and regional
organizations that are not parties to the Rome Statute
will not be legally sound. Nor will such suggestions
serve the purpose of peace in Darfur. As such, we cannot
support them.

12-35975

S/PV.6778

In conclusion, India will continue to support all
diplomatic efforts for an early establishment of peace
and security in Darfur that will afford all sectors of the
Darfuri population opportunities for socio-economic
development and peaceful coexistence through an
inclusive political process.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
China.
On the whole, the situation in Darfur, the
Sudan, is now easing. There has been progress in the
implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur. The international community should continue to
support the parties in Darfur in fully implementing the
Doha Document and in ensuring that the rebels there
renounce violence and sign a peace agreement with the
Sudanese Government on the basis of the Document.
China believes that the political process holds the
key to an appropriate settlement of the question of
Darfur. It is only through the realization of a lasting
peace in Darfur by political means that the foundation
can be truly laid for justice.
Our position on the question of the International
Criminal Court remains unchanged. We hope that the
efforts of the ICC on the issue of Darfur will facilitate
the political settlement of the question of Darfur. We
hope that the Security Council and the ICC will fully
respect the views of the African Union and the Arab
League on this question.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo
to respond to the comments made and questions raised.
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo: With due respect for the
Council and the Government of the Sudan, it is my duty
as Prosecutor to inform the Council and to put on notice
the Ambassador of the Sudan, Mr. Daffa-Alla Elhag Ali
Osman, that in accordance with article 25 3(d) of the
Rome Statute, his activities denying crimes in Darfur
could be considered part of those crimes. The Office
has an obligation to investigate anyone responsible for
the commission of crimes. The Office will therefore
investigate if Mr. Daffa-Alla Elhag Ali Osman’s
denial of the crimes committed could be considered a
contribution to a group of perpetrators acting with a
common purpose.

Since Nuremberg, it has been clear that obeying
illegal orders is not a valid excuse for the commission
of crimes. The Office will respect Mr. Osman’s rights
and invite him to present any exculpatory information,
and it will check his intentions, including if he was
aiming to further the criminal purposes of a group of
perpetrators in Darfur. In that case, the Office will not
hesitate to take appropriate action if the evidence leads
to the conclusion that he is participating in the crimes.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo for his statement.
I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): The
statement made by the Prosecutor concerning the
Permanent Representative of the Sudan is a violation
of all political and diplomatic norms. It is a threat that
should be rejected and that reflects his methods of work
at the Court. I would even say that it is the statement of a
terrorist who is trying to silence the voice of justice and
that of a politician who does not recognize the political
and diplomatic rules and norms that give us the right to
defend ourselves and to make our voices heard by the
Council, which is responsible for peace and security.
If he and his supporters have been touched by our
strong words that have shaken his credibility and put in
question his professionalism, then that is another issue
that does not give him to right to once again use the
Rome Statute to intimidate diplomatic personnel, whose
duties and functions are stipulated in political and
diplomatic rules. Such conduct should be rejected. To
permit it would only undermine international legality,
the work of the United Nations and all diplomatic norms.
Perhaps the Council has noticed that he is in an
emotional state and is behaving emotionally as a result
of what we stated regarding his conduct and his lack
of credibility. That has prompted him, at this delicate
juncture, to make a statement accusing the Permanent
Representative of the Sudan of being behind the crimes
committed in Darfur. That is the way in which he thinks,
and that is the manner in which he has tackled all of
these issues — in a totally illegal, immoral and illogical
manner, to the extent of intimidation and terrorization.
I would have preferred to hear him respond to all of
the arguments that I have put forward and the statements
made by international personalities who have denied
that ethnic cleansing has been committed in Darfur. Why
did he not say at the time that he would also prosecute

12-3597519

S/PV.6778

President Obasanjo, Mr. Danforth and Judge Cassisi
for having refuted allegations that ethnic cleansing had
been committed?
I will stop here. I am confident that the Council’s
wisdom will guide it as concerns the manner in which
he thinks and behaves.

20

The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

12-35975

S/PV.6778

12-3597521
