V.

Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Somalía
South Africa
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Swaziland
Syrian Arab Republic
Thailand
Togo

B.

Luxembourg
Malta
Monaco
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern
lreland
United States of America

LIST OF STATES INDICATED IN SECTION

Argentina
Bahamas
Barbados
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
D.

Tunisia
Uganda
United Arab Emirates
United Republic of Cameroon
United Republic of Tanzania
Upper Volta
Viet Nam
Yemen
Yugoslavia
Zaire
Zambia

LIST OF STATES INDICATED IN SECTION TI, PARAGRAPH 4 (b)

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Cyprus
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany, Federal Republic of
Greece
Holy See 57
Iceland
lreland
Italy
Japan
Liechtenstein
C.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Pero
Surinam
Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela

LIST OF STATES INDICATED IN SECTION

Albania
Bulgaria
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic
Czechoslovakia
German Democratic Republic
Hungary

32/109.

JI, PARAGRAPH 4 (e)

JI, l'ARAGRAPH 4 (d)

Poland
Romanía
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic
Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics

lnternational Year of the Child

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2626 (XXV) of 24 October 1970 containing the International Development
Strategy for the Second United Nations Development
Decade, 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May
197 4 containing the Declaration and the Programme of
Action on the Establishment of a New lnternational
Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974
containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties
of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on
development and international economic co-operation,
as well as Economic and Social Council resolution 2105
(LXIII) of 3 August 1977,
57 See

also resolution 32/39, para. (i).

89

Recalling its resolution 31/169 of 21 December
1976, in which it proclaimed the year 1979 International Year of the Child, with the following general
objectives:
(a) To provide a framework for advocacy on behalf of children and for enhancing the awareness of the
special needs of chiidren on the part of decision-makers
and the public,
( b) To promote recognition of the fact that programmes for children should be an integral part of economic and social development plans with a view to
achieving, in both the long term and the short term,
sustaincd activities for the benefit of children at the
national and international Ievels,
Believing that the concept of basic services for children is a vital component of social and economic development,
Recognizing the fundamental importance in ali countries, devcloping and industrialized, of programmes
benefiting children not only for their well-being but also
as part of broader efforts to accelerate the economic and
social process,
Having considered the report of the Executive Director of the United Nations Children's Fund on the
preparations for the International Year of the Child and
the leve! of contributions to the financing of these activities,"8
1. Commends the Executive Director and staff of
the United Nations Children's Fund for the preparatory
work which has laid the foundation for a successful
International Year of the Child and, in this regard,
welcornes the appointment of the Special Representativc for the Ycar;
2. Notes with satisfaction the co-ordination being
achicved through the use of the Interagency Advisory
Group for the International Year of the Child, composed of representatives of concerned organizations of
the United Nations system and non-governmental organizations;
3. Reafjirms that the major focus of the International Year of the Child is at the national level, but that
this should be supported by regional and international
co-operation;
4. Expresses its gratitude to Governments that have
contributcd thus far to the administrative costs of the
International Year of the Child and appeals to all Govcrnments to contributc to its financing;
5. Requests ali United Nations bodies concerned,
including the specialized agencies, to keep thc United
N ations Children's Fund informed of their respective
programmes for the International Year of the Child
ami, in this regard, requests the Fund, as the lead
agency, to prepare a report for the General Assembly
at its thirty-third session on the activities being undertaken in the United Nations system;
6. Stresses the importance of the active participation of non-governmental organizations and the public,
at both the international and national levels, in support
of the International Year of the Child;
7. Invites Governments to inform the United Nations Children's Fund on activities undertaken in their
country to promote the objectives of the International
Y ear of the Child;
58 E/6010.

General Assemhly-Thirty-second Session

90

8. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the United Nations Children's Fund, to publicize
the International Year of the Child and its aims and
objectives in both developing and developed countries;
9. Decides to consider further the preparations for
the International Year of the Child at its thirty-third
session and to observe the Year by holding a special
debate in plcnary meeting on the situation of children
in the world at its thirty-fourth session;
10. Expresses the hope that Governments, nongovernmental organizations and the public will respond
generously with contributions to attain the objectives
of the International Year of the Child and, through thc
United Nations Children's Fund and other channels of
externa] aid, to increase substantially the rcsourccs
available for serviccs benefiting childrcn.

103rd plenary meeting
15 December 1977
32/110.

United Nations Children's Fuml

The General Assembly,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 2109
(LXIII) of 3 August 1977,
Having considered the report of the Executive Board
of the United Nations Children's Fund on its scssion
held at Manila from 23 May to 3 June 1977,rili

Deeply concerned about the magnitudc of the unmet
needs of children in developing countries and the effects
that a failure to meet these needs could have on thc
long-term development process,
Believing therefore that meeting these needs should
be taken fully into consideration in the drafting of a
new international development strategy,
Believing moreover that the basic services approach, 60 as elaborated by the United Nations Children's Fund, deserves ful! support because it contributcs
to the meeting of essential human needs,
Recognizing the need for ali Governments, especially
those that are not contributing to the United N alions
Children's Fund in relation to their financia! capacity,
to increase their contributions as soon as possible,
l. Commenas the United Nations Children's Fund
for its initiative in regard to the elaboration and implementation of the basic serviccs approach for children
as part of a comprehensive development strategy;
2. Urges developing countries that have not already
done so to incorporate, as appropriate, this concept
and approach in their national development plans and
strategies;
3. Appeals with a sense of urgency to Governments
to increase significantly their contributions, if possible
on a multiyear basis, to the United Nations Children's
Fund, so that an equitable sharing of voluntary contributions will be achieved and that the target of $200
million in annual revenue from ali sources wíll be ::ittained as soon as possible, and not la ter than 1979.
the International Year of the Child.
103rd plenary meeting
15 December 1977
59 O,fficia/ Records of thc Eeonomie and Sochl Cou11ci/,
Sixty-third Se::sion, Supp/cment No.
12 ( E/ 60 I 4) and
E/6014/ Add. l.
HíJJhid., Supplement No. 12 (E/6014), paras. 131-136.

:~2/11].

Health neerls of Palestinian refugee
children

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 212 (III) of 19 November
1948 on assistance to Palestine refugees,
Deeply concerned about the fact that almost half a
million childrcn in refugee camps are not rcceiving the
basic nutritional requirements,
l. Requests the Secretary-General, in col!aboration
with Governments of host countrics and with rclcvant
United Nations bodies, to undertakc a sample survcy
to ascertain the needs of Palestinian childrcn in refugec
camps with a \ icw to averting adverse cffccts on their
health:

'°' Requcsts thc Secretary-Gcncral to report to thc
General Asscmbly at its thirty-third session on the
implcmentation of thc: present resolution.
103rd plenary meeting
15 Decemher 1977
32/112.

Tar~ct for Worlrl

Food Programmr

pl1••l.~rs for th<' periotl ] 979-1980

The General Assembly,
Recalling thc provision containcd in paragraph 1
of its resolution 2095 (XX) of 20 Dccember 1965
under which the World Food Programme is to be
reviewed bcforc each pledging conference,

Recalling a/so the provisions of paragraph 4 of its
resolution 3407 (XXX) of 28 November 1975
whercby. subject to the above-mentioned review. thc
pledging conferencc at which Govcrnments should be
invitecl to plcdge contributions for 1979 and 1980.
with a vicw to rcaching such a target as may then be
recommended by the General Assembly and by the
Confercnce of thc Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, should be convened, at the
latest, early in 1978,
Noting that thc review of thc World Food Programmc was undertaken by the Committee on Food
Aid Policies and Programmes at its third scssion and
by the Economic and Social Council at its sixty-third
scssion,
Havi11g co11sidercd Economic and Social Council
rcsolution 212 8 ( LXI 11) of 31 October 1977 and the
rccommendations madc by the Committec on Food
A;d Policics a·1d Programmes in its second annual
report, 01

Recognizing the value of multilateral foocl aid as
implcmented by the World Food Programme sincc its
inccption and the nccessity for continuing its action
both as a form of capital invcstmcnt and for meeting
cmergency food necds,
1. Estab/ishes for the two years 1979 and 1980
a targct for voluntary contributions to the World Food
Programme of $950 million, of which not lcss th::in
one third should be in cash and/or serviccs in the aggregatc, and exprcsscs the hope that thc resourccs
so contributed will be augmented bv substantial additional contributions from othcr sou;ccs in rccognition
GI Sec

F 1 6008.
