United Nations

S/PV.3890

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-third Year

3890th Meeting
Saturday, 6 June 1998, 11.40 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Monteiro . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Portugal)

Members:

Bahrain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Buallay
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Amorim
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Qin Huasun
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Niehaus
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dejammet
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dangue-Réwaka
Gambia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Jagne
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Owada
Kenya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mahugu
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Lavrov
Slovenia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Türk
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dahlgren
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . . Sir John Weston
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Richardson

Agenda
The responsibility of the Security Council in the maintenance of international peace and security

98-85406 (E)

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
1
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.

Security Council
Fifty-third year
The meeting was called to order at 11.40 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The responsibility of the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Argentina, Australia, Canada, Egypt, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Mexico, New Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, the
Republic of Korea, Ukraine and the United Arab Emirates
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Petrella
(Argentina), Ms. Wensley (Australia), Mr. Fowler
(Canada), Mr. Elaraby (Egypt), Mr. Kharrazi (Islamic
Republic of Iran), Mr. Tello (Mexico), Mr. Powles
(New Zealand), Mr. Aass (Norway), Mr. Kamal
(Pakistan), Mr. Lee (Republic of Korea),
Mr. Yel’chenko (Ukraine), and Mr. Samhan (United
Arab Emirates) took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/1998/476, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Costa Rica, Japan, Slovenia and Sweden.
I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents: S/1998/450,
letter dated 1 June 1998 from the Chargé d’affaires ad
interim of the Permanent Mission of the United Arab
Emirates to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral; S/1998/458, letter dated 2 June 1998 from the
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General; S/1998/463, letter dated

2

3890th meeting
6 June 1998
2 June 1998 from the Permanent Representative of the
Philippines to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General; S/1998/464, letter dated 4 June 1998
from the Permanent Representative of India to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council; S/1998/468, letter dated 3 June 1998 from the
Permanent Representative of Belarus to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General; and finally,
S/1998/473, letter dated 5 June 1998 from the Permanent
Representatives of China, France, the Russian Federation,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, and the United States of America to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
vote on the draft resolution before it. Unless I hear any
objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall first call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Owada (Japan): Quite recently, the Security
Council issued two presidential statements in which it
strongly deplored the nuclear tests carried out by India on
11 and 13 May, and then by Pakistan on 28 and 30 May.
By those forceful and direct statements, the Security
Council has addressed the specific acts perpetrated by the
two countries concerned.
On top of that, we are adopting today a draft
resolution in order to address the new critical and
dangerous situation triggered by the acts of the two
countries. There is now a serious danger that the tensions
in South Asia could heighten further and escalate to a
nuclear confrontation.
Yet another danger which has been created is that
the nuclear non-proliferation regime itself is being
threatened and that the international community could
drift into an uncontrollable world of nuclear proliferation.
The situation is of critical importance to the security of
the entire international community and requires its urgent
attention. The Council, entrusted with the primary
responsibility to maintain international peace and security,
is duty-bound to take action to fulfil its responsibility
incumbent upon it under the Charter of the United
Nations.

Security Council
Fifty-third year
I have to express, first of all, the grave concern of my
country at the serious negative effect of the nuclear tests
conducted by India and Pakistan on peace and stability in
South Asia. Furthermore, the deterioration of the
relationship and the risk of nuclear confrontation between
the two major countries on the sub-continent cannot fail to
produce serious implications for the maintenance of
international peace and security beyond that region. In order
to avoid any such negative effect, the Security Council
must address this situation with firm determination, with a
sense of urgency and with an awareness of its heavy
responsibility.
It is against this background that in the draft resolution
before us the Security Council urges India and Pakistan to
exercise the maximum restraint and to resume dialogue on
all the outstanding issues in order to remove the tensions
between them and to find mutually acceptable solutions that
address the root causes of these tensions, including
Kashmir.
As a fellow Asian nation, Japan strongly hopes that
India and Pakistan will move in the direction of a historical
reconciliation through strenuous efforts to build mutual
confidence and dialogue rather than confrontation and an
arms race.
Secondly, by embarking upon an attempt for the
development of nuclear weapons, India and Pakistan are
seriously jeopardizing the international regime of nonproliferation, which is the indispensable cornerstone for
safeguarding the international community from the horrors
of nuclear holocaust.
Japan is particularly shocked by the recent nuclear
tests of India and Pakistan, inasmuch as we the Japanese
people know first-hand the unspeakable horrors of nuclear
weapons and are determined not to allow nuclear tragedies
such as Hiroshima and Nagasaki ever again to visit us on
our globe. It is precisely for this reason that Japan has been
placing supreme importance on the prevention of the
proliferation of nuclear weapons.
Japan has been making strenuous efforts in
encouraging countries in all parts of the world to join the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT)
regimes. The international regime for nuclear nonproliferation, with the NPT and the CTBT, should be
maintained at all costs, for this is the only guarantee that
can prevent nuclear weapons from spreading on the globe.

3890th meeting
6 June 1998
It is out of this conviction that Japan has lodged
strong protests with both India and Pakistan and has
frozen its economic assistance for new projects, which is
meant for the peaceful development of the country. Their
actions jeopardize the very international regime for
nuclear non-proliferation, for the protection and promotion
of which we have been working so tirelessly.
For all these reasons Japan is firmly convinced that
through this draft resolution the Security Council should
demonstrate in no ambiguous terms its grave concern
about the challenge that the nuclear tests conducted by
India and Pakistan constitute to international efforts aimed
at strengthening the global regime of the non-proliferation
of nuclear weapons, and should urge them to become
parties to the NPT and the CTBT without delay and
without conditions.
In this connection, it should be made clear that there
is no way for India and Pakistan to claim a nuclear status.
The draft resolution declares that under the NPT regime
India and Pakistan cannot have a nuclear-weapon-State
status.
Before concluding, I should like to make a brief but
important reference to the question of nuclear
disarmament. It is the considered view of Japan that in
parallel with our efforts to promote the international
regime for non-proliferation, steady progress for nuclear
disarmament is essential for a safer world. Japan makes
it an article of faith to uphold its own three non-nuclear
principles — not to produce, not to possess and not to
introduce nuclear weapons — and seeks to achieve a
world free of nuclear weapons. On this basis it has
consistently appealed to the international community to
aim at steady progress in nuclear disarmament through
concrete and practical measures on a step-by-step basis.
In this context, my delegation notes with satisfaction
that in its preamble the draft resolution recalls the
successful outcome of the 1995 Review and Extension
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons, and refers to the joint
communiqué issued by the Foreign Ministers of the five
nuclear States, in which they declared themselves to be
determined to fulfil their commitments relating to nuclear
disarmament under Article VI of that Treaty.
It was in the light of these considerations that on
30 May Japan took the initiative to call for an emergency
meeting of the Security Council to draw the attention of
the Council to the grave implications of the recent nuclear

3

Security Council
Fifty-third year
testing by India and Pakistan for international peace and
security, and it has since been strenuously working for a
draft resolution on this critical issue, in cooperation with
Costa Rica, Slovenia and Sweden. We, the sponsors, have
been engaged in active and close consultations with each
and every member of the Council to improve the content of
the text. The draft resolution now before us is the result of
such consultations. It is my firm conviction that this
document represents the united voice of conscience of the
international community on the existential problem that we,
together, face.
I wish to conclude my statement by saying that the
adoption of this draft resolution will be only the beginning
of a long battle to consolidate the international regime of
the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and to secure
future generations against the scourge of a nuclear tragedy.
In the interests of the future of humankind we cannot afford
to lose this battle. The Security Council should remain
actively seized of the matter addressed in this draft
resolution and be ready to consider further how best to
ensure the implementation of the present draft resolution.
Japan, as a member of the Security Council, as a
member of the Group of Eight, which is to meet next week
to address the same issue, and as a peace-loving nation in
Asia gravely concerned about the wider implications of the
recent nuclear tests, will spare no efforts in joining the
international community in its endeavour to contain the
present crisis triggered by the recent developments.
Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): Since the first nuclear bomb
fell on Hiroshima on 6 August 1945 the whole issue of
peace and survival has gained a new dimension. The
development of nuclear weapons, and their proliferation,
came to pose a new threat to mankind. And it was a unique
threat, because we reached a stage where it was possible
not only to destroy the enemy and oneself with these
terrible weapons, but also everyone else, and all and
everything that would come after us. The entire future of
civilization was at stake.
We have all become aware of this in the years that
have lapsed since 1945, and many efforts have been made
to help reverse the trend — to stop proliferation, to halt
nuclear testing and to start real nuclear disarmament.
This is one reason why my Government has taken the
events of the last few weeks so seriously. We have
condemned the nuclear tests by India and Pakistan. Those
tests constitute a serious setback for the hope for a world
free from nuclear weapons. They are in complete disregard

4

3890th meeting
6 June 1998
of the will of the international community to ban all
nuclear testing. And they also create grave risks for
regional security in South Asia and beyond.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction is
indeed a threat to international peace and security. It is of
great significance that the Security Council, by today’s
draft resolution, will put its weight and its authority
behind the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty. This will strengthen international efforts to
prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons and to
achieve nuclear disarmament.
It is not enough to stem the flow; we must also turn
the tide. The ultimate goal is to eliminate all weapons of
mass destruction. The five nuclear-weapon States bear a
particular responsibility to make that possible. But this in
no way reduces the duty of other States to contribute to
disarmament and to prevent the proliferation of nuclear
weapons.
My Government utterly rejects the notion that
nuclear weapons increase security and international
standing, and we believe that today’s message to India
and Pakistan is very clear: nuclear testing will not give
them more security — only the opposite. Nor will it
enhance their status and standing among other nations.
Instead, through their own actions these two countries, in
one essential field, have removed themselves from the
mainstream of the international community. We want
them to return. The one road to take for India and
Pakistan is the one taken by South Africa: to reconsider,
to renounce their nuclear option, and to join the treaty
regimes.
We recognize the complex political and historical
background to the tension in South Asia. We wish to
encourage India and Pakistan to resume and strengthen a
political dialogue on all outstanding issues, including
Kashmir. The international community should stand ready
to facilitate such dialogue, at the request of the parties, in
order to reduce tension and build confidence and security
between them.
The Security Council itself can never — and
nowhere — abdicate its responsibility for international
peace and security. That is also the reason why Japan and
Sweden, together with Costa Rica and Slovenia, initiated
today’s draft resolution. We deem it a significant response
to a perilous international situation.

Security Council
Fifty-third year
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from
Russian): The draft resolution that we are considering today
is a very timely and important response by the Security
Council to the situation that has arisen as a result of the
nuclear tests conducted by India and Pakistan. The world
learned with profound concern about the nuclear explosions
that reverberated in the region of southern Asia. The many
years of confrontation and rivalry between India and
Pakistan have taken on a new, extremely dangerous, nuclear
character. Under conditions of a virtually comprehensive
moratorium on nuclear tests, such actions create significant
additional difficulties in further reducing nuclear weapons
and damage the existing regime for the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction.
The general thrust and specific provisions of the draft
resolution must be a unanimous and appropriate response
by the Security Council to this challenge as it meets its
chief responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security in accordance with the United Nations Charter.
Of great importance in this respect were the results of
the meeting of the Foreign Ministers of Great Britain,
China, Russia, the United States and France, held in
Geneva on 4 June, which were then endorsed by the
Security Council. Having condemned the nuclear tests
carried out by India and Pakistan, the five permanent
members of the Council firmly stated that no threat to
stability should come out of South Asia and the conflict
between India and Pakistan should not develop into a
nuclear scenario. The five Ministers called on both
countries to refrain from carrying out new nuclear tests,
from the deployment of nuclear weapons and nuclearcapable missiles and from the production of fissile material.
They appealed to Delhi and Islamabad to adhere to the
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons, based on the fact that
India and Pakistan, in accordance with these treaties, do not
have the status of nuclear-weapon States. All these ideas
are fully reflected in the draft resolution, for which we are
grateful to the sponsors.
At the same time, we stress our readiness to help India
and Pakistan in their search for reconciliation and
cooperation through direct dialogue. We are convinced that
we can find points of contact in the approaches of Delhi
and Islamabad to resolve their conflicts, and that they can
try to develop mutually acceptable forms which, without
interference in their internal affairs and without attempts to
raise the existing problems to an international level, would
help them to reach agreement.

3890th meeting
6 June 1998
In this connection, Russia views the adoption of any
type of sanctions against these States unjustified from the
international legal, political and humanitarian points of
view. The draft resolution does not contain the slightest
hint of any type of sanction.
We note with satisfaction the common understanding
of the members of the Security Council of the need to
continue efforts to reduce the danger which has arisen
from the nuclear tests carried out by these two States of
South Asia and aimed at preventing the spread of nuclear
weapons.
The last few years have seen real progress in the
area of nuclear disarmament. The process of reducing
Russian and United States nuclear armaments has become
broad. We hope that soon we will reach a new phase in
negotiations which will result in lowering the ceiling for
the number of nuclear warheads of both powers and in
adherence by other nuclear States to this process.
One of the priority areas in multilateral disarmament
is the task of strengthening the non-proliferation regime
for weapons of mass destruction. We are convinced that
the global non-proliferation regime that has been created
must be strengthened by fresh concrete steps oriented
towards those regions and States that are causing
particular concern in terms of non-proliferation. Russia,
for its part, will continue to do everything it can in order
to strengthen the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons and to prevent its undermining or
erosion.
Mr. Türk (Slovenia): Today the Security Council
will take action on an important draft resolution which
addresses one of the fundamental issues of international
peace and security, the issue of nuclear weapons. Slovenia
is a co-sponsor of the draft resolution, and we strongly
deplore the nuclear tests recently conducted by India and
Pakistan. By participating in the drafting of this
resolution, we wish to add our voice to the overwhelming
international concern at this unfortunate development.
Slovenia is a party to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and a signatory
of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT).
We are strongly committed to the principles and
objectives of nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament,
as adopted by the 1995 Review and Extension Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons. Like many other Member States,
Slovenia considers these two treaties as essential

5

Security Council
Fifty-third year
foundations for the efforts towards nuclear disarmament and
eventual elimination of weapons of mass destruction.
Nuclear testing by India and Pakistan represents a
serious setback to these efforts. While these two countries
have not acceded to either the NPT or the CTBT, and
consequently legitimately argue that they have not violated
any of their treaty obligations, we believe that their recent
actions had an adverse effect on universal aspirations to rid
the world of weapons of mass destruction. The principles
of nuclear non-proliferation and of prohibition of nuclear
tests have been accepted so broadly that their legal effects
equal the effects of solemn declarations of the General
Assembly. As such they cannot be simply ignored by States
not parties to these two treaties. Moreover, the nuclear
testing by India and Pakistan can have a serious negative
impact on stability in the region and beyond. It is
impossible to ignore the expressions of concern voiced in
Asia and the Pacific, as well as worldwide.
We are of the view that acquisition of nuclear
weapons is not the way to solve any problems. It will not
bring the coveted status of a nuclear-weapon State. It also
will not help resolve any outstanding political issues.
Instead, it may spark a costly nuclear-arms race which
would not benefit the security, stability or economy of
either contender.
The legitimate security concerns and political issues in
the region need to be addressed by dialogue and other
political means. In dealing with the present situation, it is
necessary for the Security Council to act with determination
to prevent the reversal of important achievements in the
area of nuclear non-proliferation and to strengthen the
efforts towards nuclear disarmament. This is why the draft
resolution demands that India and Pakistan refrain from
further nuclear tests and urges them, and other States that
have not yet done so, to adhere to the NPT and the CTBT
without delay and without conditions.
It is particularly important that India and Pakistan
refrain from weaponization or deployment of nuclear
weapons or missiles and from production of fissile material
for nuclear weapons. In this context, we note some
encouraging indications in both countries with respect to
measures of self-restraint.
The draft resolution before us expresses support for
the efforts of the Secretary-General to encourage dialogue
between India and Pakistan. We urge them to avail
themselves of his offer to assist in conducting a
constructive dialogue. The existing mechanisms of bilateral

6

3890th meeting
6 June 1998
dialogue on all political and security issues need to be
fully utilized. We are of the view that the SecretaryGeneral can and should play a useful role, in accordance
with the Charter, in the efforts made to reinvigorate the
dialogue.
Slovenia reiterates the importance of universal
adherence to the NPT and the CTBT which are essential
foundations for the pursuit of nuclear disarmament.
Nuclear non-proliferation and prohibition of nuclear
testing are not in themselves sufficient to eliminate the
nuclear danger. Progress is needed with respect to
effective measures of nuclear disarmament. We should
not allow the nuclear testing in South Asia, or anywhere
else, to jeopardize our efforts in this path. Instead, we
should reaffirm our commitment to proceed with effective
implementation of all the provisions of NPT, including its
article VI, and to pursue with renewed vigour the ultimate
goal of nuclear disarmament and eventual elimination of
nuclear weapons.
Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica) (interpretation from
Spanish): The delegation of Costa Rica is grateful for
your decision, Mr. President, which has made it possible
in a short period of time to have this open debate with the
presence of the Secretary-General in order to consider and
adopt a draft resolution consistent with the responsibilities
of the Security Council for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Costa Rica, a sponsor of the text before us, would
like to express on this occasion its gratitude to the
delegations of Japan, Sweden and Slovenia, whose active
leadership was an essential factor in order for us today to
be considering this draft resolution.
In addition, we thank the other members of the
Security Council who have once again given proof of
their firm commitment to the cause of international peace.
My country has made disarmament more than just a
foreign-policy objective. We have been a disarmed
country for 50 years, and accordingly, on both the
national and international levels, have maintained a
constant, invariable policy in favour of disarmament of all
kinds. On every occasion and in every forum we have
expressed our rejection of the arms race in all its forms.
In this regard, we have been firm in stating that the
arms build-up is contrary to the modern world’s
objectives of peace, security and development. Time and
again we have said that the economic resources that the

Security Council
Fifty-third year
world devotes to conventional and nuclear weapons should
be redirected in order to promote genuine economic
development and social equity for all peoples.

3890th meeting
6 June 1998
forceful position against such actions, irrespective of
where they take place or who is responsible for them.

This constant policy of Costa Ricans has been applied
with particular intensity to the question of nuclear weapons,
which are an irrational instrument that threatens the
existence of all of humanity and the world as we know it.

From this moment, which my delegation deems
historic, it should be possible to say that, yes, the Security
Council has a substantive policy of condemning test
explosions of nuclear weapons as well as any other type
of nuclear explosion, in accordance with the provisions of
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.

In the case now unfortunately before the Security
Council, we are facing the sad reality of two countries of
the developing world which have pressing and urgent
economic and social needs to take care of, but which are
instead devoting their financial resources and the
intelligence of their scientists to an objective that is
senseless and shows a lack of commitment to the true
values and principles of coexistence established in the
Charter of the United Nations.

Given the serious and urgent nature of the situation
and in accordance with the provisions of the draft
resolution, we trust that in the very near future the
Secretary-General will be able to inform us that India and
Pakistan have initiated the process of implementing all the
provisions set forth in the draft resolution we are going to
adopt.

This is no longer a bilateral territorial dispute. Now it
goes much further. On the pretext of maintaining their own
national security, both countries have committed themselves
to beginning a nuclear arms race which, beyond its effect
on regional tensions, is a genuine threat to international
peace and security.
In this connection, Costa Rica would like to use this
opportunity to issue a vehement and vigorous appeal to
India and Pakistan to cease immediately the development of
nuclear weapons and, as soon as possible, to accede
unconditionally to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty.
Faithful to its commitment to the peaceful settlement
of disputes, Costa Rica urges India and Pakistan to resolve
all of their pending disputes, including the question of
Kashmir, through dialogue and negotiation. In this
connection, we would like to underscore the potential role
of the Secretary-General.
The text of the draft resolution we have before us
today is realistic, sensible and balanced. It reflects a clear
commitment on the part of this main organ of the United
Nations to the maintenance of international peace and
security, which, ultimately, is the Council’s fundamental
obligation. Costa Rica considers it is important to note that,
while in the past, for reasons of global balance, the Council
has not condemned the conducting of nuclear tests, this
cannot be invoked as a precedent to justify not now
adopting — above all, with a view to the future — a clear,

For all these reasons Costa Rica has proudly
sponsored the draft resolution before us.
Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): In the first place, we would
like to express our gratitude to the delegations of Japan,
Sweden, Slovenia and Costa Rica which, through their
tireless efforts and persistence, have brought us to the
point we are at today. Ambassador Owada in particular
deserves our admiration and appreciation for the manner
in which he has conducted our negotiations.
Kenya has continuously and vigorously pursued an
active policy of nuclear non-proliferation and, with others,
has promoted the goal of complete nuclear disarmament
and the elimination of such weapons. Consequently, we
are a party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and to the Pelindaba Treaty
establishing the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone; a
signatory of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty;
and, indeed, one of the first 21 members of the
Conference on Disarmament.
It is through that prism that we learned with regret
and concern of the underground nuclear tests carried out
by India and Pakistan. The tests will no doubt be
remembered as having dealt a serious blow to our
aspirations to a world free of nuclear weapons.
We encourage India and Pakistan to exercise
restraint and to refrain from carrying out any further tests.
We note the assurances contained in their Government
press statements and expect them to exercise maximum
control over the deadly technology they have acquired, to
remain committed to the Non-Aligned Movement’s goal

7

Security Council
Fifty-third year
of nuclear disarmament, and to participate with others in
negotiating a fissile-material cut-off treaty in the
Conference on Disarmament.
It is regrettable that the insecurity created as a result
of the lack of serious commitment by the nuclear-weapon
States to move towards disarmament has provided others
who may have felt the need to ensure their own security
with an excuse to test. Deplorable though these countries’
actions may be, a wake-up call has most definitely been
sounded.
To this end, the need for security assurances for nonnuclear-weapon States and the even more urgent need for
renewed efforts to rid the world of nuclear weapons cannot
be over-emphasized. We look to the nuclear-weapon States
to start the ball rolling. The rest of us expect them to take
seriously their responsibility to finally remove the threat of
nuclear weapons, which since the end of the Second World
War has continued to hang over our heads.
Security Council presidential statements on the tests
carried out by India and Pakistan expressed the view that
such tests run counter to current global efforts towards
nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament. It is
Kenya’s conviction that testing of any kind, underground or
otherwise, should not be carried out, and that all tests pose
a threat to all of us by increasing the chances of
proliferation and, indeed, of an arms race. In this regard,
we welcome the renewed commitment contained in the
Geneva communiqué of the five States permanent members
of the Council, which inter alia expresses their
determination to fulfil their commitments relating to nuclear
disarmament under article VI of the NPT.
Kenya will vote in favour of the draft resolution
before us because we feel that, although it does not cover
all the areas it should have covered, it nonetheless
addresses our main concerns with respect to nuclear nonproliferation; contains a commitment on nuclear
disarmament by nuclear-weapon States; and, finally, calls
on India and Pakistan to choose the path of reason and,
indeed, dialogue.
Mr. Richardson (United States of America): Nuclear
tests conducted by India and Pakistan in recent weeks
represent a profound blow not only to the stability and
security of their region but also to the international nonproliferation regime on which we all depend. In a few
minutes, this Council will vote on a draft resolution that
condemns those tests. No other response by the
international community is possible in the face of such acts.

8

3890th meeting
6 June 1998
The draft resolution however does more than
condemn. It also makes clear the path India and Pakistan
should follow to restore their standing before all nations.
It calls upon India and Pakistan to refrain from
weaponization or deployment of nuclear weapons to avoid
a ballistic missiles arms race and to avoid further
proliferation by exporting this technology. It also urges
India and Pakistan to resume the diplomatic dialogue
between them, which is the path to true peace.
This draft resolution endorses, in full, the Joint
Communiqué of the Foreign Ministers of China, France,
the Russian Federation, the United Kingdom and the
United States in Geneva on 4 June. At the conclusion of
the meeting in Geneva, Secretary of State Albright noted
that in the coming weeks China, France, Russia, the
United Kingdom and the United States will be engaging
additional concerned States in our shared effort to bring
peace and stability in South Asia. Council adoption of this
draft resolution is an important step along that path.
The Geneva meeting was part of what we expect to
be a continuing process that will include numerous
participants in various forums and will address the entire
range of South Asia security issues, nuclear and nonnuclear. Through that meeting and those scheduled in the
future, we hope to reach out to India and Pakistan. Our
intent is not to make them pariah States, but to engage
and to convince them it is in their own national security
interests to do what the international community is urging
them to do.
We have called upon India and Pakistan, and
continue to do so, to take steps to avert an arms race and
reduce tensions. Both nations should sign and ratify the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty immediately and
without conditions. They should also refrain from
deploying missiles of all types. They should cease
production of fissile material and should enter into
negotiations on a fissile material cut-off treaty in the
Conference on Disarmament, and do so in good faith.
They should also formalize their pledge not to export
dangerous weapons and technologies. They should refrain
from missile testing of any sort, since any such test is a
provocative action.
They should do all of these things not only because
the Security Council or the nuclear-weapon States
proclaim the importance of immediate steps to halt a
dangerous arms race in South Asia. They should do so
because it is in their own best interests to take these
steps. The path they have started down does not add to

Security Council
Fifty-third year
their security but diminishes it. We call upon them to turn
back now.
India and Pakistan must also understand in no
uncertain terms that their tests and subsequent declarations
do not make them nuclear-weapon States. We will not
support amendment of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) to permit their accession as
nuclear-weapon States, because to do so would completely
undermine the very purpose of the NPT and the
international non-proliferation regime.
We also call upon Pakistan and India to work towards
a reduction of tensions between them. Each has legitimate
security concerns. We have already extended our hand to
the parties to offer our assistance to help improve their
confidence and thus their security. I repeat the offer again
on behalf of my Government.
The Kashmir region has the potential to be the spark
that ignites a conflict no one may be able to stop. We urge
both India and Pakistan to work to avoid striking the match.
We believe there are a number of steps they can take to
reduce the chances that a miscalculation or
misunderstanding leads to a situation neither side can truly
want. They should avoid threatening movements near the
line of control, any crossing of the line by military or
security forces, cross-border infiltrations, or other
provocative acts in the area.
The United States calls upon India and Pakistan to
take heed of both the Communiqué issued by the five
permanent members on 4 June in Geneva and the message
contained within the draft resolution we are about to adopt.
They are not calls for punishment or penalty. They are
instead a call by the international community for restraint,
for caution and for good sense. We strongly and sincerely
urge the leaders of both nations to resist the temptation to
act rashly today so that their children will have the
opportunity to live in a stable and peaceful South Asia
tomorrow.
Mr. Amorim (Brazil): Let me state first of all that on
repeated occasions the Brazilian Government has deeply
deplored the nuclear tests conducted on 11 and 13 May by
India, and on 28 and 30 May by Pakistan. That expression
of concern and consternation was forthright and
unequivocal.
Once more, the Brazilian Government calls upon both
India and Pakistan to sign and ratify the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test- Ban Treaty and to contribute towards the

3890th meeting
6 June 1998
entry into force of that instrument. Brazil also appeals to
both Governments to exercise restraint, reduce tensions,
promote dialogue on the peaceful settlement of all
bilateral issues and engage in a process of meaningful
cooperation. Such steps would not only bring concrete
benefits to the peoples of the two nations, but also
enhance their status and prestige before the international
community.
When President Fernando Henrique Cardoso asked
for Congressional consent to the text of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) on 20 June
1997, he stressed that in today’s world, nuclear weapons
represent only “a drain in resources and a source of risk
and uncertainty”.
We therefore noted with extreme concern a chain of
events that brought South Asia to the brink of a nucleararms race, endangered the nuclear non-proliferation
regime and made global efforts towards nuclear
disarmament even more difficult. These regrettable events
reinforce the urgency of the adoption by all nuclear
Powers of concrete measures for the complete elimination
of nuclear weapons.
Brazil associates itself with the statements of the
Permanent Mechanism for Consultation and Policy
Coordination — the Rio Group — issued in Panama City,
and with resolution C/E/Res.39 of the Council of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in
Latin America and the Caribbean (OPANAL).
The Rio Group deplored the conduct of nuclear tests
anywhere in the world and the negative effects of any
such tests on international peace, the environment and
human health. The Rio Group also appealed to the
international community to start immediately negotiations
on nuclear disarmament, with a view to setting up
concrete measures for the elimination of nuclear weapons,
thereby strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation
regime.
Brazil took an active part over the last three decades
in the campaign for a comprehensive nuclear-test ban, and
most recently in the initiative that led to the adoption by
the General Assembly of resolution 50/70 A, of 12
December 1995, on “Nuclear testing”. That resolution,
besides deploring the nuclear testing then being conducted
by two nuclear Powers, reaffirmed in its second
preambular paragraph that

9

Security Council
Fifty-third year
“the cessation of all nuclear testing will contribute to
the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons in all its
aspects, to the process of nuclear disarmament leading
to the ultimate objective of the complete elimination
of nuclear weapons and therefore to the further
enhancement of international peace and security”.
This remains our view.
We welcome, in this context, the statement of the
Foreign Ministers of the five nuclear Powers on 4 June
1998, in which they reiterate their determination to fulfil
their commitments relating to nuclear disarmament under
article VI of the NPT. By endorsing in operative paragraph
2 the Joint Communiqué issued by the Foreign Ministers of
those countries, the draft resolution before us enhances the
legal value of that statement.
Brazil will vote in favour of the draft resolution.
Mr. Jagne (Gambia): My country’s policy on the
issue of disarmament in general, and the strict observance
of the regime on the non-proliferation of all weapons of
mass destruction in particular, has always been consistent.
This is why we still acclaim the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) as
beacons of hope in our collective endeavour to make this
world a safer place for present and future generations.
Let me hasten to point out, however, that continued
adherence to the international regime on the nonproliferation of nuclear weapons will depend to a large
extent on the equal treatment of all States. Having one set
of rules for some and another for others cannot be justified
and is therefore unhelpful and untenable. It goes without
saying that the world would have been a much safer and
saner place if we had all played the game according to the
same rules.
The Gambia’s long-established relations of cooperation
and friendship with both Pakistan and India allow us to
state in no uncertain terms that common sense and goodwill
will always prevail and we are therefore reassured in our
assessment of the situation that the much dreaded nuclear
arms race in South Asia will not even be contemplated and
should not be contemplated.
Finally, by voting in favour of this draft resolution, my
delegation will simply be reiterating its firm conviction that
nuclear disarmament is an obligation of all States without
exception.

10

3890th meeting
6 June 1998
Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from
French): The nuclear tests conducted by India on 11 and
13 May and by Pakistan on 28 and 30 May, together with
the tension in South Asia, have aroused profound concern
throughout the world.
France has deplored and condemned these tests,
which run counter to global efforts against nuclear
proliferation and to the very broad international adherence
to the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
The Foreign Ministers of China, Russia, the United
Kingdom, the United States and France met on 4 June in
Geneva. In a Joint Communiqué, they made specific
proposals and outlined future action which the Council
will endorse when it adopts today’s draft resolution.
Given the situation in South Asia, France feels that
it is a matter of priority to preserve and strengthen the
non-proliferation regime established under the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). France
reaffirms its attachment to the implementation of the
decisions and the resolution adopted by the NPT Review
and Extension Conference in 1995.
We call on India and Pakistan, as well as on the
other States that have not yet done so, to accede to the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty without delay
and without conditions. Our objective remains the
accession of all countries, including India and Pakistan, to
the NPT as it stands and without modification.
We call on India and Pakistan to participate, at the
Conference on Disarmament and on the basis of the
agreed mandate, in negotiations on a treaty banning the
production of fissile material for nuclear weapons. We
take note of the response of those two great countries to
our requests.
We cannot underestimate the regional dimension of
the tension in South Asia. The disputes between the two
countries, particularly on Kashmir, are at the root of
today’s problems. It is essential that we actively seek a
solution to these problems through direct bilateral
dialogue, as well as through the establishment of
confidence-building measures. To ensure peace, security
and stability in the region, it is our duty to encourage
India and Pakistan to make that choice.
If we are to attain all these objectives, we feel that
it would be desirable to continue to promote dialogue and
cooperation with India and Pakistan and to avoid coercive

Security Council
Fifty-third year
measures. But these two countries must also display
restraint and demonstrate, by acting in according with the
Security Council’s requests, their willingness to commit
themselves to this path.
It is in this spirit that the French delegation will vote
in favour of the draft resolution.
Mr. Dangue-Réwaka (Gabon) (interpretation from
French): Once again, we are facing the threat of a nuclear
arms race. In similar circumstances, the ideal would be for
the Security Council to adopt a consistent attitude of
firmness and disapproval, regardless of who stands accused.
We are obliged to note, however, that in fact, in certain
cases, the Council’s assessments are subject to equivocation
and some subjectivism.
That is why we would have preferred, inter alia, that
operative paragraph 1 of the draft resolution under
consideration be worded in the same terms as the
statements adopted by the Council in similar circumstances.
Having said that, in our desire for unity and a
constructive spirit, we will associate ourselves with the
consensus.
Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic):
At the outset, I wish to express the gratitude and
appreciation of my country’s delegations to the delegations
of Japan, Sweden, Slovenia and Costa Rica for their
commendable efforts to achieve a consensus formula on the
draft resolution before us today.
Bahrain, which is committed to international peace and
security, has on several occasions called on the international
community to strive for nuclear non-proliferation and the
complete banning of tests. We are convinced that these
destructive weapons, which could destroy all mankind, must
be banished from our world.
On this basis, Bahrain invites the two neighbouring
countries, Pakistan and India, with which we are friends, to
demonstrate the utmost possible restraint and to take the
steps necessary to reduce and eliminate the causes of
tension between them through dialogue. In this way, they
may find solutions to the problems that hamper relations of
good-neighbourliness between them.
My country welcomes the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral in this respect. We are convinced that dialogue
between the two countries is the best way to ease tensions
in South Asia.

3890th meeting
6 June 1998
Having raised the issue of peace and stability in
South Asia, we are prompted to raise that of peace and
stability in a neighbouring region of no less importance:
the Middle East. My country has constantly called for its
establishment as a nuclear-weapon-free zone and a zone
free of all weapons of mass destruction. We are
convinced that peace and security must be achieved in
that region and that nuclear war and its potential effects
on property and human beings must be avoided there.
Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): In total disregard of the opposition and protest
of the international community, India conducted five
nuclear tests on 11 and 13 May, thus suddenly bringing
tension to the South Asia subcontinent. Then Pakistan
carried out its own nuclear tests. This serious
development of events has posed grave challenges to
international peace and security in the post-cold-war era
and aroused the concern of the whole international
community.
To prevent an arms race in South Asia, halt the
further escalation of tensions in the region and safeguard
the international non-proliferation regime, the Foreign
Ministers of the five permanent members of the Security
Council met in Geneva on 4 June and issued a joint
communiqué. The ministers made a coordinated response
to the nuclear tests conducted by India and then by
Pakistan. They expressed their deep concern about the
tension in the subcontinent and pledged to cooperate
closely to prevent an arms race in the region, to bolster
the non-proliferation regime and to encourage the
peaceful resolution of differences between India and
Pakistan.
The ministers also pledged that they would actively
encourage India and Pakistan to try to build confidence
rather than seek confrontation, and to find mutually
acceptable resolutions through dialogue that addressed the
root causes of the tension, including the question of
Kashmir. In that connection, the ministers urged both
parties to avoid threatening military movements, crossborder violations and other provocative acts. The
coordinated action taken by the ministers of the Five
under the present circumstances is of great and farreaching significance. The draft resolution before us, by
giving its endorsement to the joint communiqué, fully
acknowledges the positive results of the meeting.
We hope that the joint efforts of the Council and the
rest of the international community will prevent an arms
race in South Asia, strengthen the international non-

11

Security Council
Fifty-third year
proliferation regime, move the countries concerned to
peaceful resolution of their differences and eradicate the
root causes of the tensions.
The nuclear tests carried out by India and then by
Pakistan have dealt a heavy blow to international nonproliferation efforts. Under the present circumstances, what
is most urgent, in our view, is to take measures to call on
India and Pakistan to exercise restraint, stop all further
nuclear tests, abandon their nuclear-weapons development
programme, make a commitment not to weaponize or to
deploy nuclear weapons and pledge to adhere to the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons immediately and
unconditionally.
The draft resolution before us fully confirms the
importance of those two treaties and the determination of
the international community to continue to adhere to the
treaties, and makes corresponding demands of the two
countries in explicit terms. This is an extremely wise and
necessary thing to do.
The recent nuclear tests have also further strained the
bilateral relations between India and Pakistan and have
undermined the relative peace and stability in the
subcontinent. What is worrisome is that the two countries
have once again entered into military engagement in
Kashmir. There is no doubt that the escalation of the
Kashmir dispute will cause the situation to further
deteriorate, which will not only bring untold suffering to
the two countries and their peoples, but will inevitably
endanger the peace and stability of South Asia, Asia and
the world at large.

3890th meeting
6 June 1998
hope that India and Pakistan will respond to the call of
the international community and implement the draft
resolution in earnest. The international community should
continue to follow closely the development of events in
the subcontinent and encourage and create a favourable
external climate in which India and Pakistan can resolve
their differences peacefully. In the light of the nature of
the dispute in the subcontinent, the Council should play
a major and pivotal role.
In addressing and helping resolve the situation in
South Asia, China will as always take a fair and
responsible position and continue to play a constructive
role.
In view of what I have said, the Chinese delegation
will vote in favour of the draft resolution before us.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Portugal.
I would like to state that in voting in favour of the
draft resolution before us, Portugal’s position is fully
reflected in the statement that will be made by the
presidency of the European Union.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now put to the vote the draft resolution contained
in document S/1998/476.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:

In order to defuse the tensions in the region, we call
upon India and Pakistan to be calm and restrained, to
resume talks between them, to halt any statements or
movements that might further escalate the tensions, and to
refrain from engaging in an arms race. In Kashmir, they
should respect and adhere to the control line. They should
under no circumstances step across the control line or seek
to change the state of affairs in the region unilaterally. On
this basis, the countries should look for a solution
acceptable to both sides, in accordance with the principles
in the relevant United Nations resolutions and the Simla
Agreement, and through peaceful negotiations. We are
opposed to any action which pursues regional hegemony.
The draft resolution before us is the Council’s
response to the nuclear tests conducted by India and then
by Pakistan, as well as to the tension in South Asia. We

12

Bahrain, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Japan, Kenya, Portugal, Russian Federation,
Slovenia, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1172 (1998).
I now call on the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General: The nuclear tests in India
and Pakistan are unquestionably disturbing developments
with far-reaching consequences for the region and for the
international community. They affect the peace and
stability of South Asia, a region that has been one of the

Security Council
Fifty-third year
cradles of human civilization, a region with great potential
for economic and social development. They also impact
seriously on the ongoing process of nuclear nonproliferation and nuclear disarmament and its future, and on
our common security.
It is significant that the Security Council, which under
the Charter has primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, should speak with one
voice and without delay on these developments. I thank the
sponsors for their initiative and for their hard work to
achieve a resolution which addresses the concerns of all
members of the Council.
I would like in particular to welcome the call to India
and Pakistan to resume their bilateral talks on the issues
that have sadly divided them. I will continue my own
efforts to encourage this dialogue, in the hope that it will
reduce tensions and the danger of an escalation into a
nuclear arms race.
Over the past several years there have been
encouraging signs that the world might be moving towards
ending the global nuclear arms race as the process of
nuclear disarmament continued to be implemented in terms
of article VI of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons. Developments that contradict or impede
this process must certainly be avoided as we move together
towards the ultimate goal of eliminating nuclear weapons in
a safer and better world for us all and for future
generations.
Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): I have the
honour to make the following statement on behalf of the
European Union. The Central and Eastern European
countries associated with the European Union — Estonia,
Hungary, Lithuania, Poland, Romania and Slovakia — and
the associated country Cyprus, as well as the European Free
Trade Association country member of the European
Economic Area, Iceland, align themselves with this
statement.
The European Union warmly welcomes the adoption
of this resolution, which reflects the abhorrence of the
international community as a whole at the recent nuclear
tests carried out first by India and then by Pakistan, and its
deep concern about the threat posed to the peace and
stability of the South Asia region by nuclear and missile
proliferation. As the European Union has already made
clear, we condemn these actions, which run counter to the
will expressed by the 149 signatories of the Comprehensive

3890th meeting
6 June 1998
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty to cease nuclear testing, and to
efforts to strengthen the global non-proliferation regime.
The European Union remains fully committed to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons as
the cornerstone of the global non-proliferation regime and
the essential foundation for the pursuit of nuclear
disarmament, and calls on all States which have not yet
done so to become parties to it. The European Union also
remains fully committed to the early entry into force of
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
The European Union urges India and Pakistan to
take early steps to demonstrate their commitment to
international efforts on non-proliferation and nuclear
disarmament by signing the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty and moving to ratify it; by contributing
actively and without conditions towards the opening of
negotiations at the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva
for a treaty banning the production of fissile material for
nuclear weapons and other nuclear explosive devices; by
exerting stringent controls over the export of material,
equipment and technology controlled under the Nuclear
Suppliers’ Group trigger and dual use lists and the Missile
Technology Control Regime annex; and by committing
themselves neither to assemble nuclear devices nor to
deploy such devices on delivery vehicles, and to cease
development and deployment of ballistic missiles capable
of delivering nuclear warheads.
The European Union will follow closely the
evolution of the situation and take appropriate action
should India and Pakistan not sign and move to ratify the
relevant international non-proliferation agreements, in
particular the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty,
without conditions.
The European Union also urges India and Pakistan
to engage in a dialogue which addresses the root causes
of the tension between them, and to try to build
confidence rather than seek confrontation.
The President: The next speaker is the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of Iran,
His Excellency Mr. Kamal Kharrazi. I welcome him on
behalf of the Council and invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Kharrazi (Islamic Republic of Iran): Permit me
to express my felicitations to you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of June. I would also like to express appreciation

13

Security Council
Fifty-third year

3890th meeting
6 June 1998

to the Foreign Minister and the Ambassador of Kenya for
their leadership during the month of May.

call for serious progress on nuclear disarmament is partly
to be blamed for the situation at hand.

The subject before the Council today is a vital issue,
one which needs to be addressed comprehensively with an
approach that looks to the future. The vital importance to
my country of the issue under consideration needs no
elaboration. The Islamic Republic of Iran is greatly
concerned about the recent nuclear tests, which raise the
potential for the escalation of tension, uncertainty and an
arms race.

The recent nuclear tests have caused serious concern
to the entire international community, particularly to the
countries in the region. That has been the reason behind
our approach to both countries, expressing deep
concern to encourage them to sharpen their efforts at
defusing the situation and at finding ways to reduce
tension.

My trip to Islamabad and New Delhi immediately
before my trip to New York is an indication of our concern
and of the importance that we attach to this issue, not only
for the future of our region but also for the implications
that it may have for international peace and security. In my
discussions with the officials of both countries, I listened
very carefully to their arguments and concerns, and the
bases of their decisions to conduct nuclear tests. Our
discussions centred around the possible dangers, as well as
the means to try to avoid an escalation of the situation.
The recent developments in South Asia are the
synthesis of a number of historical and legal factors, chief
among them the perception of the countries concerned
about the lack of political will on the part of the nuclear
Powers to heed the call of the international community for
comprehensive nuclear disarmament.
Inadequate attention and the failure to adopt concrete
actions on global nuclear disarmament, the unpopular
insistence on the part of the nuclear-weapon States to
remain on the same course, particularly after the indefinite
extension of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) and despite the wish of the international
community to make progress on the basis of the nearuniversal consensus on the illegality of the threat or use of
nuclear weapons, and the selective approach to the
implementation of the Treaty’s provisions are among the
reasons that are said to have contributed to the present
situation.
Furthermore, the refusal to allow the Conference on
Disarmament to commence negotiations on nuclear
disarmament, and aloofness to the legitimate concerns of
the non-nuclear-weapon States during the formative
deliberations on the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty (CTBT) are deemed to be instrumental factors in the
nuclear tests, which have raised international alarm and
which the international community regrets, to say the least.
Hence, the wilfully inadequate response to the international

14

It is in this context that we view the present Security
Council resolution: as an attempt on the part of the
international community to manage the situation. The
reaction of the Security Council comes as no surprise.
Neither is it surprising that attempts are being made to
persuade both India and Pakistan to refrain from further
nuclear tests, exercise maximum restraint and resume the
dialogue between them on all outstanding issues, and to
impress upon them the negative impact of their nuclear
tests on peace and stability in the region and beyond in
order to defuse the situation.
We believe that the resolution would have been
more effective and representative of the views of the
international community were it to have reflected the
broader concerns of non-nuclear weapons States. These
concerns include the fulfillment of the commitment of
nuclear-weapon States to nuclear disarmament by
agreeing to commence international negotiations on
nuclear disarmament within a time-bound framework, the
necessity of ensuring the universality of the NPT in an
expeditious manner through urging all States to join the
Treaty without exception and a speedy commencement of
negotiations at the Conference on Disarmament on a
treaty banning the stockpiling and production of fissile
material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive
devices.
Notwithstanding all these concerns, we believe that
capitalizing on an approach marked by positive
reinforcement in the subcontinent would be more useful
than concentrating on the negatives. Having said this, and
in the light of my discussions in Islamabad and New
Delhi, as I pointed out at the meeting of the Conference
on Disarmament on 4 June, I believe that the following
areas of common interests to both countries present a
basis for initiatives that they could explore.
The first is a renewed commitment to resume and
continue a comprehensive dialogue on all outstanding
issues in a sustained manner with a view to their early

Security Council
Fifty-third year
resolution and with the objective of promoting a friendly
and harmonious relationship between Pakistan and India
and stability in the region. The dialogue would include,
inter alia, important issues of peace and security, Jammu
and Kashmir, nuclear issues, including joining the NPT and
the CTBT, and other measures to build confidence. These
issues could be dealt with through pre-arranged
mechanisms, which would include discussions at the highest
possible levels, where appropriate.
The second is a commitment to refrain from
conducting further nuclear tests to ensure the success of the
dialogue.
The final area is a commitment to engage in an
immediate discussion with a representative group of nonnuclear-weapon States and nuclear-weapon States parties to
the NPT and signatories to the CTBT for the purpose of
joining those treaties. In this context, it seems that the
removal of export controls and other impediments to access
to material, equipment and technology for peaceful
purposes is an important consideration for signing the
CTBT and for making commitments consistent with the
letter and the spirit of the NPT.
In the light of the gravity of events and the strong
position of the international community against nuclear
tests, these ideas may seem disproportionately inadequate.
That may be the case. But if they are implemented, they
will be likely to provide a broad basis for a process to be
developed which would hopefully gain momentum of its
own and disclose the path to a more secure future.
The situation at hand is a good example of an area
where the good offices of the Secretary-General can be best
utilized. As a neighbouring country, the Islamic Republic of
Iran would find some comfort if and when the SecretaryGeneral, as a seasoned and globally respected diplomat and
figure of authority, could also be engaged in bringing
normalcy to the region. We stand ready to help and support
him in this endeavour.
Despite the setback in international efforts to prevent
nuclear proliferation in our region, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, as a party to the NPT and a signatory of the CTBT,
remains fully committed to its international obligations
under these regimes.
The recent developments in India and Pakistan have
highlighted the imperative of ensuring the universality of
the NPT. This imperative also applies to the Middle East,
where Israeli intransigence in refusing to accede to the NPT

3890th meeting
6 June 1998
and to accept International Atomic Energy Agency
safeguards has endangered the entire region. It is
therefore necessary to develop a non-discriminatory
approach at the international level to the issue of nonproliferation and to exert pressure on Israel to heed the
call of the international community and, by joining the
NPT, to allow for the establishment of the Middle East as
a nuclear-weapon-free zone.
The President: I thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Islamic Republic of Iran for the kind words
he addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative of
Australia. I invite her to take a seat at the Council table
and to make her statement.
Ms. Wensley (Australia): Australia is pleased to be
able to participate in this extremely important open debate
in response to the recent series of nuclear tests by India
and Pakistan. Nuclear proliferation, with the attendant
horrifying risks of a nuclear war, constitutes the worst
possible threat to international peace and security. It is
therefore essential that the Security Council, with its
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security under Article 24 of the Charter, take
action on this issue and remain seized of it until it is
resolved. It is true that the Security Council acts on
behalf of United Nations Member States, but we believe
it is vital when such serious threats to regional and global
security occur that the wider membership be given the
opportunity to present views directly to the Council and
thus to contribute to Security Council deliberations by
participating in formal meetings of this kind.
Australia has a direct security interest in preventing
the proliferation of nuclear weapons. We are therefore
deeply concerned at nuclear testing by India and Pakistan.
After years of calls from the international community, the
General Assembly’s adoption in 1996, by an
overwhelming majority, of the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty (CTBT) established a powerful
international norm against the testing of nuclear weapons
and other nuclear explosive devices. The nuclear tests by
India and Pakistan less than two years after this historic
standard-setting action directly challenged the Treaty and
the international consensus against nuclear testing that it
represents.
These tests also challenge the international nonproliferation regime, threaten the process of nuclear
disarmament and set back efforts to work towards the

15

Security Council
Fifty-third year
goal of a nuclear-weapon-free world. They are totally
irreconcilable with claims by both countries that they are
committed to nuclear disarmament.
Beyond this grave threat to the maintenance of
international peace and security, the tests undertaken by
India and Pakistan’s decision to respond with its own tests
heighten the tension between them, threaten the security of
South Asia and raise the alarming prospect of a nuclear
arms race in that region. The pursuit by both countries of
nuclear-capable ballistic-missile programmes is an
additional cause for alarm and tension.
Australia’s response to the nuclear tests by India and
Pakistan has been firm and unequivocal. We condemn them
as we do all nuclear testing. We have instituted a number
of bilateral measures, including the suspension of bilateral
defence relations with both India and Pakistan, the
suspension of non-humanitarian aid and the suspension of
bilateral visits by ministers and senior officials. We have
called on both countries — and we reiterate that call today
in this Council — to announce immediately the cessation of
all further nuclear testing and renounce their nuclearweapons programmes. We call on them to sign and ratify
unconditionally the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty (CTBT) and to join 186 States by acceding to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
We call on them to engage in negotiations on a treaty to
ban the production of fissile material for weapons purposes.
We call, too, for both countries to take steps urgently to
resume constructive political dialogue and negotiations on
the issues that divide them, including, importantly, with
respect to Kashmir.
We have heard some refer, in connection with nuclear
tests in South Asia, to the slow pace of nuclear
disarmament by the nuclear-weapon States. Australia is
committed to the twin goals embodied in the NPT of
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. If fulfilment by
the nuclear-weapon States of their disarmament obligations
under article VI of the NPT was stalled during the cold
war, that is no longer the case. Dramatic cuts in the nuclear
arsenals of Russia and the United States have been made
under the Strategic Arms Reduction Talks (START)
process, which, when completed, will further reduce those
arsenals to some 80 per cent below cold-war peaks. Beyond
the START process, the international community will be
looking to a process of plurilateral and multilateral
disarmament, with the objective of the total elimination of
nuclear weapons. We want and we urge all the nuclearweapon States to accelerate these processes as much as
possible. And in this context we do welcome the

16

3890th meeting
6 June 1998
reaffirmation by the five nuclear-weapon States in the P-5
communiqué and in the resolution to fulfil their
commitment to nuclear disarmament under article VI of
the NPT.
But it defies logic and credibility to pretend that the
emergence of nuclear weapons in two new States, outside
the norms of the international nuclear non-proliferation
and disarmament regime, will assist, rather than retard
and complicate, the task of nuclear disarmament. The
international community has a clear responsibility to
respond to such proliferation by stating that we do not
want and we will not tolerate the development or
acquisition of nuclear weapons by additional States.
Australia, therefore, supports fully the Security
Council resolution just adopted.
I have already referred in this statement to many of
the key elements in the resolution, and I don’t want to
repeat our support for them here. But the resolution does
deal with some other important issues that I have not yet
mentioned.
These include the reference to States’ preventing the
export to India and Pakistan of equipment, materials or
technology that could be used to develop their nuclearweapons capacity. In this respect we would emphasize not
only the importance of national policies but also the
commitment made by all NPT parties to the principles
and objectives of nuclear non-proliferation and
disarmament. This states that new supply arrangements to
non-nuclear-weapon States — that is, to all countries but
the five nuclear-weapon States — should require
acceptance of the International Atomic Energy Agency
full-scope safeguards and internationally legally binding
commitments not to acquire nuclear weapons or other
nuclear explosive devices.
A further important element in the resolution is the
call on India and Pakistan to stop immediately their
nuclear-weapons development programmes, to refrain
from weaponization or deployment of nuclear weapons
and to cease development of nuclear-capable ballistic
missiles.
Finally, we also welcome the references to the
Secretary-General’s efforts to encourage dialogue between
India and Pakistan and endorse the request for him to
report back to the Council on the implementation of the
resolution.

Security Council
Fifty-third year

3890th meeting
6 June 1998

Australia is known for its deep commitment to nuclear
non-proliferation and disarmament. We remain deeply
committed to these goals. And so do most Member States
of this Organization. Nuclear testing by India and Pakistan
is in flagrant disregard of the will of the international
community. It must not go unchallenged. We believe it is
very important to speak out clearly and strongly on this
matter. We believe also that the international community
has a shared responsibility to take action quickly,
effectively and without reservation to help reverse both the
trend towards proliferation and increased tension in South
Asia and the challenge presented to the global nonproliferation and disarmament regimes. The adoption of this
resolution is an important initial step in this direction.

and beyond. We are particularly concerned that it would
also send the wrong message to other parts of the world,
further destabilizing the very foundations of the global
non-proliferation regime. In this regard, we strongly
applaud a series of initiatives taken by the Security
Council as the primary organ responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, and we
wholeheartedly endorse the resolution just adopted by the
Council today as comprehensive in scope and balanced in
content. My delegation wishes to take this opportunity to
express its appreciation to the sponsors of the resolution,
in particular Japan and Sweden, for their initiative and
persistent efforts to produce a text with the broadest
possible consensus among Council members.

The President: The next speaker is the representative
of the Republic of Korea. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.

My delegation fully associates itself with Council
members in calling upon all countries concerned to stop
their nuclear- weapon development programmes and in
strongly urging all States that have not done so to join the
NPT and CTBT without delay and without conditions. We
are also of the view that recent events once again confirm
the urgent need for reaching early agreement on a treaty
banning the production of fissile material for nuclear
weapons or other nuclear explosive devices.

Mr. Lee (Republic of Korea): Let me express at the
outset my sincere appreciation to you, Mr. President, and
through you to the members of the Security Council, for
allowing my delegation to participate in the debate of the
Council on the agenda item before it. This being my first
occasion to address the Council as the permanent
representative of my country, may I also take this
opportunity to congratulate you on the assumption of the
Presidency of the Council for the month of June.
The Republic of Korea is deeply concerned at the
serious threat that the testing of nuclear devices by India
and then by Pakistan poses to the global nuclear nonproliferation regime, to regional stability in South Asia and,
above all, to international peace and security. These tests
are all the more regrettable as they come at a time when
the international community has made consistent strides
towards a strengthened regime for nuclear non-proliferation
and disarmament through the indefinite extension of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
as well as towards increasing its universality and through
the adoption of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty (CTBT). My Government has been closely watching
the developments with great concern and acute interest, not
only as a signatory to the NPT and CTBT but also as a
country that declared a denuclearization policy voluntarily
and unequivocally in 1991.
We firmly believe that the international community
should rise to the challenges posed by the testing in a
resolute manner. Failing to do so would undermine the
effectiveness of the nuclear non-proliferation regime and
prompt the escalation of a nuclear arms race in the region

We are deeply concerned that the threat posed by the
nuclear tests in South Asia could spread to other regions
through the transfer of technology for nuclear weapons or
ballistic missiles to and from the third countries. We
attach particular importance to this danger, as it clearly
poses the risk of a domino effect under the pressure of
nuclear proliferation. The Republic of Korea firmly
believes that the spread of nuclear-weapon technology
should be prevented at all costs with concerted action by
the international community, as a prerequisite to make the
world a safer place in which to live.
Given the gravity of the risks and the uncertainty
involved, we believe that the Security Council should
remain actively seized of the matter and ready to consider
further steps, as it sees fit, to ensure the prompt and full
implementation of the present resolution.
My delegation also recognizes the role of the
Secretary-General in matters related to international peace
and security and therefore welcomes his efforts to defuse
tension in the region by encouraging dialogue and
reconciliation, as he has done in many parts of the world.
In this regard, we are looking forward to his report to the
Council, as requested in the resolution.

17

Security Council
Fifty-third year
For our part, I assure you, Mr. President, that my
Government will continue to do its best to work with
Council members towards the cause of a nuclear-weaponfree world. In this connection, we welcome the decision to
allow the participation of non-members today as yet more
proof of the strong commitment of Council members under
your leadership to enhancing the transparency of the
workings of the Council.
To conclude, I should like to reiterate the firm
commitment of my Government to nuclear non-proliferation
and disarmament in general, and to a nuclear-weapon-free
Korean peninsula in particular, as it has manifested on a
number of occasions.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Republic of Korea for the kind words he addressed to me
and to the members of the Security Council.
The next speaker on my list is the representative of
Canada. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and
to make his statement.
Mr. Fowler (Canada): I should like to begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for convening an open debate
on the situation created by the nuclear tests conducted by
India and Pakistan. I must, however, express my country’s
regret that the views of Member States not members of the
Security Council are being heard only after consideration
and after adoption of such a resolution, dealing as it does
with matters of such vital concern to all Member States.
(spoke in French)
We are meeting here today in order to avoid a new
nuclear realpolitik. The nuclear tests that India and Pakistan
have carried out are a clear and fundamental threat to
international security. Thirty years of success in the
management of the risk of nuclear proliferation have been
compromised, and the consensus of the 186 nations that
have signed the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) has been mocked.
India and Pakistan have returned the world to the dark
years of nuclear terror, with dangerous political and security
arguments put forward to justify the proliferation of, or to
retain, nuclear weapons. The chief result of such a nuclear
realpolitik would be the acceptance of India and Pakistan
into the circle of nuclear-weapon States. This would mark
one of the most serious steps backward in the process of
nuclear disarmament.

18

3890th meeting
6 June 1998
Canada believes very firmly that the Security
Council, and in particular its permanent members, should
take no measure that would enable India and Pakistan to
acquire, de facto or de jure, the status of nuclear-weapon
States. The NPT recognizes five — and only five —
nuclear-weapon States. If this number can be raised to
seven, then other countries might want to join the club.
The world cannot stand by idly in the face of such a
possibility.
(spoke in English)
Non-nuclear-weapon States parties to the NPT also
have a very particular responsibility. Over the past 30
years, they have acted responsibly, forgoing nuclear
weapons of their own while working multilaterally in
support of nuclear disarmament. The Security Council and
the international community need to invalidate the
concept of nuclear weapons as a currency of modern
geopolitical authority. According to the Charter of the
United Nations, Security Council membership is open to
those countries which contribute to the maintenance of
peace and security and to the other purposes of the
Organization. This obligation weighs particularly heavily
on the permanent members of the Council.
Countries which deliberately undermine peace and
security and flout the will of the international community
have voided their claim to Security Council membership,
let alone a permanent place in the management of the
post-cold-war world.
Canada welcomes the Security Council resolution on
this issue and the commitment of the Council to remain
actively engaged. Today’s meeting, to which all interested
United Nations Members have been invited, recognizes
that all members of the international community have a
vital interest in resolving the current, dangerous situation.
Measures directed at India and Pakistan should be
aimed at convincing the two countries to renounce their
nuclear-weapon programmes. The people of India and
Pakistan — one-fifth of the world’s population — and
their neighbours have never been in greater danger.
The Governments of India and Pakistan owe it to
their people to pull back from the course they have
chosen towards a nuclear dead-end. Sustained
international dissuasive pressure must be applied to
convince these two countries to sign the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and to look beyond it to the
NPT.

Security Council
Fifty-third year
Canada has taken a number of unilateral measures to
signal to these two countries that we profoundly oppose
what they have done. These measures have included the
recall of the Canadian High Commissioners to India and
Pakistan; the ban of military exports to both countries; the
suspension of high-level contacts; and the suspension of
bilateral aid programmes to these two countries in all areas
except for humanitarian assistance. Canadian relations with
India and Pakistan are on hold; there is no business as
usual.
Action directed at India and Pakistan is obviously not
enough. The more of these weapons there are and the more
nations that have them, the more likely it is that they will
be used. These mathematics are inexorable and ought to be
of concern to all of us.
Within the community of nations, we must recommit
ourselves to putting nuclear disarmament back on track, and
urgently. The future credibility of the non-proliferation
process depends not only on a renunciation by these two
countries of their weapons programmes, but also on the
good faith performance of the nuclear-weapon States. They
must keep their end of the NPT bargain — a promise that
not all have treated with the same urgency. There must be
visible and consistent progress on both sides of the NPT
equation.
It is time to take pragmatic steps in nuclear weapons
reductions and to ensure transparency in the disarmament
process. In supporting the nuclear non-proliferation regime,
the enhanced NPT review process provides the means to
achieve this and needs to be used to better advantage. It is
time for the Conference on Disarmament, the General
Assembly’s First Committee and the NPT review process
to move quickly beyond their current sterile debates. The
people of the world need progress on nuclear weapons
reduction, and on disarmament more generally.
The international community cannot afford to succumb
to nuclear fatalism. We have re-entered a dangerous time,
one which challenges each United Nations Member to play
its own positive and constructive role.
In addressing this crisis, we need to send three
unequivocal messages. First, to India and Pakistan: we
condemn your tests and urge you to renounce your nuclear
weapons programmes. You deserve no reward for these
irresponsible acts.
Secondly, to the nuclear-weapon States: fulfil your
commitments to reduce your nuclear weapons stocks.

3890th meeting
6 June 1998
Finally, to all here present in the body charged with
maintaining international peace and security: carry out
your responsibility by implementing the resolution you
have adopted.
The President: I thank the representative of Canada
for his kind words addressed to me. Members of the
Security Council certainly took note of his initial remark.
The next speaker is the representative of Egypt. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
The Security Council has convened today to reaffirm its
primary responsibility in the maintenance of international
peace and security, including through the provisions of
Article 26 of the Charter, which should be aimed first and
foremost at nuclear disarmament, particularly following
the nuclear tests carried out in South Asia in May.
These tests are a cause of deep concern to the entire
international community, not solely because they represent
a real setback for the efforts of the international
community to achieve the universality of the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and the
complete elimination of nuclear weapons within a specific
schedule. These explosions should not be considered as
falling outside the non-proliferation regime or its effective
scope, whether the proliferation be vertical or horizontal.
Time has vindicated Egypt’s true far-sightedness
when it warned, at the 1995 NPT Review and Extension
Conference, that the Treaty’s indefinite extension —
without the achievement of universality through the
accession of all States without exception — would
provide to the non-Parties to the Treaty capable of
producing nuclear weapons outside international control
the conditions conducive to developing and producing
these weapons, regardless of the grave threat they pose to
the security of the non-nuclear-weapon States.
The NPT’s historic record clearly shows that the
non-nuclear-weapon States Parties to the NPT have
always strongly called for the provision of security
assurances, in accordance with their commitment under
this Treaty not to seek to develop nuclear weapons, to
protect them from the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons. It is incumbent upon us now to evaluate the
effectiveness of the safeguards regime for the nonnuclear-weapon Parties to the NPT. Despite the Security
Council’s adoption of resolutions 255 (1968) and 984

19

Security Council
Fifty-third year
(1995), the recent nuclear explosions and their aftermath
require the Security Council to reconsider the entire range
of security assurances and to undertake measures to
maintain the security of the non-nuclear-weapon States
Parties to the Treaty.
Resolution 984 (1995) is inadequate in the face of the
Security Council’s Charter responsibility, as it provides
neither the required deterrence to any State that might
contemplate the use of nuclear weapons nor the minimum
protection or guarantees of urgent and comprehensive
assistance to non-nuclear-weapon States subject to nuclear
threat or attack.
It is now more urgent than ever that we establish an
effective regime of active and passive safeguards by which
the Security Council would unequivocally decide that the
use or threat of use of nuclear weapons constitutes a threat
to international peace and security in accordance with
Article 39 of the Charter. Such a threat would require the
Security Council’s intervention to deter it within the
framework of the collective security regime laid out in
Chapter VII of the Charter. In this respect, the Council’s
responsibility for providing urgent and comprehensive
assistance to States subject to such a threat should be clear
and indisputable.
It goes without saying that this intervention by the
Council should in no circumstance be subject to the veto,
since the destructive power of nuclear weapons requires
that the effectiveness and credibility of the Council’s
measures be preserved. In other words, the voting rules laid
out in paragraph 3 of Article 27 of the Charter should not
be in force in cases of the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons.
In this context the conclusion of an agreement in
which nuclear Powers are committed not to use their
nuclear weapons against the non-nuclear States which are
parties to the Treaty will serve as a contractual undertaking
and an important dimension for the protection of nonnuclear States. The General Assembly — which adopted the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons in
1968 — the Conference on Disarmament and the
Conference of the Parties to the NPT have a role to play in
maintaining their cooperation, solidarity and continuity of
efforts to achieve this goal.
The nuclear dangers which today threaten humanity
impose a special responsibility on the nuclear-weapon
States far greater than the responsibility they impose on
non-nuclear States. Despite some limited achievements,

20

3890th meeting
6 June 1998
which we recognize, the nuclear States still hesitate to
implement their contractual commitments to nuclear
disarmament under article VI of the Treaty. The failure of
the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva to undertake
any objective or significant discussion on nuclear
disarmament in the years since the indefinite extension of
the Treaty reveals that the nuclear States believed the
indefinite extension to be a goal in itself and not a means
to implement what was agreed upon.
The foot-dragging by nuclear-weapon States in
implementing their contractual commitments with regard
to nuclear disarmament is in sharp contrast with the
pressing desire of the international community to
renounce completely these weapons and may prompt
other countries to seek to enjoy the same advantages as
the nuclear-weapon States. The report of the Canberra
Commission is clear in saying that
(spoke in English)
“The proposition that large numbers of nuclear
weapons can be retained in perpetuity and never
used, accidentally or by decision, defies credibility.
“The only complete defence ... is the
elimination of nuclear weapons and the assurance
that they will never be produced again.”
(spoke in Arabic)
In this respect we should be guided by the Advisory
Opinion of the International Court of Justice, which
reaffirmed the illegality of the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons.
All this evidence proves just one point: that having
nuclear weapons does not serve any special or public
interest and that they should be renounced completely.
When we talk about the implementation of what was
agreed upon, Egypt feels extreme bitterness over the
hesitation of some States to commit themselves to the
package deal which was the basis for the adoption of the
resolution on the indefinite extension of the Treaty. We
who participated in that Conference recall and are quite
mindful of the fact that that resolution was adopted within
the framework of a package deal which included three
decisions and a resolution. The first decision was on
strengthening the process of the review of the Treaty; the
second was on the principles and objectives of nonproliferation and nuclear disarmament; and the third was

Security Council
Fifty-third year
on the extension of the NPT. In addition, there was also an
important resolution regarding the Middle East in which the
international community clearly recognized the danger and
importance of the situation in that region.
It was regrettable to witness in the meetings of the
second session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2000
Conference, which was held in Geneva last month, that
some States are trying to evade their commitments under
this package deal and express scepticism on the possibility
of implementing parts of the resolution on the Middle East.
Egypt would like to express its deep concern vis-à-vis
the consequences of the failure to realize the universality of
the NPT, and we reiterate our deep conviction that if Israel
were to remain outside the framework of the Treaty —
despite its ambiguous nuclear policies and its refusal to
place its nuclear installations under the comprehensive
safeguards regime of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) — this would definitely lead to grave
consequences not only for stability and security in the
region but also for international peace and security and,
even more so, for the credibility and continuity of the nonproliferation regime, at the forefront of which is the NPT.
That credibility will be undermined if the international
community does not act with solidarity and undertake the
necessary measures to face this situation as soon as
possible.
Accordingly, since 1974 Egypt has pursued its goal to
establish a nuclear-free zone in the Middle East. In this
connection, the initiative launched by President Hosni
Mubarak on 18 April 1990 to establish a zone in the
Middle East free from all weapons of mass destruction and
the means of delivering them is an extension of Egypt’s
original call to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone. This
call was adopted by consensus by the General Assembly in
1980.
The Arab States, as evidence of their genuine desire
to achieve the goal of establishing a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in the Middle East, have without exception joined the
NPT and placed all their nuclear installations under the
comprehensive safeguards regime of the IAEA. The Arab
States of Africa have joined the Treaty of Pelindaba in
order to achieve a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa. This
was an initiative to demonstrate their complete confidence
in this regime. However, this did not result in any response
by Israel, which persists in not adhering to the NPT. This
has led to a military imbalance in the Middle East which
threatens international peace and security and which may
undermine the non-proliferation regime.

3890th meeting
6 June 1998
In this vein, we find that the Madrid Peace
Conference of 1991 resulted in multilateral negotiations
on arms control and regional security in the Middle East.
At Egypt’s request, this issue is considered one of the
essential elements to be agreed upon regionally in order
to establish genuine peace and stability in the area, as we
believe that security and peace cannot prevail in any
region where there is a security imbalance or where one
party has the advantage.
Despite the fact that Israel originally called for
negotiations to establish that region, the negotiations
which took place in the Arms Control and Regional
Security Working Group under the umbrella of
multilateral negotiations have been at an impasse for three
years as a result of Israel’s persistence in aborting any
attempt to begin serious negotiations to establish this zone
or even to hold consultations on the elimination of
nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass
destruction within the regional framework.
The Security Council’s consideration of the
consequences of the nuclear explosions in South Asia,
where a kind of nuclear military balance exists, should
prompt the international community to study the
consequences of the general rules governing the nuclear
disarmament provisions in a number of agreements aimed
at the eventual renunciation of nuclear weapons under
strict international control. Yet this should not distract our
attention from the more dangerous nuclear military
imbalance in the Middle East, which makes it incumbent
on the Council, the General Assembly and all the States
parties to the Treaty to show their responsibility with
regard to that region by persuading Israel to adhere to the
NPT and to place all its nuclear installations under the
comprehensive IAEA safeguards regime and then to work
towards establishing a zone free from weapons of mass
destruction in the Middle East as soon as possible.
Under the current circumstances we would have
expected the Council to single out Israel by name and
urge it to adhere to the Treaty instead of merely
introducing a general reference in paragraph 13 of the
resolution adopted by the Council today. We would have
expected the nuclear-weapon States, especially the
depositary countries, to take the initiative to implement in
earnest the resolution on the Middle East adopted in 1995,
which would be conducive to strengthening regional and
international peace and security.
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of the United Arab Emirates. I invite him

21

Security Council
Fifty-third year

3890th meeting
6 June 1998

to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.

humanity and for our peoples, and it undermines stability
and international peace and security.

Mr. Al-Hosani (United Arab Emirates) (interpretation
from Arabic): I have the honour of expressing to you, Sir,
on behalf of the United Arab Emirates, my warmest
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month. We are firmly convinced that your
great experience will ensure the success of our work.

We are firmly convinced that disputes must be
resolved by peaceful means and that peace and security
must be established in the Middle East and in South Asia.
That is why we reiterate the opinion expressed in the
official communiqué issued last Monday by our Ministry
of Foreign Affairs. In that communiqué we stated that the
underground nuclear tests in India and Pakistan are not
beneficial to international peace and security but only
intensify tension in the region, which does not help to
resolve existing problems. That is why we call upon these
two States, to which we are bound by a long-standing
friendship, to show restraint and return to dialogue so as
to relieve the tension between them and thereby
strengthen confidence and arrive at a peaceful settlement
of the problems facing them so that they can create
circumstances conducive to strengthening economic and
social development and prosperity in their countries.

The course of international events, in particular the
developments in the situation between India and Pakistan,
both of which last month conducted underground nuclear
tests, has confirmed that the challenges facing the world in
the field of disarmament are very difficult and complicated,
particularly with regard to weapons of mass destruction.
There is still competition between countries in their attempt
to produce and acquire some of these extremely dangerous
weapons, in particular nuclear weapons, especially in States
which have disputes with their neighbours, suffer from a
kind of psychosis about military imbalance or threats to the
security of their national territories, or seek to retain
illegitimate control over the territory of others through force
and in violation of international law and legitimate
international resolutions.
Despite the growing expectations in the immediate
post-cold-war period with regard to disarming all nuclear
arsenals, the objectives in this area are not easy to achieve
at a time when, as can be seen, certain countries are
endeavouring to conduct nuclear tests. It seems to us that
this is no less serious than the certain adverse consequences
of accumulating nuclear weapons. On the contrary, this
clearly sanctions the intensification of areas of tension and
increases the possibility that they will explode. In one way
or another that is the cause of the justified fears that
today’s world is not one in which security prevails, as was
the case after the cold war.
The United Arab Emirates has added its voice to those
of other States and has signed the two treaties — the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty — that are an
international cornerstone, founded on world security and
peace. Despite this, we wish to state here and now that we
agree with all of those who have expressed fears about
what happened in South Asia, because that region is very
close to ours. We are afraid of this arms race and we are
also afraid of certain other countries that are trying to
acquire such weapons of mass destruction. It seems to us
that this can lead only to destruction and tragedy for all of

22

We appeal to the international community, which is
represented by the Security Council whose mission it is
to preserve international peace and security, to follow that
peaceful path and use its good offices as a preventive
measure so as to contain any escalation of tensions
between these countries.
In this connection, we reiterate that the policy of
double standards pursued by the Security Council, by
which it makes an exception for Israel — the only
nuclear-weapon State in the Middle East, and one that is
not subject to the international inspections regime of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) —
encourages the arms race. That is why the United Arab
Emirates is again asking the Security Council and its
members to make these treaties international and binding,
without providing an exception for any State, and to make
the region of the Middle East a zone free from weapons
of mass destruction, including nuclear weapons.
This requires international pressure on the
Government of Israel to take concrete, urgent measures to
accede to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and rid itself of all nuclear weapons, which
have shown their dangerous impact on security, the
environment and health in neighbouring countries and the
entire region. We believe that Israel’s continued
possession of these dangerous weapons would constitute
a major obstacle to efforts to achieve a genuine, just,
lasting and peaceful resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict
and the situation in the Middle East.

Security Council
Fifty-third year
Finally, we reaffirm that a just and lasting peace in a
given region requires the political will of Governments to
strengthen dialogue, cooperation and measures to build or
restore mutual trust, by putting an end to the arms race in
all its forms in accordance with principles of equality,
respect for sovereignty and non-interference in the internal
affairs of other States.
The President: I thank the representative of the
United Arab Emirates for the kind words he addressed to
me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative of
New Zealand. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Powles (New Zealand): Mr. President, at the
outset I would like to express my delegation’s appreciation
for your successful endeavour to hold this open meeting of
the Security Council. In addition, as to the procedure being
followed, I would like to associate my delegation with the
remarks of the Permanent Representative of Canada made
earlier today.
My Government has expressed its condemnation of the
nuclear tests carried out by India and Pakistan. This is
consistent with New Zealand’s long-standing opposition to
nuclear testing by any country, anywhere. We do not
believe that nuclear testing is ever justified in any
circumstances.
In the same way, my country considers that nuclear
weapons have no legitimate place in our world. We have
called for urgent progress towards a nuclear-weapons-free
future, and we repeat that call now. The International Court
of Justice has confirmed, in a unanimous decision, the
obligation to pursue in good faith and bring to a conclusion
negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament in all its
aspects and under strict and effective international control.
That obligation applies just as much to India and Pakistan
as it does to other States.
India’s and Pakistan’s actions in testing nuclear
devices, planning for weaponization and deployment of
nuclear weapons and claiming an entitlement to nuclearweapon status are inconsistent with that obligation. At a
time when countries like New Zealand want to accelerate
the pace of nuclear disarmament, those two countries are
looking backwards to an era of nuclear arms build-up,
confrontation and deterrence. It is unbelievable that, as
President Clinton has said,

3890th meeting
6 June 1998
“we are about to start the twenty-first century by
having the Indian subcontinent repeat the worst
mistakes of the twentieth century, when we know it
is not necessary to peace, to security, to prosperity,
to national greatness or personal fulfilment”.
We are gravely concerned that India’s and Pakistan’s
actions are leading to a nuclear arms race in South Asia,
which would constitute a major threat to international
peace and security. And we deplore both countries’
disregard of international norms against nuclear testing
and nuclear proliferation.
We are particularly disappointed that India and
Pakistan have acted contrary to their stated commitments
to nuclear disarmament. Continued calls for a global ban
on nuclear weapons lack credibility coming from a
country which has displayed its nuclear ambitions. What
is now needed from India and Pakistan are tangible acts
of commitment, not words.
If India and Pakistan want to repair the damage they
have caused to their international standing, they must
forthwith renounce their nuclear-weapons programmes,
and adhere unconditionally to the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons, as well as engage in
multilateral negotiations on a fissile-material cut-off
treaty.
Until that time, India and Pakistan must understand
that their behaviour is unacceptable to the international
community. For example, their actions inevitably raise
questions about their qualifications for membership of the
Security Council.
New Zealand supported the request for this meeting
because we consider that recent nuclear testing and the
developing crisis in South Asia represent the most serious
challenge to international stability since the end of the
cold war. We therefore welcome the adoption today by
the Security Council unanimously of resolution 1172
(1998) and warmly congratulate its sponsors: Japan,
Sweden, Costa Rica and Slovenia. We urge the Council
to continue to act decisively and effectively to defuse this
dangerous situation and to uphold nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation.
The President: I thank the representative of New
Zealand for the kind words he addressed to me.

23

Security Council
Fifty-third year
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Mexico. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Tello (Mexico) (interpretation from Spanish):
There is no need to repeat at this meeting the text of the
statements of the Government of Mexico contained in press
releases issued on 11 and 28 May 1998, in which we
condemn unambiguously the underground nuclear tests
carried out by India and by Pakistan. Copies of these press
releases were sent to all Permanent Missions accredited to
the United Nations.
The new situation in South Asia is a cause of
profound concern for the entire international community.
We are convinced that India and Pakistan must endeavour
to create mechanisms that will enable them to find solutions
to their historic differences in order to restore trust and
stability between them, and ultimately to the rest of the
region. Mexico is convinced and will remain convinced that
dialogue and negotiation are the best means for resolving
differences.
The legacy of horror of 50 years of nuclear tests is
just starting to be known. Some of the damage is
irreversible. The nightmare history of the impact on vast
areas where enormous quantities of nuclear materials,
especially enriched uranium and plutonium, have been
stored remains to be written.
On the threshold of the twenty-first century, to allow
a new nuclear arms race to begin in any part of the world
threatens the objectives and the spirit of the treaties of
Tlatelolco, Rarotonga, Bangkok and Pelindaba, which
establish nuclear-weapon-free zones. It also violates the
commitments contained in the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and in the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and those reflected
in the consolidation of the southern hemisphere and
adjacent areas as a single nuclear-weapon-free zone.
People often forget that until recently the entire world
was a nuclear-weapon-free zone. The goal for the
international community should be to restore that situation
as soon as possible. Neither in 1945 nor now can there be
any legal or moral justification for acquiring or using
atomic bombs. Let us remember that the history of mankind
covers more than 100,000 years. The nuclear age, which
covers the past 53 years, barely constitutes a minuscule
cancer, which must be removed.

24

3890th meeting
6 June 1998
Conducting nuclear tests imperils what the vast
majority of States support: the strengthening of the
nuclear non-proliferation regime and the complete
cessation of nuclear tests as an essential part of nuclear
disarmament. Once again we appeal to all — all —
countries that have not yet done so to accede to the NonProliferation Treaty and to the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty.
In addition, the possession and stockpiling of nuclear
weapons endangers international peace and security.
Existing arsenals do not strengthen security; on the
contrary, they weaken it.
All States, and particularly the nuclear-weapon
States, have an obligation to undertake and conclude
negotiations on nuclear disarmament until the world is
free of such weapons. The non-proliferation regime is
directed towards facilitating the cessation of the
manufacture of nuclear weapons and the dismantling and
elimination of existing arsenals, as well as of the delivery
systems for these weapons.
The joint communiqué issued on 4 June in Geneva,
at the conclusion of the meeting of the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of China, France, Russia, the United
Kingdom and the United States, indicates that these
nuclear-weapon States are resolved to fulfil their
obligations under article VI of the Non-Proliferation
Treaty. This commitment, if put into practice, will surely
help revive the stalled nuclear-disarmament negotiations.
The commitment of all States to nuclear
disarmament does not stem solely from the provisions of
the Non-Proliferation Treaty. In fact, the historic advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice, of 8 July
1996, establishes unambiguously the obligation to pursue
in good faith and to bring to a conclusion negotiations
leading to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects under
strict and effective international control.
Mexico firmly believes that the international nonproliferation regime must be preserved and its credibility
restored. Given current circumstances, it can no longer be
argued that nuclear disarmament concerns only the
nuclear Powers. As a result of that limited interpretation,
the nuclear-disarmament agenda item in the Conference
on Disarmament is in a state of virtual paralysis.
It is urgent and essential to establish an ad hoc
committee on nuclear disarmament in the Conference on
Disarmament. With political will and without hesitation,

Security Council
Fifty-third year
negotiations on nuclear disarmament must be initiated
immediately, in order to dispel any doubts about the
inescapable commitment of all States to the goal of
achieving in the foreseeable future a world free of nuclear
weapons. We must take measures commensurate with the
gravity of the current situation. Remaining indifferent
would only encourage others to follow the extremely
dangerous path to nuclear arms build-up.
The President: The next speaker is the representative
of Ukraine. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Yel’chenko (Ukraine): The delegation of Ukraine
is grateful to you, Sir, for convening, although later than we
expected, this meeting. I would like to express satisfaction
that the appeal initiated and signed by the group of United
Nations Member States not members of the Security
Council has coincided with a similar appeal launched by
members of the Security Council itself.
Needless to say, it is with grave concern that the
leadership and the people of Ukraine have responded to the
recent developments in the region of South Asia, which
forced my country, together with other like-minded Member
States, to seek the urgent convening of a special meeting of
a Security Council.
There is no doubt that the issue under discussion today
— and the name of the agenda item speaks for itself — is
crucial to the maintenance of international peace and
security. That is why it is a primary responsibility of this
authoritative United Nations body.
My Government has already expressed its concern at
the nuclear testing conducted by India and by Pakistan.
Ukraine condemned these actions as constituting a serious
threat to existing international agreements in the field of the
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. Our reaction to these
events has been clear and, I believe, fully justified. This
position is based on the key principles of my country’s
disarmament policy. Ukraine voluntarily renounced the
world’s third-largest nuclear arsenal, which it inherited.
Thus it assumed the status of a non-nuclear-weapon State,
and it continuously demonstrates full compliance with nonnuclear principles, advocating and strongly promoting
universal nuclear disarmament.
Therefore, Ukraine, like anyone else, has a moral right
to criticize actions that threaten the non-proliferation
regime. Ukraine acceded to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) in 1994 and

3890th meeting
6 June 1998
signed the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
(CTBT) in 1997 as a State whose participation in that
treaty was actually essential for its entry into force.
Our position, as well as the positions of the vast
majority of States that have signed and ratified both
treaties, were based on the belief that such moves would
help all of us to ensure an effective non-proliferation
regime, to halt the development of nuclear weapons and
to create grounds for a step-by-step elimination of
weapons of mass destruction.
I have to say that our hopes, beliefs and aspirations
have been dashed by nuclear explosions at the Pokaran
and Chagai test sites.
It is very important, in our view, that the
international community demonstrate all its firmness,
cohesiveness and determination to save the principles and
the objectives of non-proliferation, to avert the spiral of
a nuclear arms race in South Asia and to preserve peace
and stability both in this region and globally.
We strongly believe that the one and only way here
for India and Pakistan is to become full-fledged parties to
the NPT and CTBT without any conditions and without
any delay.
Ukraine urges all other States that have not yet done
so to become parties to the NPT and to ratify the CTBT
in order to expedite its entry into force. We also call upon
other Member States to exert every effort to influence
India and Pakistan to assume commitments under the
NPT and the CTBT.
Ukraine also considers inadmissible any action that
could aggravate tensions in the region and — God
forbid — cause a major conflict between the two States.
In this connection, Ukraine welcomes the declared
readiness of India’s and Pakistan’s leaders to negotiate
disputable issues. We are ready to support this process
wholeheartedly because we in Ukraine have deep
sympathy and great respect for both peoples.
We hope that the Secretary-General will encourage
India and Pakistan to enter into an immediate and
constructive dialogue, and we welcome his efforts in this
respect.
Any other development, even an attempt to preserve
the status quo, should be deemed unacceptable. Should
this undesirable scenario take place, my Government will

25

Security Council
Fifty-third year
seek consultations with the nuclear Powers which provided
the relevant security assurances to Ukraine in connection
with its accession to the NPT, in order to look for a new
reading of those assurances in view of the latest
developments in its close geopolitical environment.
However, we still firmly believe that India and
Pakistan will put aside their nuclear ambitions and will not
allow any further aggravation of the situation in the region.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to support the
main thrust of the resolution just adopted by the Security
Council.
At the same time, however, I should like to associate
myself with my colleagues from Canada and New Zealand
in drawing the attention of the members of the Council to
the fact that again, as in other recent instances, United
Nations Member States that are not members of the
Security Council were not given the option of expressing
their positions in the open debate before this important
resolution was adopted.
We hope that the voice and the arguments of Ukraine
and of other non-members of the Security Council will be
duly taken into consideration.
The President: I thank the representative of Ukraine
for the kind words he addressed to me.
As I stated previously after the intervention of the
Ambassador of Canada, States members of the Security
Council certainly have taken note of the remarks made by
other Member States.
The next speaker on my list is the representative of
Argentina. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (interpretation from
Spanish): Allow me to convey to you, Sir, the Republic of
Argentina’s pleasure at seeing you preside over this
meeting. In addition, I wish to express my country’s
gratitude at the exemplary and dedicated manner in which
your predecessor, Ambassador Mahugu of Kenya,
conducted the work of the Council during the month of
May.
Our gratitude also goes to all those who made possible
this open debate on an item of grave concern to the
international community. We are particularly grateful to

26

3890th meeting
6 June 1998
your own delegation and to Japan, Costa Rica, Sweden
and Slovenia.
In 1995 Argentina participated actively in the
Conference on the Review and Extension Conference of
the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT). Shortly thereafter, in September
1996, Argentina joined the 130 countries that signed the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT). While
we regretted the absence on that memorable occasion of
a group of nuclear-weapon States, we had thought it only
a temporary situation. Today we see that the nonproliferation regime is in danger, with serious
consequences for the established equilibrium and for
international peace and security.
It is necessary, now more than ever, for all those
States that have not acceded to the NPT or the CTBT to
take the necessary steps to become full members of those
instruments.
In this connection, we are following closely the
process begun in Geneva on 4 June aimed at dealing with
the situation created by the recent nuclear tests, because
we believe that it is directed towards strengthening the
non-proliferation regime. Argentina, as on previous
occasions, expressed in a timely manner its concern about
those underground nuclear tests.
The message that Argentina would like to send today
is based largely on our own experience. Influenced by the
cold-war atmosphere, Argentina debated for decades what
turned out to be a spurious dilemma. Having achieved
early on complete mastery of the nuclear-fuel cycle, we
came to understand fully the dangers and the temptations
inherent in the possession of such technology.
Fortunately, however — though not without different
kinds of obstacles — we then embarked on a cooperation
programme with our neighbour, Brazil. When in 1985 the
two countries signed a Joint Declaration on Nuclear
Policy, few in either country would have believed that in
1987 the President of Brazil would visit the uraniumenrichment plant in Pilcaniyeu, in Argentine Patagonia,
and that one year later the Argentine President would visit
a similar installation in Iperó, Brazil. In 1990 both
countries implemented this joint nuclear policy, and to
this end they created, one year later, the ArgentinianBrazilian Agency for Accounting and Control of Nuclear
Materials. This was an unprecedented step in the region.

Security Council
Fifty-third year
The increasing cooperation and the encouragement of
the international community prompted Argentina, Chile and
Brazil to ratify in 1991 the Treaty of Tlatelolco. It is only
right to emphasize once again here in the Security Council
the far-sightedness and leadership of Mexico in the creation
of what became the first nuclear-weapon-free zone on earth.
All of these concrete policies led to increased
investment in the Argentine energy sector, and our nuclear
companies embarked successfully on cooperation
agreements with other States as well as organizations such
as the European Atomic Energy Community. In addition,
with a view to enhancing vital South-South cooperation,
Argentine companies transferred technology to neighbouring
countries such as Peru and assisted in the construction of
nuclear reactors in Algeria and Egypt, inter alia.
International cooperation also reduced costs for Argentina’s
nuclear industry, making it possible to channel resources to
areas of genuine priority such as health, education and the
infrastructure.
Argentina is proud of the role it has played in Latin
America and the Caribbean to ease the tensions resulting
from those problems. It is for this reason that today we join
those countries that have taken the floor to offer
alternatives to the situation created in South Asia.
We support the resolution just adopted and in
particular the efforts by the Secretary-General to restore
stability to relations between India and Pakistan. Our
message to the Governments of both countries is simple:
there is always time to initiate sincere and productive
dialogue. We must not stand idle in the face of a situation
that could affect the established equilibrium and the security
regime of an entire continent or, even worse, revive the
spectre of nuclear proliferation elsewhere in the world.
In this respect, we feel that it is precisely those
countries that have been able to limit themselves with
concrete and transparent measures that could exercise
beneficial influence in such a delicate situation, since they
offer the best example to follow.
For our part, we trust that the parties involved will
take advantage of the experience offered in the reduction of
tension and conflict resolution through confidence-building
measures. The leaders of Pakistan and India are perfectly
familiar with the steps that the international community
hopes they will take. We encourage them to take these
steps and hope that they will assume the initiative in that
direction.

3890th meeting
6 June 1998
The President: I thank the representative of
Argentina for his kind words addressed to me and my
predecessor.
The next speaker is the representative of Norway. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Aass (Norway): Norway welcomes the adoption
by the Security Council of resolution 1172 (1998).
The decisions of India and Pakistan to carry out
underground nuclear tests are in clear defiance of
international norms and constitute a serious threat to the
global nuclear non-proliferation regime, as well as to
peace and stability in the entire region.
The tests underline the crucial importance of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty for
international efforts to prevent the proliferation of nuclear
weapons and to achieve nuclear disarmament.
There is an urgent need to establish a channel for
constructive dialogue between the international
community and New Delhi and Islamabad, and to
convince India and Pakistan to renounce their nuclear
weapon programmes. It is vital to ensure that the situation
in South Asia does not deteriorate further to the point of
serious instability or war.
We urge India and Pakistan to immediately
announce a cessation to all further testing of nuclear
weapons and to renounce their nuclear programmes. This
is a matter of urgency and essential for generating the
confidence needed for security disputes to be resolved
through dialogue and negotiations.
India and Pakistan should commit themselves to
neither assembling nuclear devices nor deploying such
devices on delivery vehicles. India and Pakistan should
cease the development and deployment of ballistic
missiles capable of delivering nuclear warheads.
We urge India and Pakistan to become Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty without
delay and without conditions. We also urge India and
Pakistan to enter into negotiations at the Conference on
Disarmament in Geneva on a treaty banning the
production of fissile material for nuclear weapons
purposes.

27

Security Council
Fifty-third year
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Kazakhstan, in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ageyev
(Kazakhstan) took the seat reserved for him at the side
of the Council Chamber.
The President: The next speaker is the representative
of Kazakhstan. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Ageyev (Kazakhstan) (interpretation from
Russian): It was with profound concern that Kazakhstan
learned about the nuclear weapons tests conducted in India
and Pakistan in May. We are obliged to note with deep
regret that India and Pakistan, carried away by nuclear
ambitions, have seriously harmed international security.
This action has threatened the progress made in
disarmament and non-proliferation following the indefinite
extension of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and the signing of the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty.
The conduct of nuclear tests is increasing tensions in
the South Asian region. Kazakhstan calls on India and
Pakistan to refrain from making the nuclear choice and to
confirm their desire to achieve a safe and stable world,
global partnership and economic development.
Kazakhstan strongly opposes the proliferation of
nuclear weapons and calls on all States to display
responsibility and restraint. The leadership of Kazakhstan
feels that India and Pakistan should adhere to the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
The President: The next speaker is the representative
of Pakistan. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Kamal (Pakistan): Allow me to begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council and by complimenting your

28

3890th meeting
6 June 1998
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of Kenya, on
the excellent manner in which he guided the affairs of the
Council last month.
Pakistan has kept the United Nations SecretaryGeneral and the Security Council fully informed, at all
stages, of the developments pertaining to the current
grave situation and security crisis in South Asia. Indeed,
to some extent, it was the dereliction of its responsibilities
by the Security Council that emboldened India to
implement its hegemonic and aggressive designs by
crossing the nuclear threshold, threatening the use of
nuclear weapons against Pakistan and resorting to nuclear
blackmail to impose a military solution on Kashmir. We
informed the Council about India’s provocative actions
and unambiguous expression of intent to commit
aggression against Pakistan. Unfortunately, the Council
did not pay heed to the impending breach of peace.
Faced with these ominous developments resulting
from India’s deliberate and calculated actions to alter the
strategic equation, Pakistan was left with no choice but to
exercise its nuclear option in its supreme national interest
to restore the strategic balance and to preserve peace.
For almost 50 years, Pakistan repeatedly drew the
attention of the United Nations to the illegal Indian
occupation of Jammu and Kashmir. We demanded the
implementation of the Council’s own resolutions. We
sought to draw the attention of the international
community to the brutal Indian campaign to deny to the
Kashmiri people their inalienable right to selfdetermination, as provided for in the Council’s
resolutions.
We repeatedly drew the attention of the SecretaryGeneral and the Security Council to the extremely volatile
situation in Kashmir resulting from grave violations of the
line of control by Indian troops. We urged the SecretaryGeneral and the Council to take cognizance of this
situation and even proposed the strengthening of the
present United Nations Military Observer Group in India
and Pakistan.
We regret to note that the Council paid no attention
whatsoever to Pakistan’s repeated warnings and requests.
Today again, the central issue which has bedevilled
relations between India and Pakistan and is at the source
of all conflicts and tensions in South Asia is being
ignored.

Security Council
Fifty-third year
Now that the Council is seized of the volatile situation
in South Asia, we note with regret that the approach that is
being adopted is once again devoid of realism. Nonproliferation cannot be pursued by creating or acquiescing
in a situation of a security void. This has been and
continues to be a major failure on the part of all those who
have sought to promote the goal of non-proliferation. It is
obviously counter-productive to bank once again on a
unidimensional approach to non-proliferation based on
selective sanctions, pressures and intimidation.
The Council has contented itself to deal with the nonproliferation aspects. Non-proliferation is no longer an issue
in South Asia. South Asia, which we had wanted to be a
nuclear-weapon-free zone, is today nuclearized thanks to
the encouragement and acquiescence of major Powers.
There is a real danger of nuclear conflict. Proliferation
regrettably has taken place. No amount of sermonizing and
lamentation can rectify or reverse this unfortunate
development. If the Council really wishes to have any role
in containing the crisis and in preventing the situation from
deteriorating further, it must adopt a pragmatic and realistic
approach.
We are convinced that a comprehensive approach to
the issues of peace, security, confidence-building,
conventional imbalance, and conventional and nuclear arms
control is the only realistic way whereby the Council and
the international community could contribute to defusing
the security crisis in South Asia, which has endangered
global peace and stability.
The resolution which has emerged from the
consultations is deficient in several aspects. Let me first
deal with the procedural points.
Under Article 31 of the Charter, any Member of the
United Nations which is not a member of the Security
Council may participate, without a vote, in the discussion
of any question brought before the Security Council,
whenever the latter considers that the interests of that
Member are specially affected. We deeply regret that the
Council has disregarded this Charter provision by not
giving us an opportunity to participate in the discussions on
this resolution. The attitude of the Council can, in short, be
described as, “My mind is made up; please do not confuse
me with facts.”
While I will be pointing out the substantive
inadequacies, let me make a more general point. I wish to
state for the record and for posterity that the adoption of
this resolution will further marginalize the role of the

3890th meeting
6 June 1998
Security Council, not only in dealing effectively with the
security crisis in South Asia but on global security issues
as a whole. The approach that the Security Council has
adopted is again devoid not only of realism but also of
legality and morality. I wonder whether the Security
Council is not about to ignite an extremely short fuse that
will destroy the entire global security order as it is
envisioned in the United Nations Charter.
Now let me deal with salient aspects of this
resolution, which I believe fall in the following three
categories: non-proliferation, the security problem in
South Asia, and the role of the Council.
As far as the non-proliferation aspects of this
resolution are concerned, we cannot help but comment on
the extremely short- sighted approach that the Council has
chosen to pursue. This resolution is not an expression of
global concern about the failure of non-proliferation and
ways and means to deal with this serious issue. It is in
fact a transparent exercise in self-assurance by the official
nuclear Five to seek legitimacy for their possession of
lethal arsenals of weapons of mass destruction. The
nuclear Five draw comfort and questionable legitimacy
from the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT). Pakistan had never questioned this
dubious distinction that they draw from the NPT. Today
we are obliged perforce to reconsider our position.
Today for the first time, this sacrosanct institution is
being used to confer legitimacy upon the nuclear Five. It
is therefore not what is contained in this resolution but
what is implied which needs to be seen in its proper
legal, strategic and political perspective. For the first time,
the Security Council is being asked to play a role in
enforcing non-proliferation. This is contrary to the letter
and spirit of the various international instruments and
treaties on this subject.
Nuclear non-proliferation is the obverse side of
nuclear disarmament. Nuclear non-proliferation cannot be
promoted in the absence of corresponding progress
towards nuclear disarmament. The nuclear Five have
continued to use the NPT for a twofold purpose: to
legitimize their own possession of huge nuclear arsenals
and the right to retain them in perpetuity, and as a blunt
instrument to curb further proliferation. It is indeed
evident that the resolution welcomes the commitment of
the nuclear Five to article VI of the NPT. There could be
no more poignant travesty of facts. Treaty provisions
cannot be enforced on non-parties. Treaty obligations can
only be assumed on a voluntary basis. Any attempt at

29

Security Council
Fifty-third year
imposition of treaty obligations on non-parties is, by its
very nature, unequal and unsustainable.
How would the Council deal with the issue so aptly
raised by the decision of International Court of Justice on
the illegitimacy of nuclear weapons? How would the
Council deal with the question of non-proliferation? How
would the Council deal with the interlinked issues of
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation? The Council
has given its verdict. Nuclear disarmament is apparently in
safe hands. Nuclear non-proliferation is the only real issue.
The Non-Aligned Movement has consistently held that
there is no justification for the maintenance of nuclear
arsenals or for concepts of international security based on
a policy of nuclear deterrence. The Non-Aligned Movement
has also categorically pronounced itself on the present
situation, whereby nuclear- weapon States insist that nuclear
weapons provide unique security benefits and continue to
make feverish efforts to monopolize them. The NonAligned Movement has said that this is a highly
discriminatory and untenable approach, and one that cannot
be sustained.
The Non-Aligned Movement’s ministerial meeting in
Cartagena recently affirmed the importance of the adoption
of an action plan for the total elimination of all nuclear
weapons within a time-bound framework, as well as the
need for negotiating and implementing universal, nondiscriminatory disarmament measures and mutually agreed
confidence-building measures. If the Council is really
concerned today about non-proliferation, then the resolution
that it has adopted does less than full justice to the
predominant views of the Non-Aligned Movement,
including those of its members which are parties to the
NPT.

3890th meeting
6 June 1998
weapon State and thus contribute to shredding to bits the
myths about the legitimacy or otherwise of nuclear
weapons? Moreover, the resolution does not take into
account the fact that besides India and Pakistan, there are
other States, non-parties to the NPT, which possess
nuclear weapons and have acknowledged the fact.
We do not want to complicate the issue. The issue
is simple and straightforward. It is about the security
crisis in South Asia. We do not want to dilute the focus
and enter into academic arguments about non-proliferation
and nuclear disarmament. Neither do we want to link
extraneous issues which only serve to detract from the
main issue: the security crisis in South Asia, which has
endangered global peace and stability.
So a highly skewed and self-defeating approach has
been taken by the Security Council in trying to handle
non-proliferation, which is strictly not within its
competence. The future of non-proliferation cannot be
assured by setting aside its very legal and moral basis.
This is exactly what is being done today by this Council.
It is evident, therefore, that what is at stake is not the
future of non-proliferation, but the exclusive privileges
and status that the nuclear Five arrogate to monopolize,
caring little about the wider aspects. I therefore dread to
say that the Council is about to embark on a totally
unrealistic and self-defeating course as far as the future of
non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament is concerned.

Let me once again clarify that the issue for Pakistan
is one of security and not one of status. Pakistan has
demonstrated its nuclear-weapon capability. We have
officially stated that the nuclear devices tested on 28 and 30
May 1998 correspond to a weapons configuration
compatible with delivery systems.

Pakistan has been subjected to double discrimination.
At the regional level we are discriminated against because
of a failure by the Security Council to make a distinction
between action and reaction, between a provocation and
a response, between a cause and its effect. Pakistan has
acquired its nuclear capability only in reaction to India’s
steady development of its nuclear weapons programme.
We cannot be asked to give up the right to defend our
country against any external threat emanating from
conventional weapons or weapons of mass destruction.
Pakistan reserves the right to maintain the ability to deter
aggression by conventional weapons or non-conventional
means.

We have already stated that South Asia has been
nuclearized. We have been compelled to join the process of
nuclearization by India’s decision to weaponize and induct
nuclear weapons. We have been obliged to do so for our
self-defence and to restore the strategic balance in South
Asia. It is India which has claimed status as the sixth
nuclear-weapon State. Does the Council, by its lopsided
approach, desire that we also claim status as a nuclear-

We are also suffering from discrimination at the
global level by the nuclear-Five States, who claim for
themselves the right to acquire and retain weapons of
mass destruction against each other, or against nonnuclear-weapon States, and thus threaten the rest of the
world. This discrimination, at the global level, is
epitomized by the possession of over 30,000 nuclear
weapons, which are in the hands of the nuclear-Five

30

Security Council
Fifty-third year
States, and which they claim they will retain indefinitely
while taking coercive measures to prevent any other State
from acquiring similar capability, even in the legitimate
exercise of the right of self-defence. This is totally unjust
and unacceptable.
While the Security Council adopts this unjust decision,
we are confident that the international community, the
majority of the membership of the United Nations and the
General Assembly, will reject this unfair and unequal
decision and uphold its demand for general and complete
nuclear disarmament in the shortest period of time by the
nuclear-Five States.
The resolution before the Council presumes to deal
with the security aspects of the situation in South Asia.
Here again the Council is ensuring that it would, in fact,
have at best a disinterested spectator’s role. What are the
immediate issues in the context of the situation in South
Asia? We would have expected the Council to seek to
address earnestly and reasonably the following issues: first,
reducing the risk of a nuclear conflict; secondly, promoting
nuclear restraint and stabilization measures between
Pakistan and India; and thirdly, defusing the volatile
situation in Jammu and Kashmir, especially along the Line
of Control.
Unfortunately, the Security Council is once again
abnegating its responsibility under the Charter for the
maintenance of international peace and security by adopting
a totally unpragmatic and unrealistic approach. This
resolution urges India and Pakistan to exercise maximum
restraint and to avoid threatening military movements,
cross-border violations or other provocations in order to
prevent an aggravation of the situation. This resolution also
urges India and Pakistan to resume the dialogue between
them on all matters pertaining to peace and security and
encourages them to find mutually acceptable solutions to
address the root causes of tension.
The mere mention of the root cause — Kashmir — is
not enough. We regret that even the important element
contained in the P-5 ministerial communiqué — their
readiness to assist India and Pakistan in promoting
reconciliation and cooperation — has been omitted from
this resolution. It is evident that by adopting this approach
the Council is in fact acknowledging its failure to address
the critical elements of the situation.
In short, the Council wants Pakistan and India to settle
by themselves the issues bedevilling their relations. If
Pakistan and India could have sorted out these problems by

3890th meeting
6 June 1998
themselves, South Asia would not today be nuclearized.
What the Security Council is today asking us to do, in
short, amounts to an appeal to two nuclear-weapon States
to settle their differences on the basis of the de facto
situation. This de facto situation is based on complex
factors underlying the power balance in strategic and
conventional terms. In fact, what you are today asking us
to do is to remain embarked on a disastrous course. You
are asking us today to cross new thresholds in nuclear and
ballistic system escalation. You are asking us today to set
aside the Charter and international law, and to base our
conduct on the imperatives of maintaining a strategic
balance, whatever the cost. You have once again ignored
the fact that the direct cause of the aggravation of the
security situation in South Asia was the unilateral altering
by India of the delicate strategic balance that had
maintained peace in South Asia for the past two decades.
We cannot read any other message in the resolution.
The Security Council has once again abandoned its
responsibility by asking us to find a mutually acceptable
solution. I say this more in sorrow than in anger, for the
implications of this approach will be far and wide. It will
oblige not only the countries of South Asia, but also 180
States Members of the United Nations, to draw their own
conclusions about the pathetic state of the United Nations
and the global security order, which is premised to serve
the strategic interests of the official nuclear Five.
I regret to say that Pakistan is disappointed. We had
pinned our hopes on the United Nations for more than 50
years. We were confident that it would be able to usher
in a new era, free from the scourge of war for our
succeeding generations. What we have witnessed instead
is a tale of missed opportunities, abdication of
responsibilities and selective and discriminatory
application of the Charter. This track record does not fill
anybody with pride. Nor does it conform to the ideals of
the founding fathers, or to the principles of democracy.
Let me, however, hasten to add that we will still
continue to base our conduct and actions on the noble
principles of the Charter. The vision of the Charter will,
I hope, one day bring the dawn of a new era. This would
come about if the nations of the world would become true
adherents to the principles and purposes of the Charter.
The Government and the people of Pakistan have
faith in the inherent goodness of humankind. We place
great value on the collective civilizational
accomplishments of the human race and the eventual
triumph of morality. It is in view of these sublime

31

Security Council
Fifty-third year
sentiments that we have taken the liberty, today, to make a
critical analysis of the shortcomings of the Security
Council, which have only contributed to the spread of chaos
and anarchy in various parts of the world.

3890th meeting
6 June 1998
Pakistan will continue to comply with its obligations
under the Charter and international law. We will continue
to seek a just resolution of the Jammu and Kashmir
dispute, in accordance with Security Council resolutions.
May I, at this stage, remind the Council of its own
resolutions on Jammu and Kashmir, which explicitly
provide for the final disposition of the State of Jammu
and Kashmir in accordance with the will of the people
expressed through a democratic method of a free and
impartial plebiscite conducted under the auspices of the
United Nations.
The Prime Minister of Pakistan has already stated,
and I would like to reiterate, that Pakistan is ready to
enter into talks with India on all matters of mutual
concern, including a non-aggression pact, on the basis of
a just, equitable and expeditious settlement of the Jammu
and Kashmir dispute.
The President: I thank the representative of
Pakistan for the kind words he addressed to me and to my
predecessor.
There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of
its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 3 p.m.

32
