t

UNITED

NATIONS

S

UNCIL

Y
c

TWENTY-

FIFTH

1

th

NEW

YORK

MEETING:

OS

YEAR

23 JULY 1970

CONTENTS

Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l549)

. . , , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . , , , . . , . . . . ,. .

Adoption

of the agenda , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I . . . . .

The question of race conflict in South Africa resulting from the policies of
crpnrfhki
of the Government of the Republic of South Africa:
Letter dated 15 July 1970 addressed to the President of the Security Council
by the representatives of Algeria, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African
Republic, Chad, Congo (Democratic Republic of), Dahomey, Equatorial
Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, India, Ivory Coast, Kenya,
Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, Niger,
Nigeria, Pakistan, People’s Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United
Arab Republic, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta, Yugoslavia
and Zambia (S/9867) . , , . , , . . , , . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . I . . . . a. . . . . . . . . I . . . .

SIPV. 1549

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are cotnposed of capital letters cotnbined with j?gures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations docwxent .
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . . ) are normally published
in quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The
date of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND FORTY-NINTH

Held in New York on Thursday,

President:

Mr. Guillermo SEVILLA
(Nicaragua).

SACASA

Adoption

2.

The question of race conflict in South Africa resulting from the policies of apartheid of the Government of the Republic of South Africa:
Letter dated 15 July 1970 addressed to the President of the Security Council by the representatives
of Algeria, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African
Republic, Chad, Congo (Democratic Republic of),
Dahomey, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon,
Ghana, Guinea, India, Ivory Coast, Kenya, Liberia,
Libya, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Morocco,Niger,Nigeria,
Pakistan, People’s Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan, Togo, Tunisia,
Uganda, United Arab Republic, United Republic
of Tanzania, Upper Volta, Yugoslavia and Zambia
(S/98$7).

of the agenda.

Adoption
The age&

2. As the number of seats available at the Council
table is limited, and in accordance with the practice
followed in the past in similar cases, I invite the
aforementioned
representatives
to take the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber,
on the understanding that they will be invited to sit
at the table when the time comes for them to address
the Council.

agenda (S/Agenda/l549)

1.

23 July 1970, at 3.30 p.m.

1. The PRESIDENT
(intcrpretatiotz from Spnnish):
In accordance with the decisions previously adopted
by the Council, and with the consent of the Council,
I intend to invite the representatives of Mauritius, Somalia, India, Ghana and Pakistan to participate in the
debate without the right to vote.

&se~~t: The representatives of the followiig States:
Burundi, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Spain, Syria, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
and Zambia.
Provisional

MEETING

At the invitation of the President, Mr. R. K. Rarnph~d
(Mauritius),
Mr. H. N. Elrni (Somalia), Mr. C. U. Rnnganathan (India), Mr. B. G. Godwyll (Ghana) and Mr.
A. Shahi {Pakistan), took the places resewedfor
them.

3. The PRESIDENT
(irzterprctntiort from Spanish):
The Security Council will now resume consideration
of the item on its agenda.
4. Before calling on the first speaker, I wish to draw
the attention of representatives to the fact that a revised
text of the joint draft resolution co-sponsored by
Burundi, Nepal, Sierra Leone, Syria and Zambia has
been distributed as document S/9882/Rev.2.

of the agenda
5. It has been pointed out to me that in the French
version, in the last sentence of the seventh paragraph
of the preamble, the original wording of the English
text “constitutes a potential threat” is errotieously rendered as “constitutes a serious threat”. Consequently,
I have arranged to have the necessary correction made.

IWS aciopted.

The question
of race conflict in South Africa
resulting
from the policies of apartheid of the
Government-_
of the Republic of South AfWa:

6. Mr. MWAANGA
(Zambia): Before the Council
proceeds with this debate I feel that I should offer
some brief explanations on behalf of the sponsors of
draft resolution S/9882/Rev.2 in order to clarify some
of the amendments which have been made to the text.
I stated yesterday that the sponsors of this draft resolution were ready to enter into immediate discussions
with all members of the Security Council with a view
to arriving at an acceptable formula. The sponsors have
had discussions with all the members of the Security
Council, and in the course of those discussions certain
suggestions were put forward which made it necessary
for us to make an amendment to the seventh paragraph
of the preamble. We have replaced the words “constitutes a serious threat to international
peace

Letter dated 15 July 1970 addressed to the President of the Security Council by the representatives of Algeria, Burundi, Cameroon, Central
African Republic,
Chad, Congo (Democratic
Republic
of), Dahomey, Equatorial
Guinea,
Ethiopia,
Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, India, Ivory
Coast, Kenya, Liberia,
Libya, Madagascar,
Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Morocco, Niger,
Nigeria,
Pakistan,
People’s Republic of the
Congo,
Rwanda,
Saudi Arabia,
Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan, Togo, Tunisia,
Uganda, United Arab Republic, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta, Yugoslavia and
Zambia
(S/9867)
1

and security” by the words “constitutes a potential
threat to international
peace and security”. We also
slightly rephrased operative paragraph 4 (x) in order
to eliminate some of the difficulties with which membeel
delegations were faced.

“Clearly there is no question of the United States
condoning, or acquiescing in, the racial policies of
the white-ruled rigimes. For moral as well as histo&
cal reasons, the United States stands firmly for the
racial
equality
principles
of
and
selfdetermination.“’

7. On behalf of the sponsors of this draft resolution,
I should like to thank all members of the Security Council for the co-operation which they gave us throughout
this most difficult task of trying to arrive at an acceptable formula. We have accepted these minor changes
in the belief that they do not in any way alter the
substance of our draft resolution.

16. Accordingly, the United States has strongly and
repeatedly urged the Government of South Africa to
change its racial policies, and we have warned thal
Government of the dangers we consider are inherent
in the continued pursuit of its policies.
17. The United States in this connexion does not
believe that it is in the interests of a long-term solution
in this area to send arms and lethal equipment to South
Africa. My own Government scrupulously avoided any
contribution of lethal weapons to South Africa and
believes that it is in the interests of the total international community to do likewise.

8. There were other suggestions made by members
of the Security Council in the course of our negotiations
which would have had the effect of altering the very
substance of the draft resolution, For quite understandable reasons we were unable to accept those changes
and we feel that we have gone as far as possible in
accommodating
the reservations of member delegations.

18. As early as 1962-in fact, even before there was
a Security Council embargo-the
United States voluntarily prohibited the sale to South Africa of arms which
might be used to enforce apartheid.
In August
1963-again on our own initiative and before there was
a Security Council embargo-we informed the Security
Council that, effective as of the end of that calendar
year, the United States would not sell any military
equipment to South Africa, subject only to honouring
our existing contracts and our right to interpret our
policy in the future in the light of requirements for
assuring the maintenance of international peace and
security. The United States solemnly and formally
affirmed these obligations which we had freely undertaken in voting in favour of the Security Council resolutions of 1963 and 1964 which established an arms
embargo against South Africa.

9. We do hope, therefore, that members of the Security
Council will join us in condemning crpa,t/wid and also
in stopping this proliferation of arms trafficking to the
uprrrtlzcid r&gime of South Africa.
10. With these few very brief remarks it is the hope
of the co-sponsors that a vote on this matter can be
taken as soon as possible.
1 I. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish):
I shall now make a statement as representative of the
Republic of NICARAGUA.
It will be a very brief statement, but a very clear one I trust.
12. Nicaragua
of the draft
Sl9882lRev.2.

will be very pleased to vote in favour
resolution
contained
in document

19. My Government has carried out these obIigations
fully and faithfully. We intend to continue to carry
them out. Our own embargo on the sale of arms to
South Africa was reaffirmed as late as March of this
year, and just yesterday an official spokesman of the
Department of State reaffirmed publicly that the United
States continues to support the Council’s resolutions
on the sale of arms to South Africa and indicated thal
our Government would not be able to associate itself
with any measures which might result in an increase
in the flow of arms to South Africa.

13. Now, as PRESIDENT
of the Council, I shall call
on those representatives who have expressed a wish
to explain their votes before the vote.
14. Mr. BUFFUM
(United States of America): I
should like, first and foremost, to emphasize that the
United States abhors and totally rejects the doctrine
of npm~heid.
The United States considers that
npcrrtheid
and the repressive measures adopted in
South Africa for its implementation
are in violation
of South Africa’s undertakings
under the United
Nations Charter. Moreover, we oppose npartheid
also
since it is the antithesis of a cardinal principle of our
basic belief that all men are created equal.

20. Some of the preceding. speakers have referred
to arms supplied to South Africa by the United States
over the last few years, and I wish here again to affirm
that deliveries currently being made consist entirely
of those spare parts which stem from contracts entered
into prior to the effective date of the United States
embargo-specifically,
3 1 December 1963. And to this
I should like to add that deliveries of major items of
military equipment under these contracts have lOI%
since been completed. In this regard I must point out
that it is a fundamental tenet of United States trade
policy that valid contracts should be honoured.

15. We are at the moment struggling to make this
deep conviction of ours a reality, both at home and
abroad. We are determined to eliminate racial discrimination within our own borders. We are equally resolved
to oppose vigorously all forms of racial discrimination
elsewhere. President Nixon categorically affirmed this
point in discussing the whole area of southern Africa
in his 18 February 1970 report. to our Congress on
United States foreign policy for the 1970’s. He said:

1The Lkprrt~~~ent
of owe Bdleti~ (Washington,
UnitedSkM
Government Printing Office, 1970), vol. LXII, No. 1602,PP. 306-307.
2

21. Turning to the specific text which is now before
us [S/9882/Rev.2], the United States is able to support
the basic intent of the draft resolution before us and
many Of its specific provisions. In particular, we fully
endorse the expression of total opposition to the policy
of crycrrtizeid and the reaffirmation of resolutions 181
(1963), 182 (1963) and 191 (1964). We have supported
them. As I said, we have fully and faithfully abided
by them, and would only wish that all States had done
likewise.

recommendations
were made by the Council the views
of my Government on how it would carry them out
were fully made known. Some speakers in this debate
have sought to give the impression that the British
Government’s operation of the embargo was more formal than real, or even that the British have been the
main suppliers of arms to South Africa in the last few
years. Nothing could be further from the real facts,
and this is made clear by the study2 circulated at the
request of the Special Committee on Apartheid3 and
the introductory
words by its Chairman. Members of
the Council will know that in spite of the exceptions
that have been made we now supply only a small proportion of what is received by South Africa and that
tens of millions of pounds worth of orders have been
willingly foregone. It has been iateresting to hear these
measures being criticized by certain countries which
have foregone nothing.

22. However, while the present text is in some very
important respects a welcome improvement over the
draft originally circulated, we cannot support it in its
entirety. It is quite clear that the more sweeping provisions contained in this draft resolution-provisions
which 60 beyond the limits to which my Government
can commit itself-cannot
command the wide support
in the Council that would make them effective. On
the contrary, we must in all seriousness ask whether
they may not carry with them the danger of weakening
rather than strengthening
the measure of compliance
required to give practical effect to the recommendations of this Council. We are therefore concerned that
their embodiment
in this resolution may serve only
to divide the Council and may therefore fail to fulfil
their intended purpose.

26. Operative paragraph p of the draft resolution calls
upon all States to implement the embargo as redefined
in that paragraph, unconditionally
and without reservation whatsoever. We have to bear in mind that the
wide-ranging nature of these provisions would conflict
with existing commitments.
Furthermore, in the statement that I made on 20 July 11546th meeting] I drew
attention to certain considerations which my Government has in mind in considering this, and which arise
from the way in which the situation is developing
around the Cape sea lanes. These considerations were
dismissed by some speakers as outmoded concepts of
naval warfare. One wishes the concepts of naval warfare would become thoroughly outmoded. Nothing
would give greater pleasure to my government than
to know that this was so and that we could all agree
that submarines and naval ships were no longer needed
so that their presence in the world sea lanes would
no longer be there to cause us all anxiety. Meanwhile
the fact that some of the world’s largest Powers have
not yet accepted the concept as being outmoded can
be a cause of worry to those of us who depend entirely
on our sea communications.
My own country has been
nearly strangled to death twice already in this century
by the presence of intruders into the world sea lanes,
and we naturally examine the problem rather carefully.

23. Accordingly, my delegation will therefore abstain
on this text. I wish to say that we particularly regret
the necessity for this decision in view of our own record
of long-standing support for and observance of earliel
Council resolutions
dealing with an arms embargo
against South Africa. We would indeed have been
happy to support a resolution which had unanimous support in the Council, and we think that such a conclusion
to our current debate would have contributed effectively to the achievement of what I am sure is indeed
a common objective at this table. In that regard, may
I conclude by emphasizing that we have been and
remain eager to assure that there is no misunderstanding, particularly
in South Africa, that this Council
remains unanimous in its condemnation of the policies
of apartheid.
24. Mr. WARNER
(United Kingdom):
The draft
r*eso!ution before us [S/9882IRev.2] presents some difficulties to my delegation. I should mention first of
all that the earlier drafts of the draft resolution gave
US concern because the language employed in the
seventh preambular
paragraph appeared to be taken
from Chapter VII ofthe Charter. However, the ameudment of which we have been informed this afternoon
makes it clear that this is not so. We are certainly
not opposed to the mention of a potential threat, and
in view of the very real and understandable fears of
South Africa’s neighbours about that country’s intentions towards them we accept the language of this Passage as it now stands.

27. Finally, I should like just once again to put on
record the present position of my Government
as
explained in the statement I made. on 20 July. It is
that my Government
has no intention of abandoning
the embargo; that it has no intention of supplying arms
for the wide category implied by the words “external
defence’ ’ ; that it has had under consideration certain
more Jimited exceptions which it considers related to
its own essential interests; but that it has not yet
reached any decision on these and that it is continuing
consuItation
on the matter with a number of other
Governments.
28. For thereasons I have explained, my Government
will abstain on this draft resolution. I should just add,

25. Then there is preambular paragraph 5, with its
reference to violations. It does not seem to my delegation that “violations”
is a suitable word to use in
respect of the carrying out of recommendations of the
Security
Council.
Furthermore,
at the time those

’ Document A/AC. I15/L.276 of 18 June 1970.
R Special Committee on the Policies of Aporthd
ment of the Republic of South Africa.

3

of the Covern-

however, that this abstention in no way means that
we are unwilling to respond to the plea made by the
representative of Zambia this afternoon that we should
join incondemningnyartheicl.
We should b&most willing
to vote for any such condemnation, either separately
or in any draft resolution that we could support as a
whole.

34. The Finnish Government has faithfully complied
with the resolutions on an arms embargo adopted by
the Security Council in 1963 and 1964. I have no doubt
that my Government would similarly wish to comply
scrupulously with this new resolution which the Security
Council has adopted today.

29. The PRESIDENT
(interpretatiorzfi’om
Spanish):
I have no more speakers on my list. If no representatives wish to take the floor at the present time, I shall
put the draft resolution sponsored by Burundi, Nepal,
Sierra Leone, Syria and Zambia [S/9882/Rev.2] to the
vote.

35. Mr. ZAKHAROV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translatedfiom
Russian): The delegation
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics supported
the draft resolution submitted by the delegations of
Burundi, Nepal, Sierra Leone, Syria and Zambia
[S/98821Rev.2], because it reproduces in essence the
proposals which were put forward by the majority of
the members of the Security Council in their statements
and which are aimed at strengthening the embargo on
arms deliveries to the Republic of South Africa and
closing the loop-holes being used by Western States
to circumvent the Council’s ban on arms deliveries
to South Africa.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: Burundi,
China, Colombia,
Finland,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Spain, Syria,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Zambia.
Against:

None.

Abstaining: France, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America.
The draft resolution was adopted by 12 votes to none,
with 3 nbstentions.J
30. The PRESIDENT
(i/zterpretatiorzfiom
Spanish):
I shall now call on those representatives who have
expressed the desire to explain their votes.

36. Although the Soviet delegation considers that the
explosive situation prevailing in southern Africa would
justify more decisive and more effective action by the
Council, it voted in favour of this draft resolution
because scrupulous implementation
of the measures
called for in this resolution could help to further the
cause of those fighting the criminal policy of apartheirl
pursued by the Government of the Republic of South
Africa.

3 1, Mr. PASTINEN (Finland): In the statement I made
on behalf of the Finnish delegation at the beginning of
this debate I outlined the position of my Government
on the question of the. policies of r/partlteid of South
Africa. The remarks which I made at that time on the
specific subject of the arms embargo, with which the
present resolution .deals, can be summarized as follows.

37. During the consideration of this item in the
Council, the Soviet delegation stated-and we shoufd
like to stress this point again-that the Soviet Union
has abided and is abiding strictly by the resolutions
of the Security Council and the General Assembly on
South Africa and does not maintain political, economic
or other relations with the Republic of South Africa.

32. The Finnish delegation considers that the essence
of the arms embargo in South Africa lies in its political
importance. The arms embargo has become a test of
the resolve of the international
community to carry
out the pledge it has undertaken under Article 56 of
the Charter. In the view of my delegation it is natural,
therefore, that the Security Council has considered this
time ways and means by which the arms embargo could
be made more effective. Further, I expressed the hope
that every effort would be made in response to the
request of the African States to arrive at conclusions
which will be based on the broadest possible support
in the Council.

38. Many other States, like the Soviet Union, do not
maintain any ties with South Africa. In the opinion
of the USSR delegation, the Security Council should
ensure that this is true of all States without exception,
In statements made here in the Council during the discussion of this question the States, including even some
members of the Security Council, which maintain close
political, economic and military ties with the Republic
of South Africa and supply it with arms in violation
of the resolution of the Security Council imposing the
embargo, have been referred to by name. The resolution just adopted by the Security Council is primarily
directed precisely at those States.

33. In the view of my delegation these aims have
been achieved in the resolution which the Council has
just adopted with the positive votes of an overwhelming
majority and without any member objecting to it. In
voting for the resolution the Finnish delegation for its
part has been guided by its wish to make the Security
Council arms embargo against South Africa more kffective and meaningful,
4 See resolution

282 (1970).

39. The fact that the delegation of the three Western
Powers abstained in the vote on this resolution, which
describes the very least the Council must do in the
existing circumstances, can hardly fail to arouse alarm.
In a situation in which the racist regime of the Republic
of South Africa is intensifying its cruel 'policy of
apartheid and defying the United Nations, interns
tional public opinion has a right to expect from the
Western Powers not evasive and ambiguous state

men&, such as those we have heard here during the
debate and again today, and not abstentions but discontinuance of assistance and support to the Republic of
South Africa and, above all, the cessation of arms
deliveries to the Republic of South Africa.
40. The PRESIDENT
(irzterpretntion from Spanish):
Since no other member of the Council wishes to speak
at this time, I now invite the representative of Mauritius
to take a place at the Security Council table in order
to make a statement.
4 1. Mr, RAMPHUL
(Mauritius) (interpretntionfr’om
French): Now that the Council has concluded its consideration of the item before it I should like to thank
YOU, Mr. President,
on behalf of the African group
for the courtesy you have shown to us both during
the consultations before the debate as well as during
the meetings of the Council. We are also grateful to
You for all the assistance you have given us.
42. I should like also to express our thanks to all
the Council members for their co-operation, particularly the delegations of Burundi, Nepal, Sierra
Leone, Syria and Zambia. I wish too to thank their
distinguished
representatives for having jointly sponsored the resolution that has just been adopted.
43, The thanks of the African Group also go to all
those delegations which, by their affirmative votes, SUPported the draft which was finally submitted to the
Council. We regret to note that the delegations Of

France, the United Kingdom and the United States
felt it necessary to abstain on a draft which . for . us
represented a compromise-the
very minimum m veew
of the present circumstances. We do hope that despite
their abstention they will co-operate in the implementation of the resolution or, at the very least, will do
nothing to hamper its implementation.
44. In conclusion, I should.like to express our sincere
thanks to members of the Secretariat, particularly those
in the Department of Political and Security Council
Affairs, for their co-operation and for the work they
have done to facilitate these meetings of the Council.
45. The PRESIDENT
(irzterpretatiolzfi’ona Spanish):
I wish to thank you for the co-operation
you have
given me and to the Council during the consideration
of the question which has led to the resolution we
havejust adopted, It is aresolution ofgreat importance.
Beyond doubt it will represent an important new page
in the history of the Council, which is the supreme
body of the United Nations.
46. Each one has stated his views. We have all
debated and discussed these matters freely and broadly
and we have all taken note of our decisions. This is
the procedure followed in all world parliaments,
a
procedure which will lead us slowly but surely to international peace and security. It has been a great honour
for me to preside over the deliberations of the Council
on this occasion.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Notions
publicationr
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may
bookstore

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

SE PROCURER

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
lo: United
Nations,
Sales Section,

DES NATIONS

throughout
New York

UNIES

Let publieotions
des Nations
Unier
sent
en vente
dons les libroiries
et la agences
dCpositaires
du monde
entier.
Informer.vous
oupr&r
de votre libroirie
ou adrerrez-vous
b:
Nations
Unies, Section des venler,
New York ou Gen&ve.
KAK

/‘IO/lY~MTb

H3AAHMH

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

OPrAHM3A~IlM

OEibEAMHEHHblX

DE LAS NACIONES

Las publicociones
de 10s Nocioner
Unidas
erlbn
en todos parles del mundo.
Conrulte
o su librero
Ventor,
Nuevo
York o Ginebro,

HALUlil

UNIDAS

en venlo en librerios
y coso~ dirlribuidorar
o dirijase
CI: Nociones
Unidar,
Secci6n

dc
