General Assembly-Forty-third Session

280

Emphasizing the responsibility of every State to promote
a policy of respect for the national independence and sovereignty of other States, non-interference in internal affairs
and good understanding and co-operation, which is a
basic requirement for reducing tension and for establishing a clima te of peace and mutual confidence in the world,
Taking note with interest of the report of the SecretaryGeneral, 16 submitted in accordance with resolution
42/150, which contains useful opinions, proposals and
considerations for a broader implementation of the
Manila Declaration,
1. Again urges ali States to observe and promote in
good faith the provisions of the Manila Declaration on the
Peaceful Settlement of International Disputes in the settlement of their international disputes;
2. Stresses the need to continue efforts to strengthen
the process of the peaceful settlement of disputes through
progressive development and codification of international
law and through enhancing the effectiveness ofthe United
Nations in this field;
3. Calls upon Member States to make full use, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, of the
framework provided by the United Nations for the peaceful settlement of disputes and international problems;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its forty-fourth session a further report containing the replies of Member States, relevant
United Nations bodies and specialized agencies, regional
intergovernmental organizations and interested international legal bodies on the implementation of the Manila
Declaration and on ways and means of increasing the effectiveness of this instrument;
5. Decides that the question of the peaceful settlement
of disputes between States shall be considered at its fortyfourth session as a separate agenda item, in conjunction
with the item ofthe provisional agenda entitled "Report of
the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization".
76th plenary meeting
9 December 1988

43/164.

Draft Code of Crimes against the Peace and
Security of Mankind

The General Assembly,
Mindful of Article 13, paragraph 1 a, of the Charter of
the United Nations, which provides that the General Assembly shall initiate studies and make recommendations
for the purpose of encouraging the progressive development of international law and its codification,
Recalling its resolution 177 (11) of 21 November 1947,
by which it directed the International Law Commission to
prepare a draft code of offences against the peace and
security of mankind,
Having considered the draft Code of Offences against the
Peace and Security of Mankind prepared by the Commission and submitted to the General Assembly in 1954, 17
Recalling its belief that the elaboration of acode of offences against the peace and security of mankind could
contribute to strengthening international peace and

16 A/43/530 and Add. l and 2.
17 Official Records ofrhe General Assembly, Ninth Session. Supplement

No. 9 (A/2693), para. 54.

security and thus to promoting and implementing the purposes and principies set forth in the Charter,
Recalling also its resolution 36/106 of 10 December
1981, in which it invited the Commission to resume its
work with a view to elaborating the draft Code and to examine it with the required priority in order to review it,
taking into account the results achieved by the process of
the progressive development of international law,
Bearing in mind that the Commission should fulfil its
task on the basis of early elaboration of draft articles
thereof,
Having considered chapter IV of the report of the Commission on the work of its fortieth session, 18
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the subject, 19
Taking into account the views expressed during the debate on this item at its forty-third session, 20
Recognizing the importance and urgency of the subject,
l. Invites the International Law Commission to continue its work on the elaboration of the draft Code of
Crimes against the Peace and Security of Mankind including the elaboration of a list of crimes, taking into account
the progress made at its fortieth session, as well as the
views expressed during the forty-third session of the General Assembly;
2. Notes the approach currently envisaged by the
Commission in dealing with the judicial authority to be assigned for the implementation of the provisions of the
draft Code, and encourages the Commission to explore
further ali possible alternatives on the question;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to seek
the views ofMember States regarding the conclusions contained in paragraph 69 (e) (i) of the Commission's report
on the work of its thirty-fifth session; 21
4. Also requests the Secretary-General to include the
views received from Member States in accordance with
paragraph 3 above in a report to be submitted to the General Assembly at its forty-fourth session;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fourth session the item entitled "Draft Code of
Crimes against the Peace and Security ofMankind", to be
considered in conjunction with the examination of the report of the Commission.
76th plenary meeting
9 December 1988

43/165.

United Nations Convention on lnternational
Bilis of Exchange and International Promissory Notes

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December
1966, by which it created the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law with a mandate to further the
progressive harmonization and unification ofthe law ofinternational trade and in that respect to bear in mind the interests of ali peoples, in particular those of developing
countries, in the extensive development of international
trade,

18 /bid., Forty-third Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/43/10).
19 A/43/525 and Add. J.
20 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-third Session.

Sixth Committee, 25th to 40th and 48th meetings, and corrigendum.
21 !bid., Thirty-eighth Session, Supplement No. JO (A/38/10).

IX.

Aware that the free circulation of bilis of exchange and
promissory notes facilitates international trade and finance,
Convinced that the adoption of a convention on international bilis of exchange and international promissory notes
will facilitate the use of such instruments,
Taking note with satisfaction of the decision of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
at its twentieth session 22 to transmit the text of the draft
Convention on International Bilis of Exchange and International Promissory Notes 23 to the General Assembly for
its consideration,
Recalling its resolution 42/153 of 7 December 1987, in
which it requested the Secretary-General to draw the attention of ali States to the draft Convention, to ask them to
submit the observations and proposals they wished to
make on the draft Convention and to circulate those observations and proposals to ali Member States,
Recalling also that in the same resolution it decided to
consider, at its forty-third session, the draft Convention,
with a view to its adoption at that session, and to create to
that end a working group, in the framework of the Sixth
Committee, to consider the observations and proposals
made by States,
Satisfied with the modifications in the draft Convention
proposed by the open-ended W orking Group on the draft
Convention on International Bilis of Exchange and International Promissory Notes, 24 and expressing its appreciation for the efforts of the W orking Group,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law for preparing
the text of the draft Convention on International Bilis of
Exchange and International Promissory Notes;
2. Adopts and opens for signature or accession the
United Nations Convention on International Bilis of Exchange and International Promissory Notes contained in
the annex to the present resolution;
3. Calls upan ali Governments to consider becoming
party to the Convention.
76th plenary meeting
9 December 1988

Article 2

1. An international bill of exchange is a bill of exchange which specifies at least two of the following places and indicates that any two so
specified are situated in dilferent States:
(a)

The place indicated next to the signature of the drawer;

(e)

The place indicated ncxt to the name of the drawee;

(d)

The place indicated next to the name of the payee;

(e)

The place of payment,

provided that either the place where the bill is drawn or the place of
payment is specified on the bill and that such place is situated in a
Contracting State.
2. An international promissory note is a promissory note which
specifies at least two of the following places and indica tes that any two so
specified are situated in dilferent States:
(a)

The place where the note is made;

(b)

The place indicated next to the signature of the maker;

(e)

The place indicated next to the name of the payee;

(d)

The place of payment.

provided that the place of payment is specified on the note and that such
place is situated in a Contracting State.
3. This Convention <loes not deal with the question of sanctions that
may be imposed under national law in cases where an incorrect or false
statement has been made on an instrument in respect of a place referred
to in paragraph 1 or 2 of this articlc. However, any such sanctions shall
not atfect the validity ofthe instrument or the application ofthis Convention.
Artic/e 3
l.

A bill of exchange is a written instrument which:

(a) Contains an unconditional order whereby the drawer directs the
drawee to pay a definite sum of money to the payee or to bis order;
(b)

Is payable 011 demand or at a definite time;

(e)

Is dated;

(d)

Is signed by the drawer.

2.

A promissory note 1s a written instrument which:

(a) Contains an unconditional promise whereby the maker undertakes to pay a definite sum of money to the payee or to bis order;
(b)

Is payable on demand or ata definite time:

( e)

Is dated;

(d)

Is signed by the maker.
CHAPTER 11.
SECTION ]

United Nations Convention on International Bilis of Exchange
and lnternational Promissory Notes
SPHERE OF APPLICATION AND FORM OF
THE INSTRlJMENT

The place where thc bill is drawn;

(b)

ANNEX

CHAPTER l.

281

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

INTERPRETATION

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 4

In the interpretation ofthis Convention, regard is to be had to its internat1onal character and to the need to promote uniformity in its application and the observance of good faith in international transactíons.

Article I

1. This Convention applies toan international bill of exchange when
it contains the heading "International bill of exchange (UNCITRAL
Convention).. and also contains in its text the words "International bill
of exchange (UNCITRAL Convention) ...
2. This Convention applies toan international promissory note when
it contains the heading "International promissory note (UNCITRAL
Convention)'" and also contains in its text the words "lnternational
promissory note (UNCITRAL Convention) ...
3.

This Convention does not apply to cheques.

Artic/e 5

In this Convention:
(a) "Bíll .. means an international bill of exchange governed by this
Convention;
(b) "Note .. means an international promissory note governed by this
Convention;
(e)

"Instrument"' means a bill ora note;

"Drawee"' mean, a persnn on whom a bill is drawn and who has
not accepted it;
(d)

(e) .. Payee .. means a person in whose favour the drawer directs payment to be made or to whom the maker promises to pay;
22 /bid.,

Forty-second Session. Supp/ement No. 17 (A/42/17), para.

304.
23 /bid., annex l.
24 See A/C.6/43/L.2.

(j) "Holder .. means a person in possession of an instrument in accordance with artícle 15:
(g) "Protected holder .. means a holder who meets the requirements
of artide 29:

General Assembly-l<'orty-third Scssion

282

(h) "Guarantor" means any person who undcrtakes an obligation of
guarantee under article 46, whether govcrned by paragraph 4 (b) ("guaranteed") or paragraph 4 (e) ("avaf') of article 47;
"Party" rneans a person who has signed an instrumentas drawer.
maker, acccptor. endorser m guarantor;
(i)

(j) "Maturity" mcans the time of payment referred to in paragraphs
4, 5, ó and 7 of articlc 9;
(k) "Signaturc" mcans a handwntten signature, its facsímile or an
equivalent authentication effected by any other means; "forged signature" includes a signature by thc wrongful use of such means;

(/) "Money'' or "currency" inclndes a monetary unit of account
which is established by an intergovernmental institution or by agreement
between two or more States, provided that this Convention shall apply
without prejudice to the rules of the inlergovernmental institution orto
the stipulations of the agreement.
Arride ó

For the purposes of this Convent1on, a person is considered to have
knowledge of a fact if he has actual knowledge of that factor could not
have been unaware of its existence.
SECTION 2.

!NTERPREI AT!ON ot· FORMAL REQU!REMENTS

Article 7

The sum payable by an instrumt>n1 is deemed to be a definite sum although the instrument states that it is to be paid:
(a)

With interest;

( b)

By instalments at succes,ive dales;

(e) By instalments at successive dates with a stipulation in the instrurnenl that upon default in paymc111 of anv instalment lhe unpaid balance
becomes due;
(á¡ According to arate of exchange indicated in the instrument orto
be determined as directed by !he instrument; or

(e) In a currency other than lhe currency in wh1ch the sum is expressed in the instrument.

Article 8
l. lf there is a discrepancy between the surn expressed in words and
the sum expressed in figures, the sum payable by the instrument is the
sum expressed in words.

2. Ifthe sum is expressed more than once in words, and there is a discrepancy, the ,um payable is the smallcr sum. The same rule applies if
the sum is expressed more than once in figures only, and there is a discrepancy.
3. If the sum is expressed in a currency having the same description
as that of at leas! one other State than the State where payment is to be
made, as indicated in the instrumcnt, ancl the specified currency is not
identified as the currency of any particular State, the currency is to be
considered as thc currency of the State where payment is to be made.
4. If an instrumenl states that the sum i, lo be paid with interest,
without specifying the date from which interest is to run, interest runs
from the date of the instrument.
5. A stipulation stating thal the surn is to be paid with interest is
deemed not to have been written on the instrument unless it indicates the
rate at which interest is to be pai<l.
6. A rate al which interest is to be paid may be expressed either as a
definite rate or as a variable rate. For a variable rate to qualify for this
purpose, it must vary in relation to one or more reference rates of interest
in accordance with provisions stipulated in lhc instrument and each such
reference rate must be published or otherwise available to the public and
not be subject, directly or indirectly. to unilateral determination by a person who is named in the 111strurnent at thc time the bill is drawn or the
note is made, unless thc person IS named ,rnly in !he reference rate provis1ons.

7. If the rate al which inlerest is to he paid is expressed as a variable
rate, it may be stipulated expressly 111 the instrument that such rate shall
not be less than or excecd a specified rafe of interest, or that the variations
are otherwise limited.
8. lfa variable rate <loes not qualify under paragraph 6 ofthis article
or for any reason it is not possihlc lo dekrmine the numerical value ofthe
variable rate for any period, interest shall be payable for the relevan!
period al thc rate calrnlakd in arco>rdan,·e "ilh paragraph 2 of article 70.

Arride 9

1.

An instrument is deemed to be payable on demand:

(a) Ifit states that it is payahle at sight or on demand or on presentment or if it contains words of similar import; or
(b)

If no time of payment is expressed.

2. An instrument payable ata definite time which is accepted orendorsed or guaranteed after maturity is an instrument payable on demand
as regards the acceptor, the endorser or the guarantor.
3. An irn,trument is deemed to be payable ata definite time if it states
that it is payable:
(a) On a stated date or at a fixed period after a stated date or at a
fixed period after the date of the instrument;
(/,)

At a fixed period after sight:

(e)

By instalrnents al suc,essive dates; or

(á¡ By instalments at successive dates with the stipulation in the instrument that npon default in payment ofany instalment the unpaid balance becomes due.

4. The time of payment of an instrument payable al a fixed period
after date is determined by rcference to the date of the instrument.
5. The time of payment of a bill payable ata fixed period after sight is
determined by the date of acceptance or, if the bill is dishonoured by nonacceptance, by the date of protest or, if protest is dispensed with, by the
date of dishonour.
ó. The time of payment of an instrument payable on demand is the
date on which the instrument is presented for payment.

7. The time of payment of a note paya ble al a fixed period after sight
is determined by the date ofthe visa signed by the maker on the note or, if
his visa is refused, by the date of presentment.
8. lf an instrument is drawn, or made, payable one or more months
after a stated date or after t he date of the instrument or after sight, the instrument is payable on the corresponding date of the month when payment must he made. lf there is no corresponding date, the instrument is
payable on the last day of thal monlh.
Article JO

1.

A bill may be drawn:

(a)

By two or more drawers;

(b)

Payabk to two ,,r more payees.

2.

A note may be madc:

(a)

By two or more makers;

(h)

Payablc to two or more payees.

3. If an instrument 1s payable to two or more payees in the alternative, it is payable to any nne of them and any one of them in possession of
the instrument may exercise the rights of a holder. In any other case the
inslrument is payable to al! of them and the rights of a holder may be exercised only hv ali of them.
Article l l

A bill may be drawn by the drawer:
(a)

On himself;

( b)

Payabk to his order.
SECTION J.

COMPLETION OF AN INCOMPLETF. INSTRUMENT

Article 12

An incomplete instrurnent which satisfies the requirements set out
in paragraph I of artide l and bears the signature of the drawer or the
acceptance of the drawee, or which satisfies the requirements set out in
paragraph 2 of article l and paragraph 2 (á¡ of article 3, but which lacks
other elements pertaining to one or more of the requirements set out in
articles 2 and 3, may be rnmpleted, and the instrument so completed is
etfective as a bill or a note.
l.

2. If such an instrument is .:ompleted without authorily or otherwise
than in accordance with the authority given:
(a) A party who s1gncd the instrument beforc the completion may invoke such lack of authority as a defencc against a holder who had knowlcdge of such lack of authority when he hecame a holder;
(h) A party who signcd the instrument after the completion is liablc
according to thc terms <>f 1hc inslrument so complcted.

IX.
CHAPTER III.

Articlc 20

TRANSFER

Artícle 13

An instrument is transferred:

Ifthere are two or more endorsements, it is presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that each endorsement was made in the order in which it
appears on the instrument.

(a) By endorsement and delivery of the instrument by the endorser
to the endorsee; or
(b) By mere delivery of the instrument if the last endorsement is in
blank.
Article 14

l. An endorsement must be written on the instrument or on a slip affixed thereto ("allonge"). It must be signed.

2.

283

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

An endorsement may be:

(a) In blank, that is, by a signature alone or by a signature accompanied by a statement to the effect that the instrument is payable to a person in possession of it;

Article 21

lf an endorsement contains the words "for collection", "for
deposit'º, "value in collectionº', "by procuration", "pay any bank". or
words of similar import authorizing the endorsee to collect the instrument, the endorsee is a holder who:
l.

(a)

May exercise ali rights arising out of the instrument;

(b)

May endorse the instrument only for purposes of collection;

(e) Is subject only to the daims and defences which may be set up
against the endorser.
2. The endorser for collection is not liable on the instrument to any
subsequent holder.

(b) Special, that is, by a signature accompanied by an indication of
the person to whom the instrument is payable.

Article 22

3. A signature alone, other than that of the drawee, is an endorsement only if placeq on the back of the instrument.

1. lf an endorsement contains the words "value in security'º, "value
in pledge'º, or any other words indicating a pledge, the endorsee is a
holder who:

Article 15

l.

A person is a holder if he is:

(a)

The payee in possession of the instrument; or

(b) In possession of an instrument which has been endorsed to him,
or on which the last endorsement is in blank, and on which there appears
an uninterrupted series of endorsements, even if any endorsement was
forged or was signed by an agent without authority.
2. If an endorsement in blank is followed by another endorsement,
the person who signed this last endorsement is deemed to be an endorsee
by the endorsement in blank.
3. A person is not prevented from being a holder by the fact that the
instrument was obtained by him or any previous holder under circumstances, including incapacity or fraud, duress or mistake of any kind, that
would give rise to a claim to, or a defence against liability on, the instrument.
Article 16

(a)

May cxercise ali nghts arising out of the instrument;

(b)

May endorse the instrument only for purposes of collection;

(e) Is subject only to the claims and defences specified in article 28 or
article 30.
2. lf such an endorsee endorses for collection, he is not liahle on the
instrument to any subsequent holder.
Artícle 23

The holder of an instrument may transfer it to a prior party orto the
drawee in accordance with article 13; however, if the transferee has
previously been a holder of the instrument, no endorsement is requircd,
and any endorsement which would preven! him from qualifying as a
holder may be struck out
Article 24

An instrument may be transferred in accordance with article 13 after
maturity, except by the drawee, the acceptor or the maker.

The holder of an instrument on which the last endorsement is in blank
may:
(a) Further endorse it either by an endorsement in blank or by aspecial endorsement;
(b) Convert the blank endorsement into a special endorsement by indicating in the endorsement that the instrument is payable to himself or
to sorne other specified person; or

Article 25

If an endorsement is forged, the person whose endorsement is
forged, ora party who signed the instrument before the forgery, has the
right to recover compensation for any damage that he may have suffered
because of the forgery against:
l.

(a)

The forger;

(e) Transfer the instrument in accordance with subparagraph (b) of
article 13.

(b) The person to whom the instrument was directly transferred by
the forger;

Article 17

(e) A party ür the drawee who paid thc instrument to the forger directly or through one or more endorsees for collection.

1. If the drawer or the maker has inserted in the instrument such
words as "not negotiable", "not transferable", "not to order", "pay (X)
only", or words of similar import, the instrument may not be transferred
except for purposes of collection, and any endorsement, even if it does
not contain words authorizing the endorsee to collect the instrument, is
deemed to be an endorsement for collection.
2. If an endorsement contains the words "not negotiable", "not
transferable", "not to order", "pay (X) only", or words of similar import, the instrument may not be transferred further except for purposes
of collection, and any subsequent endorsement, even if it does not contain words authorizing the endorsee to collect the instrument, is deemed
to be an endorsement for collection.
Article 18

l.

An endorsement must be unconditional.

2. A conditional endorsement transfers the instrument whether or
not the condition is fulfilled. The condition is ineffective as to those parties and transferees who are subsequent to the endorsee.

2. However, an endorsee for collection is not liable under paragraph 1 of this article if he is without knowledge of the forgery:
(a) At the time he pavs the principal or advises him ofthe receipt of
payment; or
(b)

At the time he receives payment, if this is later,

unless his lack of knowledge is dueto his failure to act in good faith orto
exercise reasonable care.
3. Furthermore, a party or the drawee who pays an instrument is not
liable under paragraph 1 of this article if, at the time he pays the instrument, he is without knowledge of the forgery, unless his lack of knowledge is due to his failure to act in good faith or to exercise reasonable
care.

4. Excepta, against the forger, the damages recoverable under paragraph 1 ofthis article ma; not cxceed the amount refcrred to in article 70
or art icle 71
Arríe/e 26

Article 19

An endorsement in respect of a part of the sum due under the instrument is ineffective as an endorsement.

1. lfan endorsement is made by an agent without authority or power
to bind his principal in the matter, the principal, ora party who signed
the instrument hefore sud1 endorsement, has the right to recover com-

General Assembly-Forty-third Session

:284

pensation for any damage that he may have suffered because of such endorsement against:
(a)

The agent;

(b) The person to whom the instrument was directly transferred by
the agent;
(e) A party or the drawee who paid the instrument to the agent directly or through one or more endorsees for collection.

2. However, an endorsee for collection is not liable under paragraph I of this article if he is without knowledge that the endorsement
does not bind the principal:

(a) He was without knowledge of a defence against liabihty on the instrument referred to in paragraphs 1 (a), (b), (e) and (e) of article 28;
(b)
He was without knowledge of a valid claim to the instrument of
any person;

(e) He was withoul knowledge of the fact that it had been dishonoured by non-acceptance or by non-payment;
(<{) The time-limit provided by article 55 for presentment of that instrument for payment had not expired;
(e) He did not obtain the instrument by fraud or theft or participate
in a fraud or theft cotKc•rriing it.

(a) At the time he pays the principal or advises him ofthe receipt of
payment; or

(b)

At the time he receives payment. if this is later,

unless his lack of knowledge is dueto his failure to act in good faith orto
exercise reasonable care.
3. Furthermore, a party or the drawee who pays an instrument is not
liable under paragraph I of this article if, at the time he pays the instrument, he is without knowledge that the endorsement does not bind the
principal, unless his lack of knowledge is due to his failure to act in good
faith or to exercise reasonable care.
4_ Exceptas against the agent, the damages recoverable under paragraph I ofthis article may not exceed thc amount referred to in article 70
or article 71.
CHAPTER IV.
SECTION

1.

RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES

THE RIGHTS OF A HOLDER AND OF A PROTECTED HOLDER

Ariicle 27

1. The holder of an instrument has ali the rights confcrred on him by
this Convention against the parties to the instrument.
2.
13.

The holder may transfer the instrument in accordance with article

1.

A party may set up against a holder who is nota protected holder:

Ariicle 28
(a) Any defence that may be set up against a protected holder in accordance with paragraph 1 of article 30;
(b) Any defence based on the underlying transaction between himself and the drawer or between himself and his transferee, but only if the
holder took the instrument with knowledge of such defence or if he obtained the instrument by fraud or theft or participated al any time in a
fraud or theft concerning it;

Article JO

A party may not sl't up against a protected holder any defence exc·cpt
(a) Defences under paragraph I of article 33, article 34, paragraph 1
of article 35, paragraph 3 of article 36, paragraph l of article 53, paragraph I ofarticle 57, paragraph 1 ofarticle 63 and article 84 ofthis Convcntinn;

(h) Defenccs based on the underlying transaction between himself
and such holder or arising from any fraudulent act on the part of such
holder in obtaining the signature on the instrument of that party;
(e) Defences based on his incapacity to incur liability on the instrument or on the fact that he signed without knowledge that his signature
made him a party to the instrument, provided that his lack ofknowledge
was nol due to his negligence and provided that he was fraudulently induced so to sign.
2. The rights toan instrument ofa protected holder are not subject to
any claim to the instrument on the part of any person, except a valid
claim arising from the underlying transaction between himself and the
person by whom the claim is raised.
ArticlcJI

1. The transfer of an instrument by a protected holder vests in any
subscquent holder the nghts to and on the instrument which the proteded holder had.
2.

(h)

(e)

Any other defence available under this Convention.

2. The rights to an instrument of a holder who is not a protected
holder are subject to any vahd claim to the instrument on the part of any
person, but only ifhe took the instrument with knowledge ofsuch claim
or if he obtained the instrument by fraud or theft or participated at any
time in a fraud or theft concerning it.
3. A holder who takes an instrument after the expiration ofthe timelimit for presentment for payment is subject to any claim to, or defence
against liability on, the instrument to which his transferor is subject.

Articlc 32

SECTI01'i 2.

A.

The third person asserted a vahd claim to thc instrument; or

(b) The holder acquired the instrument by theft or forged the signature of the payee oran endorsee, or participatcd in the theft or the forgery.
Articlc 29

"Protected holder" means the holder of an instrument which was
complete when he took it nr which was incomplete within thc mcaning of
paragraph 1 of articlc 12 and was completcd in accordance with
authority given, provided that when he became a holder:

LIABILITIES OF THE PARTIES

General provisions
Articl<' 33

Subject lo thc prmisions of articles .14 and 36, a pcrson is not liable '"' an instrument unless he signs it.
2. A person who stgns an mstrument in a name which is not his own
is liable as if he had signed it in his own name.
Article 34

A forged signature on an instrument does not impose any liability on
the person whose signature was forged. Howevcr, if he consents to be
bound by the forged signature or represents that it is his own, he is liable
as if he had signed thc instrument himself.

4. A party may not raise as a dcfence against a holder who is not a
protected holder the fact that a third person has a claim to the instrument
unless:
(a)

He has previously been a holder, hut not a protected holder.

Every holder is presumed to be a protected holder unless the contrary
is proved.

(e) Any defence arising from the circumstances as a result of which
he became a party, but only ifthe holder took the instrument with knowledge oí such defence or if he obtained the instrument by fraud or theft or
participated at any time in a fraud or theft concerning it;
(d) Any defence which may be raised against an action in contrae!
between himself and the holder;

Those rights are 1101 vested in a subsequent holder if:

(a) He participated in a transaction which gives rise to a claim to, or
a defence agaimt liability on, the instrument;

Article 35

l.

lf an instrument "materially altered:

(a)
A party who sigm it after the material alteration is hable according lo the term, of the altered text;

(h) A party who sign, it before the material alteration is hable accnrding to the terms of the original text. However, if a party makes, authorizes or assents to a material alteration, he is liable according to the
tcrm, of thc altered texl
2. A signature is prcsumed to have been placed on the instrument
after the material alteralton unless the contrary is proved.
_1
011

Any altcration is material which modifies thc writlen undertaking
the instrumcnl of a111 party in any respect.

IX.
Article 36
l.

An instrument may be signed by an agent.

2. The signature of an agent placed by him on an instrument with the
authority of his principal and showing on the instrument that he is signing in a representative capacity for that named principal, or the signature
of a principal placed on the instrument by an agent with his authority,
imposes liability on the principal and not on the agent.

3. A signature placed on an instrument by a person as agent but who
lacks authority to sign or exceeds his authority, or by an agent who has
authority to sign but who <loes not show on the instrument that he is
signing in a representative capacity for a named person, or who shows on
the instrument that he is signing in a representative capacity but <loes not
name the person whom he represents, imposes liability on the person
signing and not on the person whom he purports to represen!.
4. The question whether a signature was placed on the instrument in
a representative capacity may be detcrmined only by reference to what
appears on the instrument.
5. A person who is Hable pursuant to paragraph 3 of this article and
who pays the instrument has the same rights as the person for whom he
purported to act would have had if that person had paid the instrument.
Article 37

The order to pay contained in a bill <loes not of itself operate asan assignment to the payee offunds made available for payment by the drawer
with the drawee.
B.

by the acceptor, the drawer or the holder may insert the date of acceptance.
4. If a bill drawn payable at a fixed period after sight is dishonoured
by non-acceptance and the drawce subsequently accepts it, the holder is
entitled to have the acceptance dated as of the date on which the bill was
dishonoured.
Articlc 43

l. An acceptance must be unqualified. An acceptance is qualified ifil
is conditional or varíes the terms of the bill.
2. lf the drawee stipulates in the bill that his acceptance is subject to
qualification:
(a) He is nevertheless bound according to the terms of his qualified
acceptance;
(b)

l. The drawer engages that upon dishonour of the bill by nonacceptance or by non-payment, and upon any necessary protest, he will
pay the bill to the holder, orto any endorser or any endorser's guarantor
who takes up and pays the bill.

2. The drawer may exclude or limit his own liability for acceptance
or for payment by an express stipulation in the bill. Such a stipulation is
effective only with respect to the drawer. A stipulation excluding or limiting liability for payment is effective only if another party is or becomes
hable on the bill.

4. An acceptance indicating that payment will be made ata particular address or by a particular agent is not a qualified acceptance, provided that:
(a)

The place in which payment is to be made is not changed;

( b)

The bill is not drawn payable by another agent.
E.

l. The maker engages that he will pay the note in accordance with its
terms to the holder, or to any party who takes up and pays the note.

2. The maker may not exclude or limit his own liability by a stipulation in the note. Any such stipulation is ineffective.

Artic/e 44

The endorser engages that upon dishonour of the instrument by
non-acceptance or by non-payment, and upon any necessary protest, he
will pay the instrument to the holder, orto any subsequent endorser or
any endorser's guarantor who takes up and pays the instrument.
2. An endorser may exclude or limit his own liability by an express
stipulation in the instrument. Such a stipulation is effective only with respect to that endorser.
F.

Article 40
l.

The drawee is not liable on a bill until he accepts it.

2. The acceptor engages that he will pay the bill in accordance with
the terms of his acceptance to the holder. or to any party who takes up
and pays the bill.
Article 41
l.

An acceptance must be written on the bill and may be effected:

(a) By the signature of the drawee accompanied by the word "accepted" or by words of similar import; or
(b)

2.
bill.

The transferor by endorsement or by
mere delivery
Article 45

Unless otherwise agreed, a person who transfers an instrument, by
endorsement and delivery or by mere delivery, represents to the holder to
whom he transfers the instrument that:
l.

(a)
ture;
( b)

The drawee and the acceptor

The instrument <loes not bear any forged or unauthorized signaThe instrument has not been materially altered;

(e) At the time of transfer, he has no knowledge of any fact which
would impair the right of the transferee to payment of the instrument
against the acceptor of a bill or, in the case of an unaccepted bill, the
drawer. or against the maker of a note.
2. Liability of the transferor under paragraph l of this article is incurred only if the transferee took the instrument without knowledge of
the matter giving rise to such liability.
3. lf the transferor is liable under paragraph l of this article, the
transferee may recover. even before maturity, the amount paid by him to
thc lransferor, with interest calculated in accordance with article 70,
against return of the instrument.
G

By the signature alonc of the drawee.

Article 42

2. A bill may be accepted beforc, at or after maturity, or after it has
been dishonoured by non-acceptance or by non-payment.
3. If a bill drawn payable ata fixed period after sight, ora bill which
must be presented for acceptance beforc a specified date, is acccptcd, the
acceptor must indicate thc date ofhis acceptancc; failing such indication

The guarantor
Article 46

An acceptance may be written 011 the front or 011 the back of thc

l. An incomplete bill which satisfies the requirements set out in paragraph 1 of article 1 may be accepted by the drawee before it has been
signed by the drawer, or while otherwise incomplete.

The endorser

l.

The maker
Article 39

D.

The bill is dishonoured by non-acceptance.

3. An acceptance relating to only a part ofthe sum payable is a qualified acceptance. lf the holder takes such an acceptance, the bill is dishonoured by non-acceptance only as to the remaining part.

The drawer
Article 38

C.

285

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

l. Payment of an instrument, whether or not it has been accepted.
may be guaranteed. as to the whole or part ofits amount, for the account
of a party or the drawee. A guarantee may be given by any person. who
may nr may not already be a party.
2. A guarantec must he written on the im,trument or on a slip atfixed
thereto ("a/longe").
3. A guarantee is expressed by the words "guaranteed", "avaf'.
"good as avaf" or words ofsimilar import, accompanied by the signaturc
of the guarantor. For the purposes of this Convention, the words "prior
endorsements guaranteed" or v.ords of similar import do not constitute a
guarantee.

General Assembly-Forty-third Session

286

4. A guarantee may be effected by a signature alone on the front of
the instrument. A signature alone on the front of the instrument, other
than that of the maker, the drawer or the drawee, is a guarantee.
5. A guarantor may specify the person for whom he has become
guarantor. In the absence of such specification, the person for whom he
has become guarantor is the acceptor or the drawee in the case of a bill,
and the maker in the case of a note.
6. A guarantor may not raise as a defence to his liability the fact that
he signed the instrument before it was signed by the person for whom he
is a guarantor, or while the instrument was incomplete.
Article 47
l. The liability of a guarantor on the instrument is ofthe same nature
as that of the party for whom he has become guarantor.

2. lfthe person for whom he has become guarantor is the drawee, the
guarantor engages:
(a) To pay the bill at maturity to the holder, or to any party who
takes up and pays the bill;
(b) lf the bill is payable at a definite time, upon dishonour by nonacceptance and upon any necessary protest, to pay it to the holder, or to
any party who takes up and pays the bill.
3. In respect of defences that are personal to himself, a guarantor
may set up:
(a) Against a holder who is not a protected holder only those defences which he may set up under paragraphs 1, 3 and 4 of article 28;
(b) Against a protected holder only those defences which he may set
up under paragraph 1 of article 30.
4. In respect of defences that may be raised by the person for whom
he has become a guarantor:
(a) A guarantor may set up against a holder who is nota protected
holder only those defences which the person for whom he has become a
guarantor may set up against such holder under paragraphs 1, 3 and 4 of
article 28;
( b) A guarantor who expresses his guarantee by the words "guaranteed", "payment guaranteed" or "collection guaranteed", or words of
similar import, may set up against a protected holder only those defences
which the person for whom he has become a guarantor may set up
against a protected holder under paragraph 1 of article 30;
(e) A guarantor who expresses his guarantee by the words "avar' or
"good as avar• may set up against a protected holder only:

PRESENTMENT, DISHONOUR BY NON-ACCEPTANCE
OR NON-PAYMENT, AND RECOURSE

SECTION J.
PRESENTMENT FOR ACCEPTANCE AND
DISHONOUR BY NON-ACCEPTANCE

Article 49
A bill may be presented for acceptance.
2. A bill must be presented for acceptance:
(a) If the drawer has stipulated in the bill that it must be presented
for acceptance;
(b) If the bill is payable at a fixed period after sight; or
(e) If the bill is payable elsewhere than al the residence or place of
business of the drawee, unless it is payable on demand.
Article 50
1. The drawer may stipulate in the bill that it must not be presented
for acceptance befare a specified date or before the occurrence of a specified event. Except where a bill must be presented for acceptance under
paragraph 2 (b) or (e) of article 49, the drawer may stipulate that it must
not be presented for acceptance.
2. If a bill is presented for acceptance notwithstanding a stipulation
permitted under paragraph 1 ofthis article and acceptance is refused, the
bill is not thereby dishonoured.
3. If the drawee accepts a bill notwithstanding a stipulation that it
must not be presented for acceptance, the acceptance is effective.
Article 51
A bill is duly presented for acceptance if it is presented in accordance
with the following rules:
(a) The holder must present the bill to the drawee on a business day
al a reasonable hour;
(b) Presentment for acceptance may be made to a person or
authority other than the drawee if that person or authority is entitled under the applicable law to accept the bill;
(e) If a bill is payable on a fixed date, presentment for acceptance
must be made befare or on that date;
(d) A bill payable on demand or ata fixed period after sight must be
presented for acceptance within one year of its date;
(e) A bill in which the drawer has stated a date or time-limit far presentment for acceptancc mu,t be presented on the stated date or within
the stated time-limit.
Article 52
J. A necessary or optional presen tment for acceptance is dispensed
with if:
(a) The drawee is dead, orno longer has the power freely to deal with
his assets by reason ofhis insolvency, or is a fictitious person, or is a person not having capacity to incur liability on the instrument asan acceptor; or

(i)

The defence, under paragraph 1 (b) of article 30, that the protected holder obtained the signature on the instrument of the person for whom he has become a guarantor by a fraudulent act;

(ii)

The defence, under article 53 or article 57, that the instrument
was not presented for acceptance or for payment;

(iii)

The defence, under article 63, that the instrument was not duly
protested for non-acceptance or for non-payment;

(b) The drawee is a corporation, partnership, association or other legal entity which has ceased to exist.
2. A necessary presentment for acceptance is dispensed with if:

(iv)

The defence, under article 84, that a right of action may no longer
be exercised against the person for whom he has become guarantor;

(a) A bill is payable on a fixed date, and presentment for acceptance
cannot be effected before or on that date dueto circumstances which are
beyond the control of the holder and which he could neither avoid nor

(d) A guarantor who is nota bank or other financia! institution and
who expresses his guarantee by a signature alone may set up against a
protected holder only the defences referred to in subparagraph (b) ofthis
paragraph;

(b) A bill is payable ata fixed period after sight, and presentment for
acceptance cannot be effected within one year of its date due to circumstances which are beyond the control of the holder and which he could
neither avoid nor overcome.

(e) A guarantor which is a bank or other financia! institution and
~hich expresses its guarantee by a signature alone may set up against a
protected holder only the defenccs referred to in subparagraph (e) ofthis
paragraph.

3. Subject to paragraphs 1 and 2 of this article, dela y in a necessary
presentment for acceptance is excused, but presentment for acceptance is
not dispensed with, if the bill is drawn with a stipulation that it must be
presented for acceptance within a stated time-limit, and the delay in presentment for acceptance is caused by circumstances which are beyond
the control of the holder and which he could neither avoid nor overcome.
When the cause of the dela y ceases to operate, presentment must be made
with reasonable diligence.

Anicle 48

1. Payment of an instrument by the guarantor in accordance with article 72 discharges the party for whom he became guarantor of his liability on the instrument to the extent of the amount paid.

.r

CHAPTER V.

2. The guarantor who pays the instrument may recover from the
party for whom he has become guarantor and from the parties who are liable on it to that party the amount paid and any interest.

overcome; or

Article 53

If a bill which must be presented for acceptance is not so presented, the drawer, the endorsers and their guarantors are not liable on
the bi!L
l.

IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Com_01i_t.tec_ _ __

2. Failure to present a bill far ac,·eptance does not discharge the
guarantor of the drawee of liability on the bill.

(iii)

287

lf rnade oulside the instrument, binds only the party making it
and benefits only a holder in whose favour it was rnade;

A bill is considered to be dishonoured by non-acceptance:

( b) lf an instrurnent is not payable on demand, and the cause of delay
in rnaking presentrnent referred to in paragraph I of this article continuc, tP operate heynnd thirty days aftcr rnaturity;

(a) If the drawee, upon due presentrnent, expressly refuses to accept
the bill or acceptance cannot be obtained with reasonable diligence or if
the holder cannot obtain the acceptance to which he is entitled under this
Convention;

(e) lf an instrurnent is payable on dernand, and the cause of delay in
rnaking presentrnent referred to in paragraph I of this article continues
to operate beyond thirty days after the expiration of the tirne-lirnit for
presentrnent for payment;

(b) If presentment for acceptance is dispensed with pursuant to article 52, unless the bill is in fact accepted.
2. (a) If a bill is dishonoured by non-acceptance in accordance with
paragraph 1 (a) of this article, the holder rnay exercise an irnrnediate
right of recourse against the drawer, the endorsers and their guarantors.
subject to the provisions of article 59.
(b) If a bill is dishonoured by non-acceptance in accordance with
paragraph 1 (b) of this article, the holder rnay exercise an irnrnediate
right of recourse against the drawer, the endorsers and their guarantors.

(d) If the drawee, the rnaker or the acceptor has no longer the power
freely to deal with his assets by reason of his insolvency, or is a fictitious
person ar a person not having capacity to rnake payrnent, or if the
drawee, the rnaker or the acceptor is a corporation, partnership, association or other legal cntity wh1ch has ceased to exist;

Article 54
l.

(e) If a bill is dishonoured by non-acceptance in accordance with
paragraph 1 ofthis article, the holder rnay clairn payrnent frorn the guarantor of the drawee upan any necessary protest.
3. If a bill payable on dernand is presented for acceptance, but
acceptance is refused, it is not considered to be dishonoured by nonacceptance.
SECTION 2. PRESENTMENT FOR PA YMENT AND
DISHONOUR BY NON-PA YMENT

Article 55

An instrurnent is duly presented for payrnent if it is pre,ented in
accordance with the following rules:
(a) The holder must present the instrument to the drawee or to the
acceptor or to the maker on a business day at a reasonable hour;
(b) A note signed by two or more rnakers rnay be presented to any
one of thern, unless the note clearly indicates otherwise;
(e) If the drawee ar the acceptor or the rnaker is dead, presentment
rnust be rnade to the persons who under the applicable law are his heirs
or the persons entitled to adrninister his estate;
(d) Presentrnent for payrnent rnay be rnadc to a person or authority
other than the drawee, the acceptor or the rnaker if that person or
authority is entitled under the applicable law to pay the instrurnent;
(e) An instrurnent which is not payable on dernand must be presented for payment on the date of rnaturity or on one of the two business
days which follow;
(f) An instrurnent which is payable on dernand rnust be presented for
payrnent within one year of its date;

(e) If there is no place at which the instrurnent rnust be presented in
accordance with subparagraph (g) of article 55.

3. Presentrnent for payrnent is also dispensed with as regards a bill, if
the h1ll has been protested for dishonour by non-acceptance.
.4rticle 57
l. lf an instrurnent is not duly presented for payrnent, the drawer,
the endorsers and their guarantors are not liable on it.

2. Failurc to present an instrurnent for payrnent does not discharge
the acceptor, the rnaker and their guarantors or the guarantor of the
drawee of liability <>n it.
Article 58
l.

An instrurnent is considered to be dishonoured by non-payrnent:

(a) Jf pa}rnent is refused u pon due presentrnent or if the holder cannot ohtain the payrnent to which he is entitled under this Convention;
(b) lf presentment for payment is dispensed with pursuant to paragraph 2 of article 56 and the instrument is unpaid at rnaturity.

2. lfa bill is dishonoured by non-payrnent, the holder rnay, subject to
the provisions of article 59, exercise a right of recourse against the
clrawer. the endorsers and their guarantors.
él. lf a note is dishonoured by non-payment, the holder rnay, subject
to lhe provisions of article 59, exercise a right of recourse against the endorser, and thcir guarantors.
SF< TI01' 3.

RECOURSE

Article 59

If an instrurnent is dishonoured by non-acceptance or by nonpayrnent, the holder may exercise a right of recourse only after the instrurnent has been duly protested for dishonour in accordance with the
provisions of :irticles 60 to b2.

(g)

An instrurnent rnust be presented for payrnent:

(i)

At the place of payrnent specified on the instrurnent;

(ii)

If no place of payrnent is specified, at the address of the drawee or
the acceptor or the rnaker indicated in the instrument; or

Article 60

If no place of payrnent is specified and the address of the drawee
or the acceptor or the rnaker is not indicated, al the principal
place ofbusiness or habitual residence ofthe drawee or the acceptor or the rnaker;

A protest is a staternent of dishonour drawn up al the place where
the instrurnent has been dishonoured and signed and dated by a person
auth,irized in thal respect bv the law of that place. The staternent rnust
specify:

(iii)

(h) An instrurnent which is presented ata clearing-house is duly presented for payrnent if the law of the place where the clearing-house is
located or the rules or custorns of that clearing-house so provide.
Articlc 56
l. Delay in rnaking presentrnent for payrnent is excused if the dela y
is caused by circurnstances which are beyond the control of the holder
and which he could neither avoid nor overcorne. When the cause of thc
delay ceases to operate, presentrnent rnust be rnade with reasonable diligence.

A.

Protest

(a)

The person at whose request the instrurnent is protested;

(b)

The place of protest;

(e) The dernand rnade and the answer given, if any, or the fact that
the drawee or the acceptor or the rnaker could not be found.
2.

A protest may be rnade:

(a)

On thc instrument or on a slip affixed thereto ("allonge"); or

As a separate docurnent, in which case it rnust clearly identify the
instrurnent that has heen dishonoured.
(b)

(i)

If rnade on the instrurnent by thc drawer, binds any subsequent
party and benefits any holder;

J. Unless the instrurnenl stipulates that protest mus! be rnadc, a protest may be replaced by a declaration written on the instrurnent and
signed and dated by the drawee or the acceptor or the rnaker, or, in the
case of an instrurnent dornICiled with a narned person far payrnent, by
that narned person; the declaration must be to the etfect that acceptance
or payrnent is refusect.

(ii)

Ifrnade on the instrurnent by a party other than the drawer, binds
only that party but benefits any holder;

4. A declaration made i11 accordance with paragraph J ofthis article
is a protest for the purpose of this Convention.

2.

Presentrnent for payrnent is dispensed with:

(a) If the drawer, an endorser or a guarantor has expressly waived
presentrnent; such waiver:

General Assembly-Forty-third Session

288
Artícle 61

Article 67

Protest for dishonour of an instrument by non-acceptance or by nonpayment must be made on the day on which the instrument is dishonoured or on one of the four business day, which follow.

Delay in giving notice of dishonour is excused if the delay is
caused by circumstance, which are beyond the control of the person required to give notice, and which he could neither avoid nor overcome.
When the cause of the dela y ceases to operate, notice must be given with
reasonable diligence.

Article 62

l.

2.

Notice of dishonour is dispensed with:

(a)

Jf, after the exercise of reasonable diligence. notice cannot be

l. Delay in protesting an instrument for dishonour is excused if the
delay is caused by circumstances which are beyond the control of the
holder and which he could neither avoid nor overcome. When the cause
of the delay ceases to opera te, protest must be made with reasonable diligence.

g1ven;

2. Protest for dishonour by non-acceptance or by non-payment is
dispensed with:

(i)

If made on the instrument by the drawer, binds any subsequent
party and benefits any holder;

(ii)

Ifmade on the instrument by a party other than the drawer, binds
only that party but benefits any holder;

(iii)

If made outside the instrument, binds only the party making it
and benefits only a holder in whose favour it was made;

(a) lf the drawer, an endorser ora guarantor has expressly waived
protest; such waiver:
(i)

lf made on the instrument by the drawer, binds any subsequent
party and benefits any holder;

(ii)

lfmade on the instrument by a party other than the drawer, hinds
only that party but henefits any holder;

(iii)

If made outside the instrument, binds only the party making it
and benefits only a holder in whose favour it was made;

(b)

lf the cause of the delay in making protest referred to in para-

graph 1 of this article continues to operate beyond thirty days after the
date of dishonour;
(e) As regards the drawer of a hill, if the drawer and the drawee or
the acceptor are the same person;

(b) If the drawer, an endorser ora guarantor has expressly waived
notice of dishonour; such waiver:

(e) As regards the drawer of the bill, if the drawer and the drawee or
the acceptor are the same person.

Article 68

lf a person who is required to give notice of dishonour fails to give it to
a party who is entitled to receive it, he is liable for any damages which
that party may suffer from such failure, provided that such damages do
not exceed the amount referred to in article 70 or article 71.
SECrION 4.

(el) If presentment for acceptance or for payment is dispensed with in
accordance with article 52 or paragraph 2 of article 56.

AMOUNT PAYABLE

Article 69

l. If an instrument which must be protested for non-acceptance or
for non-payment is not duly protested, the drawer, the endorsers and
their guarantors are not hable on it.

1. The holder may exercise his rights on the instrument against any
one party, or severa! or ali parties, liable on it and is not obliged to observe the order in which the parties have become bound. Any party who
takes up and pays the instrument may exercise his rights in the same
manner against parties liahle to him.

2. Failure to protest an instrument does not discharge the acceptor,
the maker and their guarantors or the guarantor ofthe drawee ofliability
on it.

2. Proceedings against a party do not preclude proceedings against
any other party, whether or not subsequent to the party originally proceeded against.

Article 63

B.

Noticc of dishonour
Article 64

1. The holder, upon dishonour of an instrument by non-acceptance
or by non-payment, must give notice of such dishonour:
(a)

To the drawer and the last endorser;

(b) To ali other endorsers and guarantors whose addresses the holder
can ascertain on the hasis of information contained in the instrument.

2. An endorser ora guarantor who receives notice must give notice
of dishonour to the last party preceding him and liable on the instrument.

Article 70

I.

(b)

After maturity:

(i)

The amount of the instrument with interest, if interest has been
stipulated for, to the date of maturity;

(ii)

Ifinterest has been stipulated to be paid after maturity, interest at
the rate stipulated, or, in the absence of such stipulation, interest
at the rate specified in paragraph 2 ofthis article, calculated from
the date of presentment on the sum specified in subparagraph (b)
(i) of this paragraph;

(iii)

Any expenses of protest and of the notices given by him;

3. Notice of dishonour operates for the benefit of any party who has a
right of recourse on the instrument against the party notified.
Article 65

1. Notice of dishonour may be given in any form whatever and in any
terms which identify the instrument and state that it has been dishonoured. The return of the dishonoured instrument is sufficient notice,
provided it is accompanied by a statement indica1ing that it has been dishonoured.
2. Notice of dishonour is duly given if it is communicated or sent to
the party to be notified by means appropriate in t he circumstances,
whether or not it is received by that party.
3. The burden of proving that notice has been duly given rests upon
the person who is required to give such notice.
Artíc/e 66

Notice of dishonour mus! be given within the two business days which
follow:
(a) The day of protest or, if pro test is dispensed with, the day of dishonour; or
(b)

The day of receipt of notice of dishonour.

The holder may recover from any party liable:

(a) At maturity: the amount of the instrument with interest, if interest has been stipulated for;

(e)

Before maturity.

(i)

The amount of the instrument with interest, if interest has been
stipulated for, to the date of payment; or, if no interest has been
stipulated for, subject to a discount from the date of payment to
the date of maturity, calculated in accordance with paragraph 4
of this article;

(ii)

Any expenses of protest and of the notices given by him.

2. The rate of interest shall be the rate that would bi, recoverable in
legal proceedings taken in the jurisdiction where the instrument is payahle.
3. Nothing in paragraph 2 of this article prevents a court from
awarding damages or compensation for additional loss caused to the
holder by reason of dela y in paymen!.
4. The discoun1 shall be at the official rate (discount rate) or other
similar appropriate rate effective on the date when recourse is exercised
at the place where the holder has his principal place ofbusiness, or, ifhe
<loes not have a place ofbusiness, his habitual residence, or, ifthere is no
such rate, then al such rateas is reasonahle in the circumstanccs.

IX.
Article 71

A party who pays ao instrument and is thereby discharged in whole or
in part of his liability on the instrument may recover from the parties liable to him:
(a)

The entire sum which he has paid;

Interest on that sum at the rate specified in paragraph 2 of article 70, from the date on which he made payment;
(b)
(e)

Any expenses of the notices given by him.
CHAPTER VI.
SECTION

l.

(b) The holder mus! give ,uch party a certified copy of the instrument and any necessary authenticated proles! in order to enable such
party to exercise a right on the instrument.
5. The drawee or a party making partía] payment may require that
mention of such payment be made on the instrument and that a receipt
therefor be given to him.
6. lf the balance is paid, the person who receives it and who is in
possession of the instrument must deliver to the payor the receipted instrument and any authenticated protest.
Article 74

DISCHARGE

DISCHARGE BY PAYMENT

Article 72

l. A party is discharged of liability on the instrument when he pays
the holder, ora party subsequent to himselfwho has paid the instrument
and is in possession of it, the amount due pursuant to article 70 or article 71:
(a)

At or after maturity; or

(b)

Befare maturity, upon dishonour by non-acceptance.

2. Payment befare maturity other than under paragraph 1 (b) ofthis
article does not discharge the party making the payment of his liability
on the instrument except in respect of the person to whom payment was
made.
3. A party is not discharged of Jiability if he pays a holder who is not
a protected holder, ora party who has taken up and paid the instrument,
and knows at the time of payment that the holder or that party acquired
the instrument by theft or farged the signature of the payee oran endorsee, or participated in the theft or the fargery.
4. (a) A person receiving payment of an instrument must, unless
agreed otherwise, deliver:
(i)

To the drawee making such payment, the instrument;

(ii)

To any other person making such payment, the instrument, a receipted account, and any protest.

(b) In the case of an instrument payable by instalments at successive
dates, the drawee or a party making a payment, other than payment of
the last instalment, may require that mention of such payment be made
on the instrument or on a slip affixed thereto ("allonge") and that a receipt therefor be given to him.

(e) If an instrument payable by instalments at successive dates is dishonoured by non-acceptance or by non-payment as to any of its instalments anda party, upon dishonour, pays the instalment, the holder who
receives such payment must give the party a certified copy of the instrument and any necessary authenticated protest in order to enable such
party to exercise a right on the instrument.
(á) The person from whom payment is demanded may withhold
payment if the person demanding payment does not deliver the instrument to him. Withholding payment in these circumstances does not constitute dishonour by non-payment under article 58.

(e) Ifpayment is made but the person paying, other than the drawee,
fails to obtain the instrument, such person is discharged but the discharge cannot be set upas a defence against a protected holder to whom
the instrument has been subsequently transferred.

J. The holder may refuse to take payment at a place other than the
place where the instrument was presented for payment in accordance
with article 55.
2. In such case if payment is not made at the place where the instrument was presented for payment in accordance with article 55, the instrument is considered to be dishonoured by non-payment.
Article 75

1. An instrument must he paid in the currency in which the sum payable is expressed.
2. lf the sum payable is expressed in a monetary unit of account
within the meaning of subparagraph (f) of article 5 and the monetary
unit of account is transferable between the person making payment and
the person receiving it, then, unless the instrument specifies a currency of
payment, payment shall be made by transfer of monetary units of account. lf the monetary unit of account is not transferable between those
persons, payment shall be made in the currency specified in the instrument or, if no such currency is specified, in the currency of the place of
payment.
3. The drawer or the maker may indicate in the instrument that it
mus! be paid in a specified currency other than the currency in which the
sum payable is expressed. In that case:
(a)

The holder is not obliged to take partial payment.

2. Ifthe holder who is offered partial payment does not take it, the
instrument is dishonoured by non-payment.
3. Ifthe holder takes partial payment from the drawee, the guarantor
of the drawee, or the acceptor or the maker:
(a) The guarantor of the drawee, or the acceptor or the maker is discharged of his liability on the instrument to the extent of the amount
paid;
(b) The instrument is to be considered as dishonoured by nonpayment as to the amount unpaid.

4. Ifthe holder takes partía] payment from a party to the instrument
other than the acceptor, the maker or the guarantor of the drawee:
(a) The party making payment is discharged ofhis liability on the instrument to the extent of the amount paid;

Thc instrument must be paid in the currency so specified;

(b) The amount payahle is to be calculated according to the rate of
exchange indicated in thc instrument. Failing such indication, the
amount payable is to be calculated according to the rate of exchange for
sight drafts (or, if there is no such rate, according to the appropriate established rate of exchange) on the date of maturity:
(i)

Ruling at the place where the instrument must be presented for
payment in accordance with subparagraph (g) ofarticle 55, ifthe
specified currency is that of that place (local currency); or

(ii)

lfthe specified currency is not that ofthat place, according to the
usages of the place where the instrument must be presented for
payment in accordance with subparagraph (g) of article 55;

(e) lf such an instrument is dishonoured by non-acceptance, the
amount payable is to be calculated:
(i)

Ifthe rate of exchange is indicated in the instrument, according to
that rate;

(ii)

If no rate of exchange is indicated in the instrument, at the option
of the holder, according to the rate of exchange ruling on the date
of dishonour or on the date of actual payment;

(d) If such an instrument is dishonoured by non-payment, the
amount payable is to be calculated:

(i)

Ifthe rate of exchange is indicated in the instrument, according to
that rate;

(ii)

If no rate of exchange is indicated in the instrument, at the option
ofthe holder, according to the rate of exchange ruling on the date
of maturity or on the date of actual payment.

Article 73
l.

289

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

4. Nothing in this article prevents a court from awarding damages
for loss caused to the holder by rcason offluctuations in rates of exchange
if such loss is caused b} dishonour for non-acceptance or by nonpayment.
5. The rate of exchange ruling ata certain date is the rate of exchange
ruling, at the option ofthe holder, at the place where the instrument must
be presented for payment in accordance with subparagraph (g) of article 55 or at the place of actual paymcnt.
Articlc 76

Nothing in this Convention prevcnts a Contracting State from enforcing exchangc control regulations applicable in its territory and its
rrnvi,ions relating to the protection of its currency, including regula-

General Assembly-Forty-third Session

290

tions which it is bound to apply by virtue of international agreements to
which it is a party.
2. (a) If, by virtue of the application of paragraph I of this article,
an instrument drawn in a currency which is not that ofthe place ofpayment must be paid in local currency, the amount payable is to be calculated according to the rate of exchangc for sight drafts (or, ifthere is no
such rate, according to the appropriate established rate of exchange) on
the date of presentment ruling at the place where the instrument must be
presented for payment in accordance with subparagraph (g) of article 55.
(b) (i) If such an instrument is dishonoured by non-acceptance, the
amount payable is to be calculated, at the oplion of the
holder, at the rate of exchange ruling on the date of dishonour or on the date of actual payment.
(ii) If such an instrument is dishonoured by non-payment, the
amount is to be calculated, al the option of the holder, according to the rate of exchange ruling on the date of presentment or on the date of actual payment.
(iii) Paragraphs 4 and 5 of articlc 75 are applicable where appropriate.
SECTION 2.

DISCflARGE OF OTHER PARTIES

Article 77
1. If a party is discharged in whole or in part of his liability on the instrument, any party who has a right on the instrument against him is discharged to the same extent.
2. Payment by the drawee of the whole or a part of the amount of a
bill to the holder, or to any party who takes up and pays the bill, discharges ali parties of their liability to the same extent, except where the
drawee pays a holder who is not a protected holder, ora party who has
taken up and paid the bill, and knows at the time of payment that the
holder or that party acquired the bill by theft or forged the signature of
the payee or an endorsee, or participated in the theft or the forgery.
CHAPTER VII.

LOST INSTRllMENTS

2. Such notice must be given on the day the instrument is presented
or on one of the two business days which follow and must state the name
of the pcrson presenting the instrument and the date and place of presentment.
3. Failure tn give notice renders the party who has paid the lost instrument liable for any damages which the person whom he paid may
suffer from such failure, provided that the damagcs do not excecd the
amount referred to in article 70 or article 71.
4. Delay in giving notice is excused when the delay is caused by circumstances which are beyond the control ofthe person who has paid the
lost instrument and which he could neither avoid nor overcome. When
the cause of the dela y ceases to operate, notice must be given with reasonable diligencc.
5. Notice is dispenscd with when the cause of delay in giving notice
continues to operate beyond thirty days after the last day on which it
should have been given
Articlc 80
A part} who ha, paid a lost instrument in accordance with the
provisions of article 78 and who is subsequently required to, and <loes,
pay the instrument, or who, by reason ofthe loss ofthe instrument, then
loses his right to recovcr from any party liable to him, has the right:
l.

(a)

If security was given, to realize the security; or

(b) If an amount was deposited with the court or other competen!
authority or institution. to reclaim the amount so deposited.
2. The person who has given security in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2 (b) of article 78 is entitled to obtain release of the
security when the party for whose benefit the security was given is no
longer at risk to suffer loss because ofthe fact that the instrument is lost.

Articlc 81
For the purpose of making protest for dishonour by non-payment, a
person claiming payment of a lost instrument may use a written statemcnt that satisfies the requircments of paragraph 2 (a) of article 78.

Article 78

Article 82

1. If an instrument is lost, whether by destruction, theft or otherwise,
the person who lost the instrument has, subject to the provisions of paragraph 2 of this article, the same right to payment which he would havc
had if he had been in possession of the instrument. The party from whom
payment is claimed cannot set upas a defence against liability on the instrument the fact that the person claiming payment is not in possession of
the instrument.

A person receiving payment of a lost instrument in accordance with
article 78 must deliver to the party paying the written statement required
under paragraph 2 (a) of article 78, receipted by him, and any protest
and a receipted account.

2. (a) The person claiming payment of a lost instrument must state
in writing to the party from whom he claims payment:
(i)

(ii)

(iii)

The elements of the lost instrument pertaining to the requircments set forth in paragraph I or paragraph 2 of articles 1, 2
and 3; for this purpose the person claiming payment ofthe lost instrument may present to that party a copy of that instrument;
The facts showing that, if he had been in possession of the instrument, he would have had a right lo payment from the party from
whom payment is claimed;
The facts which preven! production of the instrument.

(b) The party from whom payment of a lost instrument is claimed
may require the person claiming payment to give security in order to indemnify him for any loss which he may suffer by reason ofthe subsequent
payment of the lost instrument.
(e) The nature of the security and its terms are to be deternuned by
agreement between the person claiming payment and the party from
whom payment is claimed. Failing such an agreement, the court may determine whether security is called for and, if so, the nature of the securitv
and its terms.
•
(á) lf the security cannot be given, the court may order the party
from whom payment is claimed to deposit the sum ofthe lost instrument,
and any interest and expenses which may be claimed under article 70 or
art;clc 71, with the court or any other competen! authority or institution,
and may determine the duration of such deposit. Such deposit is to be
considered as payment to the person claiming payment.

Article 83
l. A party who pays a lost instrument in accordance with article 78
has the same rights which he would have had ifhe had been in possession
of the instrument.

2. Such party may cxercise his rights only if he is in possession of the
receipted written statemcnt referred to in article 82.
CHAPTER VIII.

LIMITATION (PRESCRtPTION)

Article 84
l. A right of action arismg on an instrument may no longer be exerc,sed after four years have elapsed:
(a) Against the maker, or his guarantor, of a note payable on demand, from thc date of the note;
(b) Against the acceptor or the maker or their guarantor of an instrument payable at a definik time, from the date of maturity;

(e) Again,t the guarantor of the drawee of a bill payable ata definite
time, from the date of maturity or, if the bill is dishonoured by nonacceptance, frorn the date of protest for dishonour or, where protcst is
dispensed with, from the date of dishonour;
(á) Against the acceptor of a bill payable on demand or his guarantor, from the date on which it was accepted or, if no such date is shown,
from the date of the bill;

(e) Against the guarantor ofthe drawee ofa bill payable 011 demand,
from the date on which he signed the bill or, if no such date is shown.
from the date of the hill:

Article 79

(f) Against thc drawer or an endorser or their guarantor, from the
date of protest for dishonour by non-acceptance or by non-paymcnt or,
where protest is dispen,ed with, from the date of dishonour.

A party who has paid a lost instrument and to whom the instrument is subsequently presented for payment by another person mus! give
notice of such presentment to the person whom he paid.

2. A party who pays the mstrument in accordance with article 70 or
article 71 may exercise his right of action against a party liable to him
within one year from !he date ,m which he paid the instrument.

IX.
CHAPTER IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

FINAL PROVISIONS

Article 85

The Secretary-General of the United Nations is hereby designated as
the Depositary for this Convention.
Artic/e 86

l. This Convention is open for signature by ali States at the Headquarters of the United Nations. New York, until 30 June 1990.

2. This Convention is subject to ratification, acceptance or approval
by the signatory States.
3. This Convention is open for a-:cession by ali States which are not
signatory States as from the date it is open for signature.
4. lnstruments of ratification, acceptance, approval and accession
are to be deposited with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
Article 87

1. If a Contracting Sta te has two or more territorial units in which,
according to its constitution, different systems oflaw are applicable in relation to the matters dealt with in this Convention, it may, at the time of
signature, ratificatiQn, acceptance, approval or accession, declare that
this Convention is to extend to ali its territorial units or only to one or
more ofthem, and may amend its declaration by submitting another declaration at any time.
2. These declarations are to be notified to the Depositary and are to
state expressly the territorial units to which the Convention extends.
3. If a Contracting State makes no declaration under paragraph 1 of
this article, the Convention is to extend to ali territorial units of that
State.
Article 88

1. Any State may declare at the time of signature, ratification, acceptance, approval or accession that its courts will apply the Convention
only ifboth the place indicated in the instrument where the bill is drawn,
or the note is made, and the place of payment indicated in the instrument
are situated in Contracting States.
2.

No other reservations are permitted.
Article 89

l. This Convention enters into force on the first day ofthe month following the expiration of twelve months after the date of deposit of the
tenth instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession.

2. When a State ratifies, accepts, approves or accedes to this Convention after the deposit of the tenth instrument of ratification, acceptance,
approval or accession, this Convention enters into force in respect of that
State on the first day of the month following the expiration of twelve
months after the date of deposit of its instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession.
Article 90

l. A Contracting State may denounce this Convention by a formal
notification in writing addressed to the Depositary.

2. The denunciation takes effect on the first day of the month following the expiration of six months after the notification is received by the
Depositary. Where a longer period for the denunciation to take effect is
specified in the notification, the denunciation takes effect upon the expiration of such longer period after the notification is received by t he
Depositary. The Convention remains applicable to instruments drawn or
made before the date at which the denunciation takes effect.
DONE at ... , this ... day of ... , one thousand nine hundred and ... in a single original, of which the Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and
Spanish texts are equally authentic.

291
·~- -·---- -· ·--

--~--· -

on International Trade Law with a mandate to further the
progressive harmonization and unification ofthe law ofinternational trade and in that respect to bear in mind the interests of ali peoples, in particular those of developing
countries, in the extensive development of internat ional
trade,
Recalling a/so its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974,
3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974 and 3362 (S-VII) of
16 September 1975,
Reaffirming its conviction that the progressive harmonization and unification of international trade law, in reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow of international
trade, especially those affecting the developing countries,
would significantly contribute to universal economic cooperation among ali States on a basis of equality, equity
and common interest and to the elimination of discrimination in international trade and, thereby, to the well-being
of ali peoples,
Having regard for the need to take into account the different social and legal systems in harmonizing and unifying international trade law,
Stressing the value of participation by States at ali levels
of economic development, including developing countries,
in the process of harmonizing and unifying international
trade law,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law on the work of
its twenty-first session, 2 5
Recognizing the success of the seminar on international
trade law held at Maseru from 25 to 30 July 1988 in cooperation with the Preferential Trade Area of Eastern and
Southern African States,
Recognizing the need for the Commission to have adequate sources offunding for its programme oftraining and
assistance in international trade law,
Noting that the Convention on the Limitation Period in
the International Sale of Goods, of 14 June 1974, 26 carne
into force on 1 August 1988,
Aware that the United Nations Convention on the Carriage of Goods by Sea, of 31 March 1978, 27 was prepared
at the request of developing countries and is likely to come
into force in the near future,
Convinced that widespread adherence to the conventions emanating from the work of the Commission would
benefit the peoples of ali States,
l. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
on the work of its twenty-first session;
2. Commends the Commission for the progress made
in its work and for having reached decisions by consensus;
3. Calls upan the Commission to continue to take account of the relevant provisions of the resolutions concerning the new international economic order, as adopted
by the General Assembly at its sixth 28 and seventh 29 special sessions;

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned plenipotentiaries, being duly authorized by their respective Governments, have signed this Convention.

43/166.

Report of the United Nations Commission on
lnternational Trade Law on the work of its
twenty-first session

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December
1966, by which it created the United Nations Commission

25 Official Records of the General Assembly. forty-third Session.
Suf¡fement No. 17 (A/43/17).
Official Records of the United Nations Co11Jáe11ce 011 Pre,criprwn
(Limitation) in the lnrernational Sal<' of Goods. New York.
20 May-14 Jun<' 1974 (United Nations puhlicatinn, Sales No. E 74.V.K).
p. 101.
27 Official Records of the United Narions Confcrence on the Curriage of
Goods by Sea. Hamburg, 6-31 March 1978 (United Natinns puhlicat,nn,
Sales No. E.80.VIII.1). document A/CONF.89/D. annex 1
28 Resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI).
2 9 Resolution 3362 (S-VII).
