V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

l. Requests those countries that have not yet established official national focal points for the International
Year of Shelter for the Homeless to do so in the near
future, along the lines specified in the annex to General
Assembly resolution 38/168;
2. Also requests those countries that have not yet formulated national programmes and plans of action for the
International Year of Shelter for the Homeless to do so
and periodically to provide information on them to the
United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat)
so that all national focal points can be regularly informed
of the activities, progress and achievements of the Year in
countries around the world;
3. Further requests those countries and international
organizations that have not yet done so to designate projects for the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless
aimed at improving access to land, financing, building
materials, training and employment, giving special attention to legal and institutional measures, and to send a project information sheet on each project to the United
Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat);
4. Requests all countries in their periodic reports on
their national programmes and projects for the Year,
especially in reports to the Commission on Human Settlements at its ninth session, to give special attention to their
plans for developing and implementing new national policies and strategies for improving shelter for, and the
neighbourhoods of, the poor and disadvantaged by the
year 2000;
5. Appeals once again to all Governments that have
not yet announced a voluntary contribution, especially
those of developed countries, as well as to international
financial institutions and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, to provide effective financial and
other support to the programme for the International Year
of Shelter for the Homeless;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to
the Economic and Social Council at its second regular session of 1986 on progress achieved in the implementation
of the approved programme of measures and activities to
be undertaken before and during the International Year of
Shelter for the Homeless; 97
7. Invites the Economic and Social Council to include
a special account of its deliberations on the subject in its
report to the General Assembly at its forty-first session;
8. Decides, in view of the fact that 1987 is the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless, to devote special
attention to the Year at its forty-first session.
119th plenary meeting
17 December /985

40/204. Effective mobilization and integration of
women in development98
The General Assembly,
Taking note with appreciation of the world survey on the
role of women in development, 99
Recognizing that although the survey was submitted to
the World Conference to Review and Appraise the
Achievements of the United Nations Decade for Women:
Equality, Development and Peace, it has yet to receive the
detailed attention it deserves,
Noting with satisfaction the adoption by the Conference
of the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the
98 See also sect. I, footnote 17, and sect. VI, resolution 40/IOI.
99 A/CONF.116/4 and Corr. 1.
IOO Report of the World Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements ojthe United Nations T>ecadefor Women: Equality, T>eve/opment and

1:i7

Advancement of Women, 100 which constitute an important and positive contribution to the attainment of the
objectives of the Decade and provide a policy framework
for the advancement of women to the year 2000,
I. Invites the Commission on the Status of Women at
its thirty-first session to make specific action-oriented recommendations based on the world survey on the role of
women in development as a part of the overall implemen ..
tation of and follow-up to the Nairobi Forward-looking
Strategies for the Advancement of Women, which should
be for action at the national and international levels, including co-operation among developing countries, within an
economic context, and should address sectoral and crosssectoral problems identified in the survey, and requests
that the report of the Commission be made available,
through the Economic and Social Council at its second
regular session of 1986, to the General Assembly at its
forty-second session under the sub-item entitled "Effective
mobilization and integration of women in economic
development";
2. Requests the Secretary-General to take those recommendations into account when formulating the systemwide medium-term plan for women and development 101
and to invite the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, in particular the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the
International Labour Organisation, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the International Training and Research Institute for the Advancement of Women, to take into account the implications of
the world survey when preparing their contributions to
that plan;
3. Also requests the Secretary-General to update the
survey on the role of women in development on a regular
basis, focusing on selected emerging development issues
that have an impact on the role of women in the economy
at the local, national, regional and international levels;
4. Decides that the first update of the survey should be
submitted to the General Assembly at its forty-fourth session, in 1989;
5. Invites the Commission on the Status of Women at
its thirty-first session to make a recommendation on future
updates of the survey after 1989, bearing in mind the need
for effective co-ordination with the follow-up activities of
the World Conference to Review and Appraise the
Achievements of the United Nations Decade for Women:
Equality, Development and Peace;
6. Also invites the Commission on the Status of
Women to suggest terms of reference for the first update of
the survey, which should contain improved data and
information on the role of women in development, including, inter alia, their role in the informal sector of the
economy;
7. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system to contribute to thepreparation of the first update of the survey;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly, at its forty-second session, a progress
report on the preparation of the first regular update of the
survey, including preliminary views on its scope and content, so that the Commission on the Status of Women, at
its thirty-second session, can take that report into account,
together with the comments on the subject made by delrgations in the General Assembly;
Peace. Nairobi, 15-26 July /98.1 (United Nations publication, Sales N,,
E.85.IV.10), chap. I, sect. A.
IOI See Economic and Social Council resolution 1985/46 of 3 I May 1985

158

General Assembly-Fortieth Session

--9. Also requests the Secretary-General to utilize the
input provided by the Commission on the Status of
Women at its thirty-second session and by the Economic
and Social Council m 1988 for the preparation of the first
update of the survey.
119th plenary meeting
17 December 1985

40/205. Implementation of the Substantial New Programme of Action for the 1980s for the
Least Developed Countries
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 320 l (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of
l May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 197 5
on development and international economic co-operation.
Recalling also its resolution 39/ 174 of 17 December
1984,
Reaffirming the provisions of the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade relating to the least developed countries, 102 and the
agreed conclusions concerning those countries of the Committee on the Review and Appraisal of the Implementation of the International Development Strategy for the
Third United Nations Development Decade, 103
Reaffirming the Substantial New Programme of Action
for the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries, 42 whose
objective is to transform the economies of the least
developed countries so that they may achieve self-sustained development, and to enable them to provide at least
internationally accepted minimum standards of nutrition,
health, transport and communications, housing, education, and job opportunities to all their citizens, particularly
the rural and urban poor,
Reaffirming the need to respect the socio-political and
economic system of each least developed country in the
implementation of the Substantial New Programme of
Action,
Deeply concerned at the continued deterioration of the
socio-economic conditions of the least developed
countries despite national and international efforts to
achieve the goals and objectives of the Substantial New
Programme of Action,
Seriously concerned at the critical economic situation
faced particularly by the least developed countries in
Africa,
Recognizing the specific problems of the land-locked
and island countries among the least developed countries,
as reflected in United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development resolutions 137 (VI) and 138 (VI} of 2 July
1983 38 and Trade and Development Board resolution 319
(XXXI) of 27 September I 985, 39
Recalling paragraph 119 of the Substantial New Programme of Action in which it was recommended that the
Intergovernmental Group on the Least Developed
Countries of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, while carrying out the mid-term review,
should consider the possibility of holding at the end of the
decade a global review on the implementation of the Substantial New Programme of Action which might, inter alia,
102 Resolution 35/56, annex, sect. 111.K.
103 See Official Records of the General Assemhfr. Fortieth Ses<io~. Suppfp
ment No. ,(8 (A/40/48), para. 22

take the form of a United Nations conference on the least
developed countries,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the mid-term global review of progress towards the implementation of the Substantial New Programme of
Action, 104 carried out by the Intergovernmental Group a1
its sixth session,
l. Emphasizes that the least developed countries, in
view of their deteriorating socio-economic situation, need
the urgent and special attention of the international community and its large-scale support on a continuous basis to
enable them to progress towards self-reliant development.
consistent with the plans and programmes of each least
developed country;
2. Reaffirms the Substantial New Programme of
Action for the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries as
the basis for continuing co-operation between the least
developed countries and their development partners, as
well as the commitment to the full and effective implementation of the Programme;
3. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report of the Intergovernmental Group on
the Least Developed Countries 10~ on the mid-term global
review of the Substantial New Programme of Action, as
annexed hereto, which are designed to ensure the full
implementation of the Substantial New Programme of
Action over the second half of the decade;
4. Calls upon all Governments, intergovernmental and
multilateral institutions, the organs, organizations and
bodies of the United Nations system, non-governmental
organizations and all others concerned to take immediate.
concrete and adequate steps to implement the Substantial
New Programme of Action for the Least Developed
Countries, taking full account of the conclusions and recommendations of the mid-term global review so as to
enable each least developed country to achieve a minimum standard of performance in socio-economic development;
5. Reaffirms that the least developed countries have
primary responsibility for their overall development and
that, although international support measures are vitally
important, the domestic policies those countries pursue
will be of importance for the success of their development
efforts, and urges the least developed countries to continue
their efforts to implement the provisions of the Substantial
New Programme of Action at the national level;
6. Calls upon donor countries to continue to make
every effort to increase their contributions in view of the
important role that official development assistance plays
in helping the least developed countries to achieve the
objectives of their country programmes within the framework of the Substantial New Programme of Action, and
urges those donor countries that have not yet attained 0.15
per cent of their gross national product, or have not yet
doubled their official development assistance to least
developed countries, to make every effort necessary to
attain those targets as set out in United Nations Conference on Trade and Development resolution 142 (VI) ,·f
2 July 1983, 38 as adopted;
7. Urges the least developed countries to create an
appropriate policy framework (pricing policies, institutional reform, rationalization of public expenditures and
public sector management, and measures to mobilize
domestic savings through taxation, domestic financial
institutions and the rural sector), in order to increase the
mobilization of domestic resources and then ensure their
104 A/40/826 and Corr. I.
105 See A/40/827
