188

General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session

Reaffirming the decisive importance of the training
of national personnel and cadres, including the establishment of, and improvement in, the legislative framework, which should ensure the implementation and
guarantee the full enjoyment of the right to education,
Recalling that the establishment of the new international economic order requires effective support for the
improvement and expansion of educational systems and
for the training of specialized personnel and qualified
cadres for the economic development of the developing
countries,
Convinced that the United Nations and the specialized
agencies, in particular the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, could continue to
play an increasing role in supporting the implementation
of the right to education, the development of education
and the training of national personnel needed by all
sectors of activity in conformity with the requirements
of the over-all progress and development of the developing countries,
Bearing in mind the valuable work of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
in the education and training of national personnel, as
~ell as the importance of its contribution to the preparation and implementation of the new international development strategy, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 33/193 of 29 January 1979,
1. Invites all States to consider the adoption of
appropriate legislative, administrative and other measures, including material guarantees, in order to ensure
the full implementation of the right to universal education through, inter alia, free and compulsory primary
education, universal and gradually free-of-charge secondary education, equal access to all educational facilities and the access of the young generation to science
and culture;
2. Appeals to all States, in particular the developed
countries, actively to support through fellowships and
other means the efforts of the developing countries in
the education and training of national personnel needed
in industry, agriculture and other economic and social
sectors;
3. Requests the Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
to submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session a preliminary report and, at its thirty-sixth session,
a final report containing:
(a) Information on the activities of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
in relation to support for education and training of
national personnel of developing countries;
(b) His views and suggestions, in accordance with
the organization's mandate and after consultation with
Member States and specialized agencies, on the need
for and the possibility of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization reinforcing
its programmes and activities for the purpose of cooperating with developing countries in their efforts to
ensure adequate education networks at all levels as well
as fellowships and facilities for the training of qualified
national personnel, bearing in mind also the proposals
contained in General Assembly resolution 33/135 of
19,December 1978;
(c) Information on the difficulties and obstacles encountered in the full implementation of the right to
education, particularly in developing countries, in conformity with their own requirements of over-all progress

and development, as well as his conclusions on action
to be taken in this regard.
106th plenary meeting
17 December 1979

34 / 171.

Regional arrangements for the promotion
and protecdon of human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/127 of 16 December
1977 and 33/ 167 of 20 December 1978 and Commission on Human Rights resolution 24 (XXXIV) of 8
March 1978,113
Mindful of the report of the Secretary-General on
regional arrangements for the promotion and protection
of human rights, 114
1. Notes with satisfaction that a United Nations
Seminar on the Establishment of Regional Commissions
on Human Rights with Special Reference to Africa was
held at Monrovia from 10 to 20 September 1979 and
adopte~ the Monr<;w~a Proposal for the setting up of
an Afncan Comm1ss10n on Human Rights, 115 as well
as other conclusions and recommendations, 116 and expresses the hope that the recommendations of the Seminar will be given due consideration by the Governments
and organizations concerned;
2. Reiterates its appeal to States in areas where
regional arrangements in the field of human rights do
not yet exist to consider agreements with a view to the
establishment within their respective regions of suitable
regional arrangements for the promotion and protection
of human rights;
3. Requests once again the Secretary-General, under the programme of advisory services in the field of
human rights, to explore with the States in the regions
concerned the possibility of holding a seminar as soon
as possible for the purpose of discussing methods for
the promotion and protection of human rights;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session on
the implementation of the present resolution.
I 06th plenary meeting
17 December 1979
34 / 172.

Measures to improve the situation and ensure
the human rights and dignity of all migrant
workers

The General Assembly,
Affirming the need to establish international cooperation by resolving international problems of an
economic, social, intellectual or humanitarian nature
and by developing and encouraging human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to
race, sex, language or religion,
Recalling in this connexion the provisions of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 117 of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
113 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
1978, Supplement No. 4 (E/1978/34), chap. XXVI, sect. A.
114 A/34/359 and Add.I.
115 A/34/359/ Add.I, annex I.
116 ibid., annex II.
117 Resolution 217 A (Ill).

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

of Racial Discrimination118 and of the International
Covenants on Human Rights, 119
Bearing in mind the international instruments elaborated by the International Labour Organisation, notably
the Migrant Workers (Supplementary Provisions) Convention, 1975,120 and the Recommendation concerning
Migrant Workers, 1975,121 adopted by the General Conference of the International Labour Organisation,
Taking account of the provisions relating to the question of migrant workers of the Declaration and the Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference
to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, 122
Recalling that the family is the natural and fundamental element of society and has a right to protection
by society and by the State and that, in this context, the
families of migrant workers are entitled to the same
protection as the migrant workers themselves,
Recognizing, therefore, the need to devote all necessary attention to the families, in particular the children,
of migrant workers in all spheres, notably those of
housing, health and education,
Reaffirming that the relationship between worker and
employer is in itself a source of rights and obligations
and that consequently a violation, or even a limitation,
of those rights of migrant workers may be tantamount
to a violation of the principles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
Continuing to express its deep concern at the fact
that, despite the general effort made by the States Members of the United Nations, the regional intergovernmental organizations and the various agencies of the
United Nations, migrant workers still are not exercising
their rights in the sphere of work as defined by the relevant international instruments,
Affirming that close co-operation between the Commission on Human Rights, the Commission for Social
Development, the International Labour Organisation,
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Orga~ization and the World Health Organization will
~ntnbut_e to. the sear~h for solutions aimed at improvmg the situation of migrant workers and their families,
Bearing in mind Economic and Social Council resolution 1979/13 of 9 May 1979,
Recalling its resolution 33/163 of 20 December
1978,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
of 18 October 1979 and the addendum thereto; 128
2. Welcomes the large number of replies submitted
by Member States and the international organizations
concerned favouring the elaboration of an international
convention on the protection of the rights of all migrant
workers and their families;
3. Decides to create at its thirty-fifth session a working group open to all Member States to elaborate an
international convention on the protection of the rights
of all migrant workers and their families;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, in application of
the provisions of Economic and Social Council resolution 1979/13, to give the working group all necessary
118 Resolution 2106 A
119 Resolution 2200 A
120

{XX), annex.
(XXI), annex.
International Labour Office, Official Bulletin, vol. L VIII,
1975, series A, No. l, Convention No. 143.
121 /bid., No. 1, Recommendation No. 151.
122 Report of the World Conference to Combat Racism and
Racial Discrimination, Geneva, 14-25 August /978 (United Nations publication, 'Sales No. E.79.XIV.2), chap. II.
1 2 s A/34/535 and Add.I.

189

support, with a view to facilitating the elaboration of
the international convention on the protection of the
rights of all migrant workers and their families;
5. Invites the international organizations concerned
to participate in the work of the working group and to
co-operate with a view to the elaboration of such a
convention.
106th plenary meeting
17 December 1979
34 / 173.

Exchange of information on banned hazard.
ous chemicals and unsafe pharmaceutical
products

The General Assembly,
A ware that the exportation of banned hazardous
chemicals and unsafe pharmaceutical products could
have serious and adverse effects on the health of peoples
in the importing countries,
Recognizing the urgent need to take concrete measures to prevent adverse effects on health on a worldwide basis and, to that end, mindful of the importance
of objective information about banned hazardous chemicals and unsafe pharmaceutical products,
1. Urges Member States to exchange information
on hazardous chemicals and unsafe pharmaceutical products that have been banned in their territories and to
discourage, in consultation with importing countries, the
exportation of su~h products to other countries;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the United Nations agencies and bodies concerned,
especially the World Health Organization, to assist Governments in exchanging information and to submit a
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session, through the Economic and Social Council, about
the experience of Member States and the United Nations agencies and bodies concerned.
106th plenary meeting
17 December 1979
34/174.

Assistance to student refugees from Namibia,
Zimbabwe and South Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 31/126 of 16 December
1976, 32/119 of 16 December 1977 and 33/164 of
20 December 1978, in which it, inter alia, reaffirmed
that humanitarian assistance by the international community to all those persecuted under repressive and
discriminatory legislation in South Africa, Namibia and
Southern Rhodesia is appropriate and essential,
Deeply concerned by the discriminatory education
policies and repressive measures being applied by the
Government of South Africa against black students in
that country,
Noting Security Council resolution 417 (1977) of
31 October 1977 in which the Council, inter alia, demanded the abolishment of the "Bantu education" system and all other measures of apartheid and racial
discrimination,
Noting with concern the continued influx into Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia of student refugees from South Africa as well as from Namibia and
Zimbabwe and the urgent need to provide facilities for
their care, health and education,
