UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
COUNCIL

CONSEIL
DE SECURITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS
FOURTH YEAR
No. 14

PROCES·VERBAUX OFFICIELS
QUATRIEME ANNEE
No 14

FOUR HUNDRED AND ELEVENTH

QUATRE CENT ONZIEME SEANCE

MEETING
011 Thursday, 17 February 1949, a: 3 p.m.

Tcnue a Lake Surcess, N,'W-YiXk,
l, marai 17 [ivrier 1949, d 15 heures.

Presidellt: Mr. T. F. TSIANG (China).

President: M. T. F. TSIANG (China).

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Argentina, Canada, China, Cuba,
Egypt, France, Norway, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom, United States of America.

Presenls; Les representants des pays suivants:
Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cuba, Egypte,
France, Norvege, Republique socialistc sO\'ietique
cl'Ukraine, Union des H.epubliques socialistes S(J~
vietiques, RoyaumeRUni, Etats~Unis d'Amerique.

1. Provisional agenda (S/Agenda 411)

1. Ordre du jour prmrisoire

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Appointme:lt of a Governor of the Free Terri-

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.
2. DesignatiOl: d'un gouvemeur du Terdtnire
libre de Trieste: Lettre en date du 8 fevrier
1949 adresscc au President du Consei] ne
securite par le representant de l'Union des
Republiques socialistes sovietiques at! sujet
de la designation d'un gouverneur du Territoire libre de Trieste (5/1251).

Held at Lake Success, New York,

tory of Trieste: Letter dated 8 February 1949
from the representati'.. .e of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to the President of
the Security Council concerning ,he appoint~
ment of a Governor of the Free Territory of
Trieste (5/1251).

2. Adoption of the agenda

(S/Agend.411)

2. Adoption de l'ordre du jour
L'o1'dre du jOfW esi ado pte.

The agenda. was adopttd.

3. Appointment of a Governor of the
Free Territory of Trieste

Mc. lI,'IALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republies) (translated from Russian): The USSR delegation has brought lip for discussion the questio:l
of appo:nting a Governor for the Free Territory
of Tdeste by the Securi~y Council. The USSR
delegation considers that any further delay i:l
tIle appointment of a Governor jf'. inadmissable,
and proposes that the Council should consider
the question immediately.
As we know, the Peace Treaty with Italy provided for the creation of a Free Territory cf
Trieste, the Governor of which was to be
appointed by the Securitv Cou:J.cil alter consulta~
tion wi~h the Governments of YU7os1avia and
Ita.ly. There is a special decislon
the Council
(If Foreign !lHnisters on the appointment uf the

ot

3. Designation .run gouverneur
du Tcrritoire libre de Triesle
M. MALm (Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques) ({raduit du rH.,m): C'e£t la delegation de l' URSS qui a soumb au COliseil de
securite la question de la nomination d'un gouyerneUT pouT:e Territoire libre de Trieste. Notre
delegation estime en effet qu'il cst inadmissible
de difIerer davantage la designation d'un gouvemeur pour le Territoire libre de Tries!e et eUe
propose de proceder immediatement a ]'etuue de
cette qt.:estion.
On sait que le Traite de paix avec l'Ilalie prevoit la ;creation d'un Territoire Hbre de Trieste,
dont le gouverneur doit etre nomine par le Conseil
de securite apres consultation avec les Gouve~­
nements de la Yougoslavie et de l'Italie. La nOlm~
m.tion d'un gouvcrneur pour le Territoire libre de
Trieste fait l'objet d'une c1~ri.'lion specia:e du

2
Governor of the Free Territory; it is recorded
in the Protocol signed on 12 December 1946 by
the representatives of the Unitl':d States of
America, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
France and the United Kingdom at the session
of the Council of Foreign Ministers in New York.
The Protocol reads as follows:

Couseil des Ministres des affaires etrangeres. Cette
decision figure an Protocole du 12 decembre 1946,
qui a ete signe par les rcrJn!~sentants des Etats-Unis.
d'Amerique, de l'URSS, de la France et du
Royaume-Uni lors de la session du Conseit des
Ministres des affaires etrangeres tenue a NcwYork
On lit dans ce Protocole:

"The representatives of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United States of America,
France and United Kingdom, meeting in New
York on 12 December 1946 as the Council of
Foreign Ministers, agreed that their Governments
will do their utmost to select a Governor for the
Free Territory of Trieste at the earliest possible
date, in accordance with the provisions of the
draft permanent statute, in order to ensure that
his appointment by the Security Council shall
take place simultaneously with the entry into
force of the Peace Treaty."

"Les rcpresentants de l'Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques, des Etats~Unis d'Amerique. de la France et du Royaume-Uni, reunis
le 12 decembre 1946 a New-York en Camel[ dcs
Ministres des affaires etrangeres, conviennent
que [eurs Gotlvernements respectifs prendront
toates les mesures necessaires pour assurer la
designation, dans le pIns brd delai, d'un gouverneur pour le Territoire libre de Trieste, con formement aux conditions prevues dans le projet
de statut permanent, atin d'assu~er que la nomination de ce gotlverneur par le Conseit de sec.urite
et l'entree en vigueur du Traite de paix aient lieu
en meme temps."

In accordance with this decision of the Council
of Foreign Ministers, a special artitle, article 11,
on the appointment of the Governor, was included
in annex: VI to the Peace Treaty .vith Italy.
According to the terms of this article: "The
Governor will be appointed by the Security
Council after consultation with the Governments
of Yugoslavia and Italy."

Conforrnement a cette decision du Conseil des
Ministres des affaires etrangeres, un article 11,
concemant la nomination d 11 gouverneur, a ete
insere a l'annexe Vl du Traite de paix avec
l'Italie. Aux tennes de cet article, "le gouvernCUf
sera nomme par le Conseil de securite apreg
consultation aver. les Gouvernernents yOllgoslave
et italien.

Thus the four Governments pledger! them~
selves to ensure the appointment of a Governor
of the Free Territory of Trieste not only at the
earliest possible date, but simultaneously with
the entry into force of the Peace Treaty.

Les quatre Gouvernements se sont donc engages
.it assurer la nomination d'un gouverneur pour le
Territoire libre de Trieste, non seulement dalls
le plus bref delai possible, mais encore synchroniser cette nomination avec I'entree en vigueur
du Traite de paix.

As .we know, the Peace Treaty with Italy
came mto force on 15 September 1947. From
that moment Italian sovereignty over the area
constituting the Free Territory of Trieste was
t~rminated. Almost eighteen months have elapsed
SInce the Peace Treaty with It;)l)' came into
force, hut the question of appointing a Governor
for the Free Territory of Trieste is not yet
settled. Why has this important clause of the
Peace .Treaty not yet been carried into effect?
~hat .IS the cause of this abnormal situation, of
thIS dlsrespect for the Peace Treaty, '~

On sait qt,e le Tnaite de raix avec i'Italic est
entre en vigueur le 15 septembre 1947. Son entree
en vigueur a mis fin a la souverainete de l'Italie
sur la region forrnant le Territoire libre de Trieste.
Pres d'un an et demi s'e5t ecoule depuis, mais la
question de la nomination d'tm gouverneur pour
le Territoire libre de Trieste n'a pas encore ete
resolue. Pourquoi cette dame im,'portante du
Traite de paix n'a-t-elle pas encore ete appliqLU~e?
Comment une situation :1ussi anormale a-t~el1e pu
se creer? D'al! vimt ce manque de respect pour
le Traite de paix?

. The Securi~y Council officially beg-an to conSider the appOtntment of a Governor for the Free
Territory of. TrieSle liS long ago as June 1947
[143rd meetwg]. The discussion of the question
shows that the representatives of the United
S~tes of America ann tile United Kingdom are
~OIng everythi~g in tlleir power to delay a solu~
bo~ ~nd ar~ VIrtually attempting to prevent any
deCISIOn bemg taken on the appointment of a
Go~ernor, This is a direct violation of the obligat;ons t~e United States of America. and the
U?h1tcd Kmgdum assumed under the Peace Treaty
wlt Italy.
Althongh a sufficient number of suitable candidates for th.e post of Governor of the Free Terri"
tory ~f Tneste bave been propo.~ed, the representlltl~es ofr.the United States of America and
the Untter!. h.. tngdom have, for more than a year
bee~ evadlllg discussion of the question unde;
VaflotlS pretexts and, notwithstanding their
pledges, have been striving to retard its solution.

a

On sait que l'examen de la question de la nomination d'un gouvemeur pour le Territoire libre
de Trieste :1vait commence officiellement au
Conseil de securite des j uin 1947 [143eme seance].
Les debats qui ont eu lieu au Consetl de securite
ont montre lIue le.. representants des Etats-Unis
d'l\.meriqtlc et du Royallme-Uni font tout leur
possible pour retarder le reglement de la question
et cherchent en fait
empecher toute decision
sur la nomination d'un gouverneur, ce qui est
une violation flagrante des obligations assUlnees
par <:es E-tiats aux tennes du Traite de paix: avec
l'Italie.

a

Bien qu'un nombre suA'isant de candidats satisfaisants aient ete proposes ;Ill poste de gonverneur
du Territoire libre de Trieste-, les representants
~es Etats-Un~s d'Amerique et du Royaume-Uni
elude~t, depUls plus d'ull an, l'examen de cette
qU'esb?n et s'efforcent, en invoquant toutes sortes
de,pret~xt~s, d'en retard~r la solution en depit
des obbgahons qu'ils ont assumees,

3
For. e~ample, at a meeting of the Security
Counctl tn Jantl:l.'y 1948 [233rd meeling] the
repre!'ent<l.tive of the United Kingdcm stated
that he had not received the instructions frem
his Government which he required to discuss the
candidates for the post of Governor, whIle the
representative of the United States of America
said he fOllnd it difficult to give any indication
~s to .when he would receiye the necessary
instructions.

Ainsi, le representant clu Royaume-Uni a declare, au cours d'unc se.mee du :'::onsei1 de- securite
tenue ,en janvier 1948 [233eme secnce], qn'il ne
pouvai: pas discuter les cmdidatul'es proposees,
etant donne que son Gouvernemer.t ne lui avait
pas enCOre fait parvenir les instr~.l'ctions neccssa.ires. Qllant au representant des Etats-Unis, it
a iadique r;,u'il ne savait meme ?as au juste quand
il recevrait les instructicms de son Gouvernemcnt.

As a resul: of the attitude taken by the representatives of the United S:ates and the United
Kingciom, the question was not di"cuRsed at
rneeti:J.gs of the Secnrity Council for a long tit:1e,
The next meeting on tl:e question was conver.ed
on 9 :March 1948 [265th meeting] on the initiafve
ur Lhe USSR t'cprescntative in the Sectlfity
Council. At that meeting, the USSR representative stressed the need to expedite a decision on
the 3?point01ent of a Gcvernor of the Free Territory of Trieste and listed eight candidates whose
names h.:d already been submitted to the COilneil.
The USSR representative asked t:'1e representa.
tives of the United States and the United Ki:lgdom whethe: they had received ins:ructions from
their Governments which they had said they
lacked at the previolls meeting in Jant.:ary.

En raison de l'attitude adoptee par les representants des Etats-Unis et du Royaume-Uni, cette
question n'a longte:nps pM ete disc\ttee au Conseil
de securit6. La seance suivante qui a He eonsacree a cetle qwes!ion ellt lie:1 le 9 mars 1948
[265eme seance] sur l'ini:iative clu representant
d~ I'URSS au Conseil de .~ecllrile, Au cours de
cetlc seance, le representant ce l'URSS a souligne qu'il etait indispensable de tegler rapidement
la questior. de la nominatio:! d'un gouv<,:rnetlr pour
le Tf'rrito:re libre de Trieste et il a rappeJe les
ncms des huit candidats q.li avaient ele prof.loses
au Conseil de secllnte. Le representant de l'URSS
a demande aux representants des Et:lts-Unis et
n.ll' Royaume-Uni s'its avaient re~u de leurs
GDuvernements respectifs les instructions qui
leur manquaient a la seance tenue a'J mois de
janvier,

Again using a variety o£ pretexts, the United
Usant, une fois de plus, des pretextes les plus
Kingdom representative dedared that tJle calldi- varies, le represennnt du l.oyaume-Uni a declare:
dates numec were unacceptable. The representa- que ces candidatures etaient imcceptables. Le
tive of the United States uf All1erioa rushed to repre~enbnt d('~ Etats-Unis d'Amhique s'est
his suprort, no: even bothering to give reasons raUie a son opinion, sans DIeme tacher de motiver
for his refllsaL The reasons for fle attitude son refus. Les raisons de I'at:itllde que les
adopted by the representatives of the United representants des Etats-Unis d'AmeriqUJe et du
States cf America and the lJniteJ. Kingdorr. in Roy::t.ume-Uni an Conseil de securire ont adoptee
l'egard de la nominatior; d'cri gouverneur pour
the Sec'Jrity Council in regard to the 2ppointment of a Governor for the Free Territory of le Territ(lire libre de Tri,~ste devinrent parfaiteTrieste became absolutely clear when, on ment claires le 20 mars 1948, lorsque les Gottver20 .March 1948, the Governmen:s of the two nements de ces deux pays, appl.1}"es par le
cotlntries, supported by the Government of GOllvernement de la France. presenterent nue
France, proposed that the Free Territory of proposition [S/707] tendAnt a transferer le TerTrieste sho:.lld be transferred to Italy. In their ritoire libre de T:ieste a l'Italie. Dans leur declastatement l)ll the sllbject [Sl107] the three ration, les trois Gouvf'rnements affirmaient qu'ils
Governments attempted to maintain that they avaie::lt cecide de dcmander ce transfert parce
had reached their decisior. to transfer the Free ql.l:e la diSCUSSion au Conseil de sfLllrire avait
Territory to Italy because discussion in the demontre l'impossibillte. d'aboutir a un accord
Securit3' Council had shown the impossibility of sur le choix du gOlwern~ur. Toutefois, pour se
reaching agreenent on the choice of a Governor, rendre compte des veritables motifs de cette
The real causes of this manoeuvre become clear, manCfuvre, i1 suffit de se rappeler que la n?te
if we hear in mind that the foint :1ote of the commune de ces trois Gouvcl'nements au sUJet
three Governments proposing the transfer of the dutransfert a l'Italie du Tedtoire libre de
Free Territory of Trieste to fta.:y was sent by Trie5te a ete rem~se au, GoUvemet:lent cie J'lIRSS,
them to the Government of the USSR, and was pnbliee et largement repandue par la presse, aU
prir.ted and widely publicized in the Press just cours de la campagne eledorale qui s'est derotllee
at the time of the election campaign in Italy en Italic l'nnnee nf'nliere.
last year.

a

The Governments of the U:lited States and the
United Kingdom found it ne,:essary to reso:t to
this manoeuvre in order to int~rvene in the Italian
elections 0: Ihe sp~ing of 1948, with the object of
ens'.uing in advan<:e that the results would be
favoutil.ble to those Italian political parties of
which most of the leaders are reliable tools in
the hands of Anglo-American politicians. The
ma.noenvl"e W~:<; an integral part of n1.ea~ures
undertaken at that time by the Government of
the U:::tited States of Amer:ca with a view to
exertir.g political influenl.:e on the attitude of the
Italian electors.

Les Gotlvernements des Ehtts-Unis et du
Royaumc-Uni oat us,.: df': cett; rn~no::uvre pou::
pouvoir s'ingerer dans les electIOns itahennes, qUI
eurent liw alll printemp;; de 1948, et pour falre
en sorte que ces elections fussent favorables it.
ceu:x des partis po~iliques It<ilienS don: la plupart des chefs sont U:l instrument fldele aux
mains des dirigcants anglo-americains. Cette manceuvrc s'integmit dans l'ensembl~ de ;nesures
que le Gouvernement cies Etats-Ums av;ut entreprises a cett~ .epoque ~ns le, but,d'exet;"cer une
infbence pohtlqlle mr l'etat d esprit des electeurs
itilEens.

4
'\jVe know, for example, that American and
British warships were dispat::hed to Italian pcrts
in t1:e period preceding the elections, that American aircraft carried out special "election" flights
over Ttali:Hl territory. tll<lt prominent leaders in
the United States of America exhorted the
Italian voters to vote against the parti~ of the
Popular Front, thereby makng thenselves guilty
of cpenly :ntervelling in the internal affairs of a
foreign State. Besides, on the eve of the elecw
tions there was a mass campaigp in the Un:ted
States for tb" dispatch of special letters and
par~els, w;,ich were des:gnen to SErve as instruments of propagc.nd" and which loosed floods of
slander against those Italian political parties which
were not to the liking oi the ruling circles of the
Ul;1itcd States.

On sait par exemple qu'au cours de la campagne electorale des navires de guerre amcricains
et b~ita:11liques ant ete envoyes dam les ports·
italiens, que des avions americaim O:1t effectue
des vols "electoraux" au-dessus du territoire de
l'ltalie, que des personnalites cunericaincs ant
lan-ee des appels aux electeurs it::Jiens pour les
exhorte:- voter coutre les partis dUI Front populaire et qu'elLes Se sont rer:dues coupables ainsi
d'une ingerence ouverte clans les affaires intcrieu:cs d'un Etat etranger. D'autre part, la ",eitle
des elections on a envoye des E:ats·Unis en Italie
de grandes quantites de lettres et de colis qui
devaien:servir des buts de propagande et qui
deversaient des flats de cabmnies sUr les partis
politiques italiens que les milieux dirigeantsdes
Etats-l.rns consideraient d'un ail de£avorable.

During the e:ection campaign in Italy, the
Governments of the Unite::! States of America
and the United Kingdom exploited the Trieste
(j,uestion as a means of exerting dire<:t poli:ical
pressure for purposes entirely unconnected with
the promotion of respect for treaties and agreements or with the cause of world peace anc.
5ecurity. The real purpose of the manOf>;uvre was
not, however, to prote:t the interes:s of Italy
in any way. One 0:11y need' look at the case oi
the Italia:], color.ies to realize that, actually, the
United States of America and the United Kir:g~
dom do not in the least hesitate to violate those
interests. Tb'~ obje~t of this manoeuvre was to
prolong indefinitely the use of the Free Territory
of Trieste as an American naval base and to
retain the armed forces of the United States of
America in the ...Te~ritory under one prete:xt or
another.
In the note which the USSR Ambassador in
London sen: On 13 April 1948 in reply to the
British Foreign Office note of 2() March 1948,
outlining the thee Government's joint proposal
on Trieste, the USSR Government made the
following statement:

Les GOl1vernements des Etats-Unis et dl1
Royaume- Dni ant profite de la question de Trieste
pall:' exercer, au <:.ours de la campagne e:ectorale
en :taEe, une pre.ssion politique dir~cte et pour
atte:ndre ces objectifs qui n'avaient rien a voir
ni avec le respect des accords et des tra.ites
conc1us, ni avec la sauvegarde de la paix et de
securite. Le veritable but de ('ette manauvre
n'etait point de dHendre les inte:-ets de ]'Italie.
Il suffit d'envlsager le cas des colonies itatiennes
pour se rend re compte qu'en fait les Etnts-Unis
d'Awerlque e: le Royaume-U111 n'he,~itent nutlement a. violer ces interets. Cette mant:e:lWre devait
permettre de conserver le Territoire lib~e de
Trieste comme une base navale amer:caine et d'y
rnaiutenir indefinirncnt, sous divers pretextec;, des
forces armeeE des EtatswUnis d'Amerique.

"The Govern:nent of the USSR also draws the
attention of the Foreign Offi~e to be fact that
the Peace Treaty with Italy-like the treaties
concluded with other States taking part in the war
-?~d been drawn up by the Council of Foreign
MinIsters; this Treaty waE considered in detail at
the Paris Peace Conference and was signed ar.d
rati.fied sUbs~quently by the twenty-one States
tak111g. part 111 that Conference. This Trea,y
came 111:0 force o:l.ly a few months ago. It is
therefore understandable that the Government of
the USSR cannot !i.gree to any proposal to cecide
the question of revising any part of the Peace
Treaty with Italy by means of an, exchange of
notes or of private conferences, since it reganls
such methods !i.S an infringement of the ele11len~
tary principles of democracy."

Such is the high-principled policy of the Government of the USSR, a policy of respect fnr tnt!"r-

a

a

En repcnse la note du F orciolt 0 Jjice en date
du 20 mars 1948, qui exposait la proposition
COl:1mune des trois Gouvernements a.u sujet de
Tr:e~te, l'ArrJbassadeur de I'URSS a Londres a
transmis, le 13 avril 1948, une note de son Gouvernemen: ou i1 eta!t dit:
"Le Gouvernement de l'URSS attire en meme
lel:lps l'a:tention du Foreig" OffiCi! sur le fait
que le Traite de p(;,ix conclt.lI avcc l'Italie - de
meme qlle les traites condus avec les autres Etats
qUL ant participe
la guerre ~ a ete elabore
par le Conseil des Ministres des affaireR etrange:-es; ce Traite a fait l'objet d'un examen minutieux
la Conference de la pahc ~ Paris, et a
ere signe et ratifie par la s'lite pat les vingt et un
Etals qui unt pris part a cette Conference. Ce
Traite est entre en vigueur il y a quelques rhois
seulement. 11 est done comprehensible que la
proposition tenclant
resoudre la question de la
revisiun tlu Traite de paix aver: l'Itnlie Oll de
l\:ne qllelconqlle de se.s dauses par Utl echange
de notes ou au moyen de conferences privees
appamisse all GOllvernemmt de l'VRSS C01nlne
inaccepta!Jle et coutrairc aux principes eJementaires de la cle:nocratl€."

a

a

a

Tel1e est la position de prineipe du GO'.lverncrn~nt de I'URSS; elle consiste clans le respect des

national treaties and agreements and of strict
fulfi1.ment of. :>bligat.ions devolving from peace
treaties and mternatlonal agreements.

traites et ees accords inte:-nationaux et dans
l'exectltion rig<r.lre'clse des obliga.tions qtiJi decoulent des traites de paix et des conventions intcrnatio:1ales.

On t:1.e other hand, the policy of the United
States of America and the United Kingdom with
regard to the appointment of a Governor for the
Free Territory of Trieste show::; that the Govent-

Par contre, I'attitude adoptee par les EtatsUnis d'Amerique et le Royaume-Uni
l'egard
de la nomination cl'un gouverneur pour le Territoite. librc de Trieste l110ntre que les Gouverne~

a

5
ments of these two countries h~vf' long ..incl'
a~opted the cour~e of violating the Peace Treat)'
:ylth Italy, The Tact that the question of appoint~
:ng ~ Govcfl1.or for the Free Territory of Trieste
IS strll undecIded prevents tile implementation of
other provisions of the Peace Treaty with Italv
aml the application of the decision of the Council
of Foreign Min:sters acopted ()r} 22 AjJril 1947
on the subject of the Free Territory of Trieste.

nlent~ ,rl~ cf'.~ pays I'nfreignent clept1i.~ longtctrlps
le T~~l.1te de pa1x .avec l'Italie. Le fait que la
questLon de la mmJnation d'un gouverneur pou·
I
' , _ I rl' ne Triest!' rf'ste tOI]jollrs en
eT
err:tolre
s1;1spe~s, er:J.pec?e de mettre en vigueur d'autres
dBposlt:ons prevu<.:s clans le Traite <le paix .'lvel:
l'I!a~,e et d'a?pliquer la decision dn Comeil des
MJnlstr:e des aff~ircs etrangeres adoptee Le
22, avril 1947 au Sitjet du Territoire libre de
Tfleste,

"h

.

Th~ military High Co~mand of the AngloLe haut commandement rnilitaire de la zone
AmerIcan zone of occupatlOn of the Free Terri~ d':lccupation anglo·a.rnerioaine du Territoire libre
~0!y of Trieste openly infringes the Peace Treaty de Trleste parte OUvertement aeeinte au Traite
with Italy, os well .as the agreed decision of the de pai~ <'.vec I:Italie de meme que la decision.
Council of Foreign Ministers on the subjec~ of concertee adoptee par le Conseil des Ministre. des
the Free Territory. During discussion of the affaires etra,ngeres au sujet de ce Territoire, Au
question of the Free Territory of Trieste at meet~ cours des debats sur le Territoire libre de Trieste
ings of the Secu~ity C:onncil in August 1948 q"ji se son: dero;,tles au Conseil de securite au rnois
[344ilt, 346th, 318th mtetings] many facts were d'aor.t 1948 [344emc, 346-eme, 3'18ime J'lUlI'es] ,
brought forward demonstrating that the Anglo~ 0:1 a cite de nombreux faits qui montrent que
American military authorities are carrying out les autorites ~il~taires anglo-amerieaines prennent,
a whole series of meast:.res in tne Free Territory dans ce Terntolre, une serie de r:Jesttres ('ui, non
of Trieste wl:ich not only run counter to seulement SO:1t incompatibles avec les dis~sitions
the tenlls of the Pe.ace Trellty with Italy, but du J'raite de paix ave.c l'Italie, mais qui constituent
wbic~ constitute a direct violation of that Treaty.
tme violation directe de ce Traite.
In the course of that discussion it was estabIl a ete etabli au cours de ces debats que, en
lished that in March 1948 the Anglo~Americiin mars 1948, le ha\lt commandemcnt anglo~
Rigr, Commanc concluded a number of economic americain a conclu avec le Gouverr.err.ent italien
and financial agreements with the Government of un certain no:nbre d'accords economiques et
ItaJy, which have made it po::sible for Italy to f'inancit:rs qui ont permis a l'Italie d'e1f.hli:- un
establish absolute control over the finances of c:lntrole absolu sur les finances de b. zone angl()~
thl!'; Anglo-American zone of the Free Territory. atTIericaine du Territoire libre.
Arbitrary acts on the part of the Ang)o-ArneriDes mestlres <Irbitraires du haut con~rn:mde­
can High Comma:ld, such as the inclusion of 6e r:Jent anglo-americain, telles que l'inc1usion de la
Anglo-American zone of the Free Territory 20ne anglo-an:ericaine du Territoire libre de
among the "Marshallized" cOUCltries, can only be Trieste parmi les pays "marshallises", doive:lt
regarded as direct violations by the United States ega:ement e:re considerees ccmme des v'olations
of America and lhe United KingC:om of their <Iirectes des ob:ig:::tions cOl1tractees par les Etatsobligations under the Peace Treaty with Italy.
Unis et le Rovaume-Uni en vertu du Traite de
paix: ave-: l'Italie.

As we know, in October 1948 the Commander·
in-Chief of the Anglo-American zone of the Free
Territory of Trieste, the British General Airey,
signed an agreement on behalf of the Free Territory with a representative of the Government of
the United States of America, envisaging the
extension of the "Marshall Plan" to the Territory; the provisions of this agreement imposed
Ul.I0n the Territory servile obligations to the
United States of America,

On sait que, en odohre 1948, 11" genera: bri~
toumique Airey, commandant en chef de la :tone
anglowamericaine de Trie~te, a signe, au nom de
':e TerrilOire, un ac~ord nvet le represe:lta:1t du
GO:.1vernt'ment des Etats-Un:s prevoyant I'appli-:ation &J "Plan Marshal:" i Cl" territolre. Aux
ter:neg de cd accord, le Territoire lihre s'est vu
imposer des obligations asserv:ss:antes it I'egard
des Etats·Unis.

A curiots situation results: the representa~
tives of the United States ()f America and the
United KingdoIT. cou?le their efforts· to violate
the Peace Treaty with Italy in regard to the .Free
Territory of Trieste, to transform thnt TerTltory
into an American n:i1itary base, to suppress democ.ratic movements in the Anglo-A:nerican zo~e,
to encOl1Tage the activities of reacti~l1ary faSC1St
organization and to place representat~Yes of these
org:mintiollS in positions of authoTlty_

It en resulte une situation fort curieuse: les
repre"ent:mts des Et.1.ts-Unis et dll Royallme-Uni
conjuguent leuTS efforts en vtte de violer les ~is­
positions du Traite de paix avec J'Italie relatIves
au Territoire libre de Trieste, de transiormer ce
Territoire en une base :nilitaire americaine, de
reprit11e:' les :notlvements democratiques dam la
zone anglo~amerieainc de Trieste, d'cncourager
I'activite des organisations reactionnaires fascistc5
et de place, ('lUX pastes de commande les representa~ts de eel'; organisations.

In order to camouflage all these illegal activ:ties
which violate the Peace Treaty with Italy, the
representative of the British High Co:nmanc.,
General Airey, signed an agreement Wlth M~.
Joyce, American politkal adviser attache? to hlS
staff, on the incInsion of the Free Terntory .of
Trieste in the group of "Ma:'shaltized" countnes
of Europe. This Anglo-American agree?le n; on
the Free Territory of Trieste, concluded m Vlola·

Pc-ur camou£ler toutes ces mcsures Uegales
prises en yiobtion du Traite de paix avec l'Italie,
le general Aire), representant ch: hallt ccmrtandement britf,nnique, a signe tm accord avec
M. Joyee, conseiller politique ame~ic.<.in aupres
de ce meme general, au sujet cl!' J'inclu,ion du
Territoire libre de Trieste dans le gtot:pe des
pa.ys ecropeens "marsha,ilises", Cet ,ac~or~, anglo~
ame:'ie<:in, conc:u au sUJet dtl Terrlt01:'e .lbre de

6
tion of the Peace Treaty with Italy, was subsequently represented as an "intemation~l agree·
ment" designed to determine the economic and
political fate of the Free Territory, for the
terms of this agreement amount to that British
general delivering the Territory into the bondage
of American monopolies, which, as we are aware,
offer credits only On terms of bondage.
The British general has thus delivered into
long-term. bondage not only the popu1aticn of the
Anglo~American zone of oCl::llpation of the Free
Terrllory of Tricste, but the population of the
Territory as a whole, since it is the population
of the Territory as a whole which will have to
assume responsibility for financial otligations
contracted during the Anglo-A merical1 occupation
of one part or the Free Territory.
All of this proves that the Anglo-American
occupation authorities, not content with openly
yiolating the Peace Treaty, seek to reduce the
Free Territorj of Trieste to servitude by imposing enslaving economic and financial obligations
t1pOn the population without :ts knowledge or
consent.

Trieste en violation du Traite de paix avec l'll.1l;e,
est (,;n~lli'e prc5el1te CQlllme un "accord il;l~nla­
tional" appele a determiner la situation economique et politique du Territoire 1ibre. Or, aux
termes de cet accord, le general britanniqtle a
bel et bien livre le Territoire libre aux monopo[es
americains qui, COO1me on le sait, n'ouvrcnt de
credits qu'a dcs conditions asservissantes.
Ain,.,i done le genb-al britannique a Evre a
I'exploitation des monopoles americains non seulement la population de la zone d'occt.:pation
ang1o-americaine du Te:ritoire libre de Trieste,
mais a;lssi la population du Territoire tout entier.
En effet, 1es dettes C011tnactees pendant I'occupation par les Dritanniques et les Americatns
d'unepartie d·l Territoire lib re devront etre
payees par la population du Territoire tont eutier.
Tout cela montre que, non cor.tentes de violer
ouvertement le Traite de paix ,wec l'Ita:ic, les
autorit~s d'occupation anglo-americaines ch~r­
chent encore a reduire le Ter:1toire tibre de
Trieste en esclavage en 1ui irnposant des obligations finanderes et economiques asservissantes,
rinsu et sans le consentemcnt de la population
de Cl'. Territoire.

a

It is knowr.., however, that the decisicn of the
Council of Foreign Ministers of the Four Powers
-the USSR, the United States of America, the
United Kingdom and France-on the hasis 0 f
the report of the Trieste Commission in Moscow,
laid down on 22 April 1947 that external financial
aid ior the :Free Territory of Trieste for the
purpose of covering essential requirelllen:s during
the initial period should come solely from the
reserves !Jf the United Nations, to the extent of
five million dollars, as had been recommended by
the Secnrity Council.

On sait cependant que le Cons€il des MiniSb-es
des affaires etr.mgeres des quatre Puissances a s,wDir, l'UR5S, les Etats-Unis d'All1erique, le
Royaume- Uni et la France - avail adopte, le
22 avril 1947, a Moscou, a la suite dw rapport
de la Commission d'enquete sur Trie~te, uue
decision 1a11X termes de laquelle I'aide financierc
accordee du clehxs au TerritOlre libre de :rieste,
pour faire face aux besoins urgents pendant la
premiere periode, ne devait provenir que des ressources de l'Organ1s<Jti'On des Nutions Unies et
devait s'elever it doq millions de dollars, ai11s1
que l'avait recomrt1.ahd~ le Conseil de securite.

He~ce, by the arbitrary inclusion of tht: Anglo~
Amcncan ·zone of the Free Territory of Trieste
~~he "Marsh all ~lan" sys~em and by their imposlbon of oppress1ve financial and econonic obli~
gations on that zone and thereby on the Territory as a whole, the Governments of tlle United
States of America and the United Kingdom are
ll(;t only violating the terms of the Peace Treaty
With ~taly and the Sti:.tute of the Free Territory
of Tneste, but arc also violating dceisicns taken
by t~le C'JUncil of Foreign Ministers on the
questlOn.

En incorporant arbitrairement la zone angloamericaine du Territoire libre de Trieste dans
le systeme du "Plan 1'~arshall" et en imposant
a cette zone, et par cOllsequent it l'ensemble ciu
Territoire, des obligations financieres et ecooomiques' asservissantes, les Gouvernements des
Etats-Uni::; d'Amerique et du Royaume-Uni enfreignent non seulement les clauses du Tralte de
paix et le S"tatut du Territoire :ibre de Trieste.
mais 2ussi les decisions adoptees par le Conseil
des Ministres des affaires etral1geres it. Cl'. sujet.

As we know, the first clause of the abovequoted decision of the Council of Foreign Ministers lays down that, ir. deciding qllestior.s related
to the budget, the balance of payments, foreign
exch~nge, customs and other 5nandal and economl.c matters, the economic independence of the
Terntory mu~t be safeguarded. By the arbitrary
conclusion of financial and eccnomic agreements
on .behalf of the Anglo-Amerkan zone of occupation, and I::y compf'~ling it to he a part of the
"Mars~~lI Plan", the Anglo-American occttpation
au.tb~ntles are bl:ltantly violating one of the basic
pnn,..clples underly!ng the. ~ecision of 22 April
J-941 of the Cotmcll of MinIsters on the economic
mdependence of the Free Territory of Trieste.

Comme on le sait, le premier point de la decision du Consei1 des Ministres des affaires etrangeres prevoit que la soluti'on des problemes relatifs
all budget, a la balance des paiements, a la monnaie, aux dou,mes. ,dnsi que des atltrcs pr()bJemes
d'ordre economique et financier ayant trait an
Territoire lihre de Trieste, devra tenir 'compte
de la necessite d'assurer l'independance economique de ce Territoire. En contract<lnt arbitrai:rement des accords nnal1ciers et e('onomiques au
nom de la 7.0ne d'occupation ang:o-arnericaine du
Territoire libre et en la faisant partieiper au
Plan Marshall, 1es autorites d'occnpation angloamericaines ont grossierell1ent vio1e un des principes ~ssentlels de la decision adoptee par le
Conse:! des Ministres des affail"es etrangeres le
22 avril 1947 GU sujet de l'independance economique du Terri:oire libre de Trieste.

All these facts show that, in their policy regarding the Free Territory of Triestc, the Gov·ern-

Tout cela montre QtlC, dans leur politique a
l'egard du Territoire libre de Trieste, les Gouver-

ments of the United St<ltes of America and of
the United Kingdom are motivated by narrow
and selfish interests, and blatantly violate the
obligations they have assnmed under the Peace
Treat} with Italy ,]Dd under agreed de:::isions of
the Council of Foreign Mini!;tel's.

Eta,ls-Unis cl'Amerique et du
n'obeissen'; qu'a :el:l·S inten~ts
egoistes et violent grossiercment les obligations
gu':!:; avaient asstffi,ies ;till< terrr.es du Traite
de paix avec l'Italie et cOotormemer:t aux decisions roncertees du COllseil des lvlin;sti'C's des
<tffaires etrangeres.

The manoeuvres unfolded in the Security
Cocndl by the representative of the United
States of Ameri~a and of the United Kingdop
to prevent <l decision on the appointment of the
Governor of the Frte Territory of Trieste :>Ire
intendec to Impede establishment of those democratic organs of a&ninistrntion j~ the Free Territory wbich were ellvisc.ged in the Peace Treaty,
and to prolong indefinitely the occupation of tl:e
territory by A:lglo-American forces.
The delegation of the eSSR con,~iders inad
missible any further delay in appointing a Gov~
UJ10r of the Free Territory of T:ieste, and proposes that the c;uestjon should ~e disCllssed
immediately_
In view of the need for the earliest pDssible
solutiOt; of the q~estion, the de:egafon of the
LJSSR WIshes to state that it is ready te support
the c:w_didatnre of Colonel Fbc:-iger, whose
:lame was earlier put forw&rd for the post of
Governor of the F:ee Territory of Trieste by
other permanent members of the Seettrity Cotmdl.

Les r.w.n~uvres depJoyres all C..onsei~ de se-Ctlrite par les representants des Etats~Unis d'Amefiquc et dn Royal~me-Ul:i en vue de sabo~cr la.
prise d'une decision sm la nomination d'lr:t
gOLlverneur pollr le Territoire libre de Trieste ont
pour but d'empkher l'etabli~ser.le:lt des Ql'ganes
gouvernementaux denocratiques prevt:s pour ce
Territotre par le Tra.ite de IJab. avec l'ltalie, et
de prolonger i:t.definiment ['occupation de ce
:erritoire par l~s fon_es anglo-americaines.

w

As we know, 0'1 2 September 1947, the represe:Jtative of ~he United Kingdom 3uJrnited the
name I)f Colonel Fluckig"er as candkl<lte for the
pest of Governor of the Free Territory of Trie~te
to the Suh-Co:nmittee set ltp by the Secltfity
Cound on 10 July 1947 to coUt:C[ additio:la:
inforrr.ation aoout the candidates Pl1t forward.
On 10 Septenber the CoanciJ received all
official letter from be Chairman of tlle StlbCommittee, which stated that Colonel Fluckige:had been included in the list of car.didates and
tlmt the Sub-Cammit~ee had !l0 obi~ction to hi;
c<1ndic.attlre.
b view of these c:rcuffistances, the uelegation
of :he USSR wishes to state tJ-:at it is ready to
accept this cand:d<lture.
Sir Tcrcnce SnoNE {'United Kingdom): Tre
United Kingdom delegation ha~ made no seLret
of its attitude in regard to the Free Territory of
'Tries:e. It :'as done its best to ccntribute to the
carrying ellt oi tile prot'isions of tne Peace Treaty
in tl,is matter. It dees not accept the contentiOll
of the representat:ve of the USSR that it was
responsible ior the delay whic:l has occ.lTrcd since
this matter was first raised.

The story lS r8ther longer than Mr. Malik's

ve~sbn suggests, <lnd in order to jJll: it ill a more

cOercct hgh I propose to quote the followbg
excerpt ~rom a Spel::l:;l made by Sir Alex~nder
Cadogan at the 350th meet:ng of the Secllrity
Council un 16 AtlgU3t bst. The text says:
"On 21 January 1947.
1"- th::J is, Sir
Alexander Cadogan-"had a talk on the subject
with ... Mr. Grolliylw, pointing out to him that
the Security Council had a duty b this matter,
tb1t it w<;s d~sjrable that the five permanen:
members should ge: together on the subject ::.nd
try to reach agreeme:lt, and, :noreover, that the

nemellls

des

RoyaullJe-UlIi

La delegati.on de I'DRSS cstime qu'il est
madmissible de retarder davantage la Le~ignation
d'un g()uvemeur pou: le Territoire liLre de Trieste
et propose de passer illlmediatement .i l'eX3.me_n
de eette Question.
Vu 1", necessi:e de :reg~er cette 1lmstJon le plus
vi:e possibie, la delegation de I'WSS decI<l.re
qt:'elle est prete a suutellir la candidature cu
cdoneJ FJuckiger, Cor.t la des:gnaton :la poste
de gotlvemel1l in Tcnitoire libre de Ttie,~te .wait
ete presentee par dJautrcs membres permanents
du Conseil de sec:.uritf...
Comme on le sait, le 2 septembre 1947 le representant du Royaume~Uni avait presentp., ::tu Sous·
Cornite cree 'Jar le Conseil de securite le 10 juilld 1947 en v:le de rasSf"mhl~r des renseignements
supplementai:es Stl:" les candidats proj:lOSeS, le
colonel Fludriger comme candidat au poste de
Gouverneur dll Tefl"itoi:e libre de Trieste.
Le 10 septembre 1947, le Consell a re~u ,me
lett:e officielle du Pres:dent ce ee .'3ot:s-Comite
l'informant que le r:om du colo:Je: F1Ui:kg~r avait
ete porte sur la Iiste ces candidats et qtle le Sous
Comi~~ n'a.vait aUCUf.e objection contre sa cancidature.
Tenant COlnpt.. de ces cDrlsiderations, la delegation de l'URSS est prete
accepter cette
tanrlidature.
w

a

Sir Terer:ce SHONE (Royaume-Uni) (tradui{
de l'e-nglais): Li delegation clu Roy;1llme-Uni n'a

pas fait mystere de sa poSition it l'egard du pl"OJu Tcrritoire librE'_ Of' Trieste, Elle s'est
d'force~ de sor. mieux d'aider mettrc eK.ecution
les dispos;t~OfJ.~ du Traite de paix qui Dnt trait
11 ce~te question et die l1'adr.1et pas la these du
repr~_sentan: de l'URSS, selon laquelle e]e serait
responsable des lenteurs apportees i la solution
de la question.
L'hi3tcire est plus 101Jgtle que ne le l:r.isse croire
la versicn de Yr. Mlilik et, pour presenter les
faits sous ~1ll jour plus exact, je me prolJu,'se de
ci-::er un extrait dt: discf)ur~ ?rononce par Sir
Alexander Cadogc.n a la 350tmt: sear.cc du Conseil
de securitc, le 16 aout demier, Sir Alexander
Cadog<Ln a decla:e:
"Le 31 ja:wier 1947,
;'ai - c'est-a-~ire
Sir Alexander Cadogan - 'eu t:.ne co!'.vcr£:ttlOn
Sill' la question avec M. Gromyko; je lui at fait
renmrquer que le COIl:;eil dc sccurite avait une
respon.s<:bilite en la matiere, qll'iJ :' au~ait il.V'antage a ce que les ci:lq membrE's pe,rnanents se
reunissent et s'ef.orcent de se mett:e d'aceord et,
')l~Ille

a

a

-matter was likely to be rather urgent. He said
he h,Hl no instructions. 1 begged him to cable to
Moscow for such instructions. I do not know
'Whether he did so or not.

de pillS, que l'affaire presentait certainement un
camctere d't:rgence. Il m'a repondu n'avoir pas
w;u d'instructions. ] e I'ai prie de telegraphier
Moscot\! pour en obtenir, mais j'ignore s'il /a fait.

"On 19 February the representatives of the
United States, France, the Union of Soviet
Socialist Repl1blics and I had a conversation, in
the course of which certain names were submitted by the representative of the United States.
I had already given him the name of a candidate
favoured by my Government, and the name of
that candidate was included in the list of five
candidates ",hich was then handed to Mr.
Gromyko. Mr. Gromyko was unable to make
any comment at all. He had no candidate to
propose; he had no views on the part of his
Gover:lrnent in regard to the five candidates
whose names had been submitted for his consideration. At that meeting, however, the three
other' represe:Jtatives pressed the l1rgency of the
matter and the neces::;ity, or at least the desirability, of reaching some agreement by 1 March.

"Le 19 fevrier, au cOtlrs d'une conversation
entre les representants des Etats-Ullis d'Amerique, de la France, de l'URSS et moi-meme, le
representant des Etats-Dnis proposa certains
noms.]e lui avais deja communique le nom d'un
candidat approtlv6 par mon Gouvernement; on
ajouta ce nom a la liste de dnq candid:l.ts que
I'on remit ensuite. a. M. Gromyko. M. G:omyko
ne put formuler aucune observation. 11 n'avait
pas de can&dat a presenter; il ignomit le point
de vue de wn GOl1vcrnement sur les candidats
clont les dossiers lui avaient ete communiq:tes aux
cette rneme seance,
fins d'examen. Toutefois,
les trois autres representants soulignerent le
caractere urgent de la question et la necessite, ou
tout au mains l'avlllttage, q'J'il y aurait se mettre
d'accord avant le ler mar.';.

"They kept up their pressure through the rest
of the month of February and during the whole
of March, but it was not until 21 April that there
was a meeting of the representatives of the five
permanent members of the Security Council.
That was nearly three months after we had first
broached the question to Mr. Gromyko, emphasizing the urgency of it. Two or three days before
21 April, Mc. Gromyko did at last put in H_e name
of a USSR candidate for the post. That candi~
date proved unacceptable to the other representatives, who, I think I am correct in saying, all
stated the reasons for their objection. Cert.ainly,
I stated mine. Even at that date, 21 April, Mr.
Gromyko told us lhat ht was ull<lble to make
any comment at all on the five candidates whose
names had been submitted for his consideration.

"Us continuerent d'insister dans ce sens jus~
qu'a. la fin CUI mois de fevrier et pendant tout le
mois de mars; neanmoins, Ce £ut le 21 avril seu~
1t:1Ilenl 4ue Its rcprcsentants des cinq membres
pertr.anents du Conseil de s~kurite se reunirent.
Il y avait presque trois mois que nous avions
pour la premiere fois presente la question
M. Gromyko, en insistant sur son caractere
d'urgence. Deux ou ,trois joursavant cette date,
M. Gromyko prOposa entin un candidat de I'URSS
au poste en question. Les autres representants
trouverent cette candidatjre inacceptable, et je
ero\s me souvenir qu'ils exposerent tous ies raisons
de leur refus. ]e sl1is sur, en tout CaS, d'avoir
donne les micnnes. Meme :tlors, le 21 lwrll.
M. Gromyb nous dit encore qu'il ne pouvait
formuler aucune observation sur les dnq candi.dats dont les noms lui avaient ete communiques.

"At that meeting, the representatives of Chim
and the United States and I indicated that
althoug,h, of course, we maintained o"lr own
choices, we nevertheless would accept any of three
candidates appearing on the list: that is to say,
each of us, while supporting his own candidate,
was nevertl-:eless quite ready to accept a candi~
date ~r candidates put forward by other representatives present.. That Was not the position
of the representative of the USSR, who maintained his Sl1pport of the candidate proposed by
the USSR and who was unable to indicate any
support for any of the other.'!.
.

"A cettc seance, les representants df! la Chine,
des Etats-Unis d'Am6riqJt el moi-merr.c avons
declare que, tout en appuyant, bien entendu, nos
candidats respectifs, nous acceptions l'uo quel.
conque des trois autres cartdidats figurant sUr
la Iiste; en d'autres 1:ermes, chac:tn de nous, toct
en appuyant la candidat11!Te qu'il presentait, etait
tout fait dispose
accepter le ou les candidats
des autres representants. Le representant de
l'URSS, an contraire, continuait d'appuyer le
candidat propose par son payssa:lS pouvoir aucu~
nement se prononcer en favenr de I'une des autre.s
candidatures.

. "A few days later, on 25 April, the representatIve of the USSR produced a further cmdidate
wh? als9 proved unacceptable, again for reason~
whIch were stated. Mr. Gromyko was still unable
to make any comment in regard to the olher
candidate~. On that occasion, the representative
of the Umted States indicated th"t he cou:d accept
any OlIe of si~ candidates who had by then bee:J.
proposed by dlfferent delegations, and I indicated
that I could accept anyone of five candidates
proposed by different delegations.

"Quelques jours plus tard, le 25 a.vril, le representant de I'URSS proposa une autre eatldidature
qUI, pour des raisons qui furent alors bdiquees,
s'ave-ra egalement inacceptable. M. Gromyko ne
pouvait to'Jjours pas donner son avis sur les
autres candidats. Ce jour~1<I., le representant deg,
Etats~Unis de.clara qu'il pouvait accepter l'un
que1c:onque des six candidats qu'avaient proposes
jusque-la differentes delegations, et j'ai declare
pouvoir accepter l'un quelconque des einq candidats proposes.

"According to my record, there was <: further
meeting of the five permanent members On
22 May, nearly fOur months after the first
approach to the representative of the USSR. On
that occasion, Mr. Gromyko again repeated that

"D'apres mes notes, les dnq mcmbres permanents se reunirent de nouveau le 22 mai, soit pres
de quatre mois apres que le representant de
l'URSS eut ete saisi de la question; M. Gromyko
reve-ta, a cette seance, que les deux candidats que

a

a

a

a

a

a

9
he could accept no. candidate except those two
whom he had been tnstrueted by his Gilvernment
to put forward.

"On 16 June [141st meeting), nearly five

~ollths after the fi:-st approach to the representa-

~o~ Gouverr.ement lui avait prescrit de presenter
etalent les seuls qu'il pouvait accepter.
':Le

19 juill [141ef~e ,)"hmct') , presqllc ci:tq

mOl~ a_ores que nous e.umes saisi

le representant

tive 0:£ the USSR, he announced in the Security
Council tha~ he was not prepared to discuss the
problem untIl the Peace Treaty edered into force.
Nevertheless, on 16 June, he did, as a matter of
fact,. produce a third candidate. That suggestion
of hiS suffered the samf" hteas his previous ones:
there were objections to that third candidate
which were explained by other representatives.

de sect:nte qu 11 n avalt pas l'intention d'examinel'
cette, que~tion avant. que le Traite de paix: fut
entre e;.l ~~lgueur. C; Jour-la, c9cndant, il propcsa
unA trolSlerne candldat. Sa proposition subit le
meme sort que les prececentes, Les autres representan:s refuserent ce candidat en donnaut leurs
moC.fs.

"We finally come to the cate of 20 June, when
the President began his recital of the history of

"Nous en arrivons enfin au 20 juin date a
~aqt:elle le President fait COffi'11enCer 50~ expose

the ma.tter in connexion wi~h the meeting of the
Security Council of that date;

d~ 1':UR?? de}a ~ues~10n, il fi.: savoir au Conseil

~ propos d~ la. reunioI: UU COI:seil de sCCllritc qui

5 est tent:.e a cette date.

"By that time I think the other delegations
".re trois que l'obstruction du representant de
were almost won: dOwn by USSi{ obstrt.1ction, l'UR~S avait alors fini par decourager presque
That Council meeting [143rd meetillg], it is true, cott'.p1etement lcs nutres delegaticns. Le Cl)nseil
was unable to accomplish anything, mucl"~ The ne fit pas grand-.chose pendant cette seance
matter was referred back to a closed meeting.
[143~f seanc~J et il d~ci~a qu~ la question serait
We still r,naintained our position that we preferred exanllnee en seance pnvee. Comme auparavant,
the candIdate whom We had originally put up- nous - j'entends la deU~gation du Royaume-Uni
I am speaking o( the Ullited Kingdom delegation - accordions la preferer:ce. au c;mdidat que nous
-but that we could su pport various other candi- avions presente des le debut, en ajoutant toute~
dates who hat! been suggested at various times fois . que r.ous pourrians appuyer certaing des
by other delegations. The USSR representative candldats Que le.> autres de:lt~gatiuns aVi/,iell: premerely objected to all the candid:;tes other than sentes
differente~ occasions. Le representant
those whom he hau been instructed to propose. de 1'l.:RSS refusa purement et simplement taus
1 remind the Council that t3at was nearly five les ca.,didats, sauf ceux qu'it avait ordre de pre~
months after we had begun the discussion of this senter. Puis-je rappe:er au Conseil que ced se
unhappy question.
passait environ dnq mo:s apres gUl; nous eumes
entrepris l'examen de cette 'llalheureuse question?

a

"1 need not, I think, follow in detail the remain"Il est inutile, je crois, cue j'entre dans le
At a meeting on 10 July [155th meet- detail des evenements qui ont suivi. Le 10 juillet

jog stages.

ing) the Security Council appointed a sub-com~ [155bn(' .dance), le Con.eiJ de securite nomma un
mittee to collate various suggestions wh:ch had sous-comite charge de grouper les civerses propObeen made, and the Coundl met :l~ain on 24 Sep- sitions, et it s'est reun~ de nouveau le 24 septembre
tember [203rd meeting] to consider three names [2D3eme seancel pour examiner trois c.111&dawhich were put to it by that sub-con:mittee. Most tures, que lul recommandait le Sous·Cornite. La
delegations favoured more than cne of those mc.jo~itc des delega.tions st" :'Jr(lnom;a en faveur
candidates, PersonallYI I was able to favour two, de deux au moins de ces candidats. Pour ma part,
but the represe.ntative of the USSR still stuck j'en acceftais de:.tx, ma:s le representant de
to his own candidate. To conti:1l1e this weary l'URSS s en tenait tOlljours au sieu. Pour cont;nuer cette ennuyeuse histoire ... ]a question fut
hi.~tory ..• the matter was referred agab to the
five permanent members. All this, it should be a nouveau renvoyee aux cing membres perma·
rememberec, was nearly eight months after the nents. N'cubliDns pas qu'il" y avai~ alors presqt:e
first broacl1ing of this question. Then" was a huit :ncis que la question avait Cte soulevee pour
dosed meeting oi the five permanent members on la premiere fois. Lea tinq r.1cmb:es permanen~s
2S September, but the position remained exactly se reunirent huis c10~ le 25 septernbre, mais la
the same, and so it continced until 10 October situation demeura inchangee; i: en fut ainsi jus·
'When it was agreed to ask th~ Yugoslav ane qt:.'au 10 octobre, date a l..quelle il fut decide
Italian Gover:unents to get togethf'r and see if de demander aux Gouvernemcnts yougoslave et
they, by any chance, could agree on a candidate. italien d'entrer en .::on3ultatlor.s ann de voir si,
par aventure, ils pOllITaient se mettre d'ac.co;d
Ser un candidat.

a

"On that occasi<ln, for the first time, eight and
a half months after the beginning of this exchange
of views, the representative of lhe Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics in.dicated that he coulrl ar.cept
one other candidate besides his own. Unfortu~
nately, he hit upon one about whom tnert was no
agreement among the other representatives, and,
therefore, the matter was not advanced very far.
The Yugoslav and Italian Government.c; failed to
agree on a caildidak, and I, on the instructions of
my Gaverr:ment, indicated that r codd not support
the appoir.tment of .a candidate who had been

"C'eat alers qee, poUt' la premiere fo:s apn!s
huit mois et demi d'echanges de yl1es, le representant de !'URSS lit savoir qu'i: pourrait accepter
un eandidat en plus du sitn. Malheureusement,
le nom qu'il choisit n'avdit pM rcuni l'accord de_"
autres Tepresentants, et cela ne servit pas
g~and-chosf'. J .es Gouvernetnents italien et yougoslave r.e purent se mettre d'~.ccorc sur un candidat
et, confonnernent anx instructions de man Gou·
vernernent, je u6c1a~ai que je ne pOllvais appuyer
la nomination d'un candid.at qui serait rejete par
l'une ou l'autre des parties interessees, sait l'ftalie,

a

turned down by one or other of the interested soit la Yougoslavle. C'etait apparemment nne sage
parties, Italian or Yugoslav. ] think that t]-.at decision.
w;).!; prohahly a wise decision.
"Nons voici done au mois de ma:s. Dans Cl'S
"So we come to March. As is well known, in
those circumstances and for other reasons, on conditions, comme nous le sa'lOns tous et pour
20 March the United States, French and United d'autres ralsons encore, les GOL1verne~ents des
Kingdom Governmen:s made their declaration Etats~Unis, de la France et du Roya'lme-Uni ont
which has been referred to already before the fait, le 20 mars, une declaration dont il a deja ete
question au Conseil [5;7071,
Security Cound [5/707].
"Lorsque :e President c1u Consel! de securite
"When the President of the Security Council
spoke on 10 August [346th meeting] in his prit la parole le 10 aout [346e-me seance], ell sa
capacity as USSR re?re!ien~alive, he stttcd ~hat qualite de representant de l'URSS, il dit que la
the diffict1lty in agreeing on a Governor was gIven raison principale invoquee par les tro;s Puissances
by the three Powers as the main reasOl: fo~ the lorsqu'elles dedan~rent, le 20 mars, que le 'Terrideclaration of 20 March that the Free Territory toire libre devait faire retour a l']talie, etait la
should return to Italy, but I must reJ:lind the difficulte de se mettre d'accord pour nommer un
Council that tllis was only one of the reaSO:ls. GOl1verneur; je dais toutefois rappeler au Conseil
As the declaration itself specifically stated, it was que cette raison n'etait pas la seule. Comrne la
the unsatisfactory conditions in the Yugoslav declaration elle-meme l'indique explicitement, la
zone and the virtual incorporation of 6at zone situation peu satisfaisante qui regnait clans la
into Yugoslavia which caused the three Govern- zone yougoslave et I'annexion vil'tllelle de celle-ci
ments to realize that the settlen:ent prescribed a la Yougoslavie ant fait comprendre aux trois
in the Peace Treatv had been rendered t:n- Gouvernements l'impossibilite d'effectuer le reglement prescrit dans le Traite de paix".
workable"
.
During this long period of delay caused by
Pendant ce long retard cause par l'obstruction
the obstruction of tl:e USSR, tne situation in de l'U~SS, la situation a Trieste s'est serieuseTrieste suffered serious deterioration owing to ment aggravee par suite de l'E.ction des alltorites.
tbf actio:. of the Yugoslav authorities. All 6is .Yougoslaves. Tont cela a He e~p1ique en detail
was explained in detail to the Security Council au Conseil de securite en aotit deroier [350hnelasl August [350th meeting]. Eventually, thf'. sru#cel_ Finalemt'n! la situation est devenue
situation became such that, in the view of my telle que, de l'avis de mon Gouvemement, avis
Government-and this view was shared by the que p-.artageaient les Gouvernements des EtatsUnited States and French Governments-the Unis cl'Amerique et de la France, il n'etait plus
task of a Governor had become impossible and possible a un gouvemellr de s'acquitter de sa
the solution provided in the Pea~ Treaty was no clche et la solution prevue par le Traite de paix
longer workable.
etait devenue inap?1icab1e.
Aussi, le 20 mars de l'annee dem:ere, IfS trois
So, On 20 March of last year, the three Governmentsintimated formally to the USSR Gouvernements ont-ils formellement averd le
Government [S/707] thnt they h",d reached the Gouvernement de I'URSS [S/707] qu'ils etaient
cO:1clusion that the only real sohltion l<.y in the arrives a cette condnsion que la seule vraie solurestoration of the Free Territory :0 Italy. There tio11 etait de placer de nouveau le Territoire libre
is no secret about this, and direct reference was sous la souverainete italienne, 11 n'y a pas de secret
made to it in the discussion of Trieste in the i Cl' sujet, et la question a !fte mentionnee ouverSecurity Coundl last Aug:.lst [350th meeting]. tement au cours de la discussion de la question de
But the Government of tr.e USSR has not to Tricste all Conseif de secutite, en aout dernier
this day seen lit to give any direct or serious [350eme seance], Neanmoins, le Gotlvernement
reply to :he conmunication from the three Pbwers 'de l'URSS n'a pas juge apropos jusqu'ici de
of 20Mlirch, or to their subsequent communica~ clonner une reponse directe cu serieuse, ni a la.
tien of 16 April giving flJf:her ir.f0n11ation con- communication des trois Puissances en date du
cerning the procedure they bd in mind for giving 20 mars, ni a leur communication uherieure 'du
effect to their proposal, and asking it for its views 16 avril, clans laquelle eiles donnaierit des renseias to the procedme which it would propose for gncme:1ts comp1ementaires sur la p:ocedc.re qui.
tile subs~antive proposal made to it by the three i leur avis, devrait etre suivie pour la mise en
ceuvre de Ieur proposition et demandaient au
Powers,
Gouvernement de I'URSS' de faire:onnaitre son
point de vue quant a la procedure a $uivre pour
examiner la proposition concrete des trois
Puissance:;,
There, for the mcment, the matter rests, So
C'est la que l'affaire en {'~t pou: le moment.
far as my GoYernment, at least, is concerned, it Pour te qui est de man Gouvernement, tout au
is not prepared in the circntnstar.ces to consider mains, il n'estpas dispose, etant donne la situation ..
the appointment of a Governor of Trieste,
a examiner la question de la designation d'un
gouverneur pour k. Territoire libre d~ Trieste,
. ~r. AUs1'IN Cquited States of Amer:ca) : The
slgmficance of t1us debate, thecmpbasis on the
rc?eated attempts to come to an agreenent on a
Governcr, is based on the Treaty itself. Annex 7
to the Treaty is called "]nstrument fOr the Provisional Re.gime, of the Free Territory of Trieste."
The Sec1lnty CounCil acce:::.ted responsibility for

M, AUSTIN (Etats~Unis d'Amerique) (trQduit
de l'anglais): C'est Jans le Traite llti-ltJeme qu'il
£.aut chercher le sens dece debat e: la raiSon <le'
I'inslstance avec laquelle on rappe:te les efforts.
repetes que le Conseil a faits pour aboutir a un
accorc sur le choix d'un gouverneur. L'aunexe VII au Traite est intitulee "]nstrument.

11

the Free Territo~y prOVISions in January 1947
(91sl 11Ieeting] , That was some time ago. This
annl:>I. emphasized and made urgen; the time
element in the agreement on a Governor for this
Free Territory, which was conceived of as an
independent territory at tl,at liml:.

relatif, all regime provisoire du Territoire libre
~e Tneste". Le Conseil de securitc a accepte, en
J~:lV[l"r ~947 [91dm.. S[:(7.J!,,:,eL il y 3 done deja
l~I1, certam ~emps, d'Hre responsable des dispoSitions ~elatl"es at: Territoire lib re, L'annexe en
q~csli?r: i,rl.sistc sur le filcteur ter.lps et sur la
necesslte ce se mettre d'accord le plus tot possible
s.ur le .ch.oix ~':m gOl1VerneUl pDur le Territoire
Ilbr~. ,qUl. et;lt reg,n:J6, ;l ['epuljue, CO:11me un
terntOlre maependan:.

Article 1 of auucx VU thus says th<1.t; "The
Governor shat asSt:me office in the Free Terri·
tory at :he earEes: possible moment aftet the
coming into force of the r-resent Treaty,"

Void ce ",ue <lit, en e.fIet, l'artic1t> pn':m:~r de
l'annexe VII: "Le Gouverneur entrera en kmction dans le Territoi:-e Libre le plus tOt possible
apre; l'eltlree ell vigueur du Frcsellt Tl'aite de
Paix".

I do not know how time can be made more

~e ne vois pas comrr.en: on pOl1rrait dire plus
dalremen: ~ue le temps est l'ele:nent essentieL
d'une operation. C'est pou~ c~tte raison que nous
110U5 SOITlmcs cfforcCs ce ;eaiiser l'unanimite ele.'>
cinq grandes PuissanC'cs, prescrite pa:- la Charte,
et de nOlls mettre d'accord sur llne personnaIite,
avant que le Truite n'entfiit en vigucur. C'etait
en agissant aimi que nons pom:ions executer, en
toute bonne foi, en qualiti d'orgalle ['esponsable
des Nations Unies, la partie e:' question du Traite,
On se sOlwient que le CO:lseil a assume cette
responsabilite :lU debut de ·'Ilr.nee 1947 et que
les efforts con:inus qu'a si eloqucmmer:t {Merits
ki le representant du RoyaumeMUni se sont pelll-·
sltivis, depui;; le moment ,)U le Conseil 1.1 assume
eette responsabilite jll5qU'i l'entree en viguem du
Traite c'est-a~dire jJsqu'<.t1 15 septembre
1947 - sans qu'il ait ete po,55ibk de se mcttre
d'acco:-d sur \:.D :lOm.

clearly the essence of a transaction than in that
\,;ording. It was for that reason that we tried
to carry OU:' this part of the C:...arter relaling to

the cr.ar.imity o~ the five great Powers and to
arrive at an agreement on the person before the
Treaty shouLc: come into effect; it was so that
we should be carrying ant in good faith, as a
responsible organ of the enited Nations, this
part of the Trea~y.
The :otlnLil will .emember tllat we had
assumed this responsibility at the beginning of the
year 2947, ana tha-: all the continuous effort that
has hee"! w elDq\1cntly Jescr:bed here by the
representative of the Uni:ed Kingdom haa been
going on il·oln tl'e time that we 2ssum~d tha-t
£csponsibility down to :111' time when the Treaty
came into effect-that was on 15 September 1947
-and that we had not '.:hen ;:.rrived d name upon
which we CQ:.lld agree.
I am not arguing as to who is wrong and who
is right: I am not saying which side created the
obstacles. It is not necessary for ;15 to argue that
question here. We are dealing with the cold fact
that a long time passed-nin!' ~nonths-during
which we were trying and trying to cOUle to an
agreement Oll a caJ1llidate for Governor and could
no: attain such an 4gn;~ement-and this was a -case
that called for unanimity.
Article 1 of the annex-and this is the only
part of that article which I have not yet readprovided as follows:
"Pending ass'.llI::ption of office by the Governor,
the Free Territory shall conti:Iue to he administered by the Allied military cQ1rlmanus within
their respccfve zones,"
And this is where the possibility was opened
for deterioration of the situation ir. Trieste; this
is where the opportunity was given for a change
of fundamental character in the sitllation-unc
the time between January and September was
ample for this deterioration to occur. But it
contintled to be difficult to reach agreement.
After :his Tre;J.ty came into effect, that is, after
15 Septemher 1947, it cOllt:mled to be impossible
to arrive at unanimity in regard to a candidate.
It has been eloquently called to the attention
of the membe,s of the Secm-ity Coun-cil by the
representative of the United Kingdom-and I
know that they remember it-that the jQint not,e
sent b." the Govefllments of the Dnitd Kingllolll,
France and the United States to the Govern'ment
of the Union of Snvil"t Socialist Republics, which
is contained in ciocumer.t S/707, was dated

Je ne discute p~ la qtte~tion de savoir ql:i
a tol t et t;Ul a mlson; je ne clis pas de ~ucl
cote sont vellU;; les obstacles. II est il1utile de
dtscilter de cela id. Nous nollS OCCUPO!lS dll
:ait p~r et simple qu'un long temps s'est ecoule
_ exactement neuf mJis - pend,mt lcque! UOl:S
n'avorl.s epargne aucun effOlt pour nous mettre
r1'accord sur un candidat all poste de gOllver~
netT et nous ::J'Y SGmmes pas parveml~; il s'agit
d'un cas pour leqllel l'llnanimite eta:t uecessaire.
L'al'tide pr=lcr de l'annexe VII - c'est la
5cde partie de Ctt arti:le dont je :1'aie pa.> er:core
clonne lectt:.re ---;- prescrit que:
"Jusqu'a l'entree en £anction <Iu Gouvemeur,
le Territoire libre continuera d'etrc administre
par les cOlTunandements railitai~es a:lies, ag:s~
sant chaeun dans :eu:- zone respective."
VOLla ce qlli est a l'origine de l'aggravation de
la situation a Trieste; voila pourquoi la situatinn
a pu changer enliereme:,t de caractere - et le
temps c,ui s'est ecoule de .ianvier a s,eptem?re a
large:l1ent suffi pour Jui perme:tre de s envcnlmer.
Neanmoins it etait toujOtlrs difticile de s~ mettre
c1'accord, Aprfo$ l'entn~e en viglleur du Trait~,
c'est-a-dire apres ie 15 sept~mb~c ,1947',te CO.1l5;1~
n'a pas retlssi davantage a re::lllser 1unan1l11lte
sur Ull canciida:,
Le represcnt;;nt du Roya.l.llne-Uni a attire [attention des :nembres a:.! Con~eil de secmite et je sais qu'ils ne l'avaient d'ailleur~ p<lS oublie
_ sur Le fait que la note commune aclressee par
les Gouve"nements du Royaull1e-Uni, de :a France
et des Etats-Unis all GOllvemement de j'URSS
[,fj707J porte la date GU 20 man 1948 et q~'el1e
a et'; cOlnmuniqll~e :l,l1:lC men.bres du Consed de

,

•

12
20 March 1948 and was circulated to the members
of the Security Council on 31 March 1948. I

pause to call attention to the fact that this was
fourteen months after we had begun the attempt
to come to a unanimous agreement on a candidate;
and of course the time had elapsed that was
nec~ssary for the occurrence of the event to which
I shall allude.

securite le 31 mars 1948. Je me permets, en passant, d'appelcr l'attention sur le fait qu'il y avait
alors quatorze mois q~le nous nous efforcions de
reunir I'unanimite SU]' le choix d 'un candidat; bien
entendu, l'evenement auquel je vais £aire allusion
avait eu, dans 1'intervalle, tout le temps de se
produire.

This joint note to the Government of the
USSR, dated 20 March 1948, presented a new
proposal. In this note, the three western Powers
proposed to the USSR and to Italy that they
join them in agreement on an addditional protocol to the Italian Peace Treaty which would return
the Free Territory of Trieste to Italian sovereignty. This proposal was motivated primarily by
the fact that the Yugoslav zone had bee~ complete1.v transformed in character. and vlrtually
incorporated into the Yugoslav police St~te so as
to make an independent and democratlc status
for the Territory impossible. In the view of t~e
western Powers, the return to Italy was, and !s
now, the only solution to meet the democ;atlc
aspirations of the people in the Free Territory
of Trieste and to re-establish stability in the area.
Inasmuch as the Security Council has assume.d
responsibility for the independence and territorial integrity of the Free Territory of Trieste,
the three western Powers stated that they would
submit to the Security Council for approval the
arrangements to be jointly agreed upon. The
Italian Government accepted the proposal of the
west~n Powers. This, however, is not the case
with the USSR.

La note commune adressee le 20 mars 1948 au
Gouvemement de l'URSS contenait une nou·
velle proposition. Par cette note, les trois Puissances occidentales proposaient a l'URSS et a
l'Ita1ie de se joindre a eUes pour se mertre d'accord sur un protoco1e qui serait annexe au Traite
de paix avec l'Italie et qui p1acerait de 110uveau
le Territoire libre de Trieste sous la souverainete
italienne. Cette proposition emit motivee principalement par le fait que le caractere de la
zone yougoslave du Territoire libre avait ete
entierement modifie et que cette j';one avait He
virtuel1ement incorporee a l'Etat policier yougoslave, ce qui empechait absolument de donner au
Territoire un statut inrlependant et democratique.
De l'avis des Puissances occiuentales, le retonr a
l'Itali.e etait alors et reste encore aujourd'hui la
seule solution qui reponde aux aspirat;ons democratiques de la population du Territoire tibre de
Trieste et permette de retablir la stabilite dans
cette 20ne. Etant donne que le Conseil de seeurite a assume la responsabilite de l'inuependance
et de l'integrite territoriale du Territoire libre de
Trieste, les trois Puissances occidentales ont
declare, dans leur note, qu'elles soumettraient a
l'approbation du Conseilles dispositions a prendre
d'un commun accord. Le Gouvernement italien
a accepte la proposition des puissances occidentales, mais il n'en va pas de meme pour l'URSS'.

When the USSR failed, as it did fail, to reply
to the proposal, the United States delivered a
further note ot the USSR Embassy in Washing~
ton pn 9 April 1948, proposing a preliminary
meeting~I stress tIle word "preliminary"-to
draft the necessary protocol. Allow me to read
that part of the note;

Comme I'URSS ne repondait pas a cette proposition _ car elle l'a effectivement laissee sans
reponse - les Etats-Unis ont remis, le 9 avril
1948, a l'ambassade de l'URSS a Washington,
une nouvetle note dans laquelle ils proposaient
une reunion preliminaire - je dis bien "pretimimire" - en vue de rediger le protocolI'. necessaire.
Permettez-moi de donner lecture de la partie correspondnnte de la note:

"The Italian Go;'ernment has now replied
favourably and, should the Soviet Government
also look with fayour on the proposal it is the
view of the United States Governme~t that a
preliminary meeting of representatives of the
Powers principally concerned might be convened
in Paris early in May to negotiate a draft of the
nel'.essary protocol to the Italian Treaty. The
United States Government feels that, in the
.interest of terminating the present unsettled situ~
ation in the Free Territory of Trieste and restoring peace and stability in the area, early action
by the interested Powers is required. The United
States Government would be grateful, therefore,
for an early expression of the views of the Soviet
Government."

"Le Gouvernement italien a fait parvenir une
reponse favorable et, si le Gouvernement de
I'URSS envisage, lui aussi, la proposition d'un
reil favorable, le GOtlVernement des Etats-Unis
estime que l'on pourrait convoquer a Paris,
pour le debut de mai, une reunion preliminaire des representants des prineipaJes Puissances
hiteressees, en vue d'e-laborer un projet pOUT le
protocole qu'il sera necessaire d'aujoindre au
Traite de paix avec l'Itatie. Le Gouvernement des
Etats~Unis estime qu'i! faut que les Puissances
interessees prennent sans tarder des dispositions
pour mettre fin a la situation troublee qui regne
actuellement dans le Territoire libre de Trieste et
retablir la paix et la stahilite dans cette zone.
Aussi le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis serait-il.
reconnaissant au Gouvernement de l'UR5S s'il
voulait bien lui faire connaitre prochainement
sa maniel'e de voir."

In a note dated 13 April the Government of
the USSR replied that it "considered the proposal
to solve the problem concerning revision of the
Treaty of Peace with Italy in any of its parts,
by way of correspondence or arrangement of

Dans line note en date du 13 avril, le Gouvernement de l'URSS a re-pond:.! qu' "it considerait
la proposition de resoudre le probleme de la
revision du Traite de paix avec l'Italie, dans
l'une quelconque de'ses parties, par un echange

•

I

13
private conferences, unacceptable as violating the
elementary principles of democraq".

de note.s ou au moyen de conferences privees,
comm~ macceptable et contraire aux principes eIe-

For this reason, my Government has come to
the col1cltlsion hat the provision of the Peace
Treaty with regard to the Free Territory of
Tdeslt: has become unworkable. In vif'W of this
situation, it is cnr opinion that a discussion in
the Security Council of the governorsh:p of the
Free Territory of Trieste would not serve any
constrllctive purpose pendir.g settlement of the
question----that is, the question posed in that note
of 20 March----through diplomatic negotialions
wHf: the other Powers concerned.

me:J.tatres de la democratie".
Dans une ncuvelle note, {ldressee le 16 av:il
a ~'ambassade de l'URSS A Washington. le Secretatr~ d'E:at par interim a precise que la reunion
en-vlsagee clans la precedente note des Etl.ts~Unis
devait avoir un caractere p:eliminaire, ·et cons:ituer la. premiere phase de la procecIure a suivre.
I1 a declare er, outre que le Gouvernement des
£ta~s~Unis examinerait trt:s yolon:iers toute suggestion que le Gouvernement cle I'URSS pourrait
faire au sujet de la procedure asuivre pour rMiger
le protocole qu'il serait necessaire d '~cljoiDdre
au Traite de paL'!: avec l'I:alie.
Le Gouvemement de :'URSS n'avant pas
repondu, le Sec.retaire d'Etat a adresse une autre
note. a. I'ambassade de \';JRSS a WashingtoD, le
1er JU1n, dans laquelle 1\ exprimait l'espoir que
le Gouvernement de I'URSS voudrait bien faire
connaitre sans retard sa maniere de voir au suj et
de la procedure a. suivre pour l'exarnen en commun de la question par les Puisstances interessees.
Or, le Gouvernement des Etats~Unis at:end tou~
jours line reponse a eette note du ler juin..
Pendant ce temps, les deux. zones du Territoire
libre de Trieste Sont adminisirees, conformct11ent
a. I'artide premier de l'Annexe VII au Traite
de Paix, par les commandements militaires allies
respectifs. Le;; i:Qmmandants militaire~ britannique et americain, e'une part, et le commandant
militaire yDugoslave, d'autre part, ont adresse au
Conseil de securite des rapports sur leur administratjc.n.
La difficulte qu'i1 a executer les dispositions
du Traite, en partant de l'iMe que Trieste est un
terntoire independant, resulte dil. fait, auquel fai
deja fait allusion, que la YougosJ.avie appliql:e a
sa zone les methodes propres a un Etat policier,
avec tous les attributs d'tm regime totalitaire. It
est done impossible de fondre cette zone avec celle
qu'admillistrent le Royaume-Uni et les EtatsUnis, pour ~ormer un territoire democratique
indeper.dant, comme le prescrit le Traite de Paix,
Dans ces conditions, c;reer un territoire "indepen~
clant" serait creel' une zone exposee a une agres~
sion indirecte, du genre qui a €le pratique dans
toute l'Europe orientale et, en demier lieu, en
T checDs lo.vaquie.
En consequence, mon Gouvernement est arrive
cette conclusion que les dispositions du Traite
de paix qui ont trait au Territoire tibre de Trieste
sont devenues inapplicab:es. En raison de ceUe
situation, nous estimous que la discussion de la
question du gouverneur du Territoire Iibre de
Trieste au Conseil de securire ne presenterait au:;un interet positif tant que la question - celle qui
a ete posee {)ans la note du 20 mars - n'aura pas
He re.gle.e au moyer. de negoeiations diplomatiques
avec les autres Pt:issances interessees.

Mr. DE ROSE (France) (translated from
French): I shaJ not go back to the record of
the question, whirll was given quite fully and
clearly by the representatives of t}-.e United Kingdom and the United States. I shall restr:ct myself
to what follows:
In attacking the declaration of 20 Marc;h just
n(}w, the USSR representative said that the
reason invoked in that declaration was the im~
pos5ibility of reaching agreement on the desig-

M. DE ROSE (Fronce) : ]e ne veux pas re"enir
sur I'historique de la question, qui a ete fait, de
la maniere la plus complete et sans 1aisser la
moindrc 'ombre, par les representants du
Royaume-Uni et des .Etats~Unis. Je me bornerai a dire ceci:
Le representant de l'URSS, en attaq~artt t?U t
i l'he'He la Mdaration du 20 mars, a dlt que le
motifinvo'1tl~ dans cette declaration etait l'impos·
sibitite de se mettre d'axord sur la designation

In a further note to the USSR Embassy in
V/ashington, date.cl 16 April, the Acting Secre-

tary of State pomted out tha: the meeting envisaged in the preceding United Sta:es note was
to !le of a preliminary character, a~ a first step
of procedure, He stated that the Government
of the United States would be glad to consider
any suggestion which the Government of the
USSR migh: have regarding the p~ocedure for
drafting the necessary protocol to the Italian
Peace Treaty.
Since no reply was forthcoming from the
Government of the llSSR, the Secretary of State
forwarded another note to the USSR Embassy
in Washington 1 June, expressing the hope that
the Government of the USSR would communicate i~s views at ~m early date c(lncerning the
procedure to be followed for joint consideration
of the matter by the Powers concerned. The
United States Government is s:il1 awaiting a reply
to this note of I June.
In the meantime, the two zones of the Free
Territory 0: Trieste are being administered by
the respective military commands under article 1
to annex VII of the PeaCe Treaty. Both the
United Kingdom-United States and the Yugoslav
military commanders have forwarded reports to
the Security Council on their aumiuislration.

The diffiCUlty of implementing the Treaty on
the basis of Trieste being an independent territory
is revealed by the fact that, as I have saic'l,
police State foons of government were extended
by Y:tgoslavia to its zone, having at the attributes
of a totalitarian regime. This ma<es impossible
its unification with the United Kingdom-United
States zone into an independent democratic territory along the lines prescribed by the Peace
Treaty. Under these circumstances, the setting
up of an "indeFendent" Territory would mean
creating an area open to indirect aggression
through the pattern well tested throughout Eastern Europe and, m0::;l Iccently, in Czechoslovakia.

y a

a

14
nation of a Governor for Trieste. That is the
truth. But it is not the whole truth. The declaration of 20 March pointed out that the character
of the Yugoslav zone had been completely
changed, and that that lOne had virtually been
incorporated into Yugoslavia by steps which did
not respect the expressed desire of the Powers
to accord the Territory independent and democratic status.

d'ull gouverneur pour Trieste, C'est la verite. Mais
Cl" n'est pas toute la verite. La declaration du
20 mars signalait qlle le caractere de la ZDne
yougoslave a ete entierement modi fie, que cette
zone a ete virtuellement incorporee a la Y ougo..
slavic par des mesures qui ne respectent pas le
desir exprime par les puissances de dauner au
Territoire un statut independant et dbnocratique.

A little further on, the declaration also said:
"In these circumstances, the three Governments
have concluded that the present settlement cannot guarantee the preservation of the basic rights
and interests of the people of the Free Territory,"

Un pell plus loin, cette declaration disait encore:
"Dans ces conditions, les trois Gouvern~ments
.considerent que le reglement actuel ne peut garantir la protection des droits et des interets
fondamentaux des populations dll Territoire
libre."

According to the information available to the
French Government, the situation has, unfortunately, not changed in that regard. The USSR
representative's statemfnt dol'S not introduce any
new factor regarding the situation in the Yugoslav zone and I am quite prepared to believe that
it is not within the power of the USSR to bring
about any change.

Cette situation n'a, selon les renscignements
que possecJe le GOllVcrnement frant;ais, malheureUSCl11ent pas ch::mge. Sur cc point -la situation
dans la zone yougoslave - la dCclamtion du
representant de l'URSS n'apporte rien de nouveau, et je suis tout pret a croire qu'il n'est pas
au pouvoir de I'URSSS d'y apporter Ulle modification.

The question for llS is not whether we shollld
or can designate a Governor for Trieste. The
question is the question we put forward on
20 l\farch and the French Government does not
consider that the statement made today by the
representative of the USSR justifies any change
in the line of conduct and the policy which it
has taken in the matter.

La question, pour nous, n'est pas de savoir
si, nous devons ou pouvons d~signer Lln gOl1verneur pour Trieste. La questlOn est celle que
nous avons posee le 20 mars et le Gouvernement
fran\ais n'estime pas que la declaration faite
aujourd'hui par le representant de \'URSS just'ifle
une modll1cation a la ligne de conduite et a la
politique qu'il a adoptees en cette matiere.

The PRESIDENT: ] f no one else wishes to speak,
I shall adjourn the meeting.

Le PRESIDENT (trariuil de' l'anglais): Si personoe ne demande plus la parole, je vais lever
la seance.

. Mr. MALlK (Union of Soviet Socialist RepublIcs) : I wish to introduce a short proposal.

M. MALII( (Union. des Republiques sDcia1iste~
sovietiquci'l) (traduit de l'ong(ais): Je voudrai~
presenter une courte proposition.

Mr. Malik canti/wed in RlUsian:

In yiew of the statement made by the representatlye of the United Kingdom to the effect
that hiS Government is not ready to discuss the
~uestion under present circumstances, although
It has been studying the question for more than
twelve mo~ths, and since further time is apparently rcq~lred for stu~y, the delegation of the
USSR wlshes to submIt a formal resolution on
the.questi~m, hoping that the Governments of the
U;llted Ktngdom, the United States and France
WIll be able to study its text at the same time as
they pr<;ceed to study the question of the apTXlint~
ment ot the Governor of the Free Territory of
Trieste as a w haie.
The resolution reads as follows [5/1260]:

M. Malik poursuit en YlIsse.
Le representant du Royaume-Uni vient de
declarer que, vu les dr.constances actuelles, son
Gouvernement n'est pas encore pret a discuter
cette question, bien qu'il ait eu plus de douze
mois pour l'etlldier. IL al1rait besoin, ~emble-t-il
d'un delai supplementaire pour terminer ceUe
etude. Dans Cl'S conditions, la delegation de
I'URSS tient presenter officiellcment un projet
d~ resollltion, esperant que les Gouvemements
du Royaume-Uni, des Etats-Unis et de la France.
exmnineront cc texte en meme temps qu'ils
procederont a l'etude de I'ensemble du problt:me
que pose la nomination d'un gouverneur pour le
Territoire libre de Trieste.

a

Cette

resolution

[S/1260] ,
"The SCC1!rity C{J1lncil,
"Taking into consideration article 21 of the
Treatr of Peac;c with It<lly, providing for the
establlshment or a Free Territory of Trieste;
"Ta~illg inta consideration the decision of the
Counc!1 of Foreign Mi:listers, dated 12 December
1946, on the appointment of a Governor for the
Free Territory of Trieste;

'~Taking inlo considerat-iOlI the provisions of
artIcle 11 of annex VI to the said Treaty;

est

redigee

comme

suit

"Le Conseil de secunte,
"Compte tet/It des dis[Jositions de l'article 21
du Traite de paix avec I'Italie portant constitution
du Territoire libre de Trieste,
"Compte tenlt de la decision du COllseil des
Ministres des affaires etrangeres, en date du
12 decemure 1946, relative a la designation d'un
gouverneur du Territoire libre de Trieste;
"Compte tenu des dispositions de I'article 11
de j'annexe VI audit Traite, concernant cette
meme question;

15

"Resolves to appoint Colonel Fluckiger as
Governor of the Free Territory of Trieste."
1 dQ not insist that a vote should be taken or:
this Tf'solution now, since the representatives on
the Security Council need time to study this
proposal.

"Decide de desig:ter comme gouverneur du
Tcrritoire libre ele T:iestc M. Fluckiger."

Mr. MOE (Norway): Before dosing the meeting, could the President give us any indication

M. Mo'E (~orvcge) (traduil de !'anglais):
in'ant de lever la seance, le President pourrait·il
tlOUS donner quelqlle indir:\tion quant a la date
de la prochaire sear.ee, car, si je ne me trompe,
marcli prochain est jour Hrie.

of whl;:Tl the next meeting will be held? As far

as I know, next Tuesday is a holiday.

Je n'insiste pas pour que cette reso:ution sait
mi3e aux voix des mainttn:mt, car les membres
du Conseil de securite daivent pouyoir I'ett:dier
13. loisir.

The PRESIDENT: I am not in a position:o give
the date for our next :neetir.g, but I hope to
have notices sent O'.1t on Monday.

Le PRaslmNT ~ tradHit de lbnglais): Je
ne suis pas en mesure d'indiquer la da:e de notre
prochaire seance, mais j'espere pouvoir faire
envoyer les convocations lundi.

The ,.neeting rose at 5.35 p.m.

La seance r.st IflVee de 17 h. 35.
