TWENTY-EICIITll

YEAR

MEETING : 31 JANUARY 1973
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS

Complaint by Zambia:
fu) Letter dated 24 January 1973 from the PermanentRepresentativeof Zambia
to the United Nations, addressedto the Presidentof the Security Council
(S/ 10865);
(bj Letter dated 23 January 1973from tho representativesof Guinea, Kenya and
the Sudanto the Presidentof the SscurityCouncil (S/ 10866);
(cl Letter dated 26 January 1973 from the Actiw PermanentRepresentativeof
Yugoslavia to the United Nations, addressedto the Presidentof the Security
Council (S/10869) 1.1...1111~11.1.1,11111,1,1,..1.,111.1.

(16 p.)

1

!3/w. I689

?

NOTE

Symbols:of United N&Ions documentsare composedof gnpital lcttcrs combhod with
figures,Mention of lrucha symbol lndkatos a reforencoto a United Nations document,
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) arenormally publlshed in quarterly
Supplenwllsof the Of~ccln~Recordsof fke Secu?ity Council. The date of the document
Mcates the supplement in which it appearsor in which InformatIon about it is given,
The resolutions of the Security Council, nmbered in accordancewlth a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutimts
artd L~cS~OV?SOf t)tt?
,%x&y COU~IC~~.
The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, becamefully operativeon that date,

1 lbt&vtt:

Mr. Chaldlr ANWAR SAN1(Indonesia),

2. The PRESIDENT:In accordancewith the decision
takenat thesamemooting,I proposenow,with the consent
lYesent: The representatkes
of the followhig States: of the Council, to Wit0 the representatives
of Ghana,
AustraliaAu&la, Chhla,Prance,Guinea,India, lndoneala, Morocco,the United Repubilcof Tanzania,Zaire, Chile,
Kenya, Panama,Peru, Sudan,Union of Soviet Soclallst Algeria, Senegal,Egypt and Somallato take the places
Republics,
UnitedKingdomof GreatIlritaln and Northern reservedfor them hr tlro Council chamberhi order to
Ireland,UnitedStatesof AmericaandYugoslavia,
participateln the dlscusalon
underthe termsof Articlc 31
of the Charterwithout the right to vote. They will bo
lnvitod to takeplacesat the Counciltablewhenit is their
Rov&iIonld agenda (s/Agenda/l 6S9)
turn to speak.
1, Adoptionof the agenda,
At the invltatlonof theR&dent, Mr, A, Rahal(Algwkt),
Mr, H. Diaz Cirsanuevu
(Clrlle), Mr. A. Abdel Meguid
2. Complulntby Zambia:
(&vpt), Mr. J. C&land(Ghutn), Mr. M Zen&r (Morocco),
(a) Letter dated24 January1973fromthe Permanent Mr, M. I%zll(Senegal),Mr, J. Nur hYmi(Somalia),Mr. S.
Representative
of Zambiato the UnitedNations, Spllm(Unit&dRepublicof Tanzania)wld Mr. Ipoto Eyebu
addressed
to the President
of the SecurityCouncil
Bukwtd’ud(Zdre) took the placesreserved
for themit8the
(S/lOl?65);
‘(b) Letter dated23 January1973from tho reprosen. CotmU chamber,
tatives of Guitca, Kenya and the Sudanto the
3. Tho PRESIDENT:In a letter dated30 January1973,
President
of theSecurityCouncil(S/10866);
of Cubahas a&cd to bc allowedto
(c) Letter dated 26 January 1973from the Acting the representative
of this Item. In accordtulce
PermanentRepresentatlvcof Yugoslaviato UW participateln the dlscuaaion
UnitsJ Nations,addressod
to the Presidentof the with the provisionalrules of procedureand the usuai
practiceof the Council,1 propose.,
if them isno objection,
Secur4yCouncil(S/10869),
to invite the reprosentativo
of Cuba,under the termsof
Article 31 of the Charter,to partlcipatoin the discussion
‘13,e
meetingwas&led to orderat 3.25p*m.
without tho right to voteandto takea placein the Council
chamberon the understanding
that he will be invited to
Adoptionof thoagenda
take a placeat the Counciltablo whenit Is his turn to
SPOtlIt,
Theagenda
yasadopted.
At the invitationof the President,
Mr, H. Ala&n (Cuba).
Complaint
by zdmbla:
took theplacereserved
for himin the GmtcU dumber.
(a) Letter dated 24 January 1973from the Permanent
Keprosentativeof Zambia to the United Nstiona,
4. The PRIBIDENT:Thefirst nameon thellst of speakers
addressed
to the PrlmIdcntof the Security council is that of tho representative
of Somalia.
1invite himt6 take
(SllOS6S);
~,p111ce
at theCounclitableandto mukohisstatement,
(6) Letter dated 23 January1973from the representativea
of Guinea,KenyaandtheSudanto the Reddentof the
5, Mr. NURELM1(Somalia):Mr. President,
my delegation
SocurItv councn fS110866~:
wishesto thank you and tie membersof the Security
(c) Let@ ,&ted 26 ‘Jk~wy 1973 from the Acting I%rmanentRepresentative
of Yugoslaviato the Uilited Councilfor givingmethe opportunity to partlcipatcin the
Nations,addressed
to the Presidentof the Security presentdebate on the questionof the recent wanton
aggression
againstZambiaby the &gal regbnein Southern
CounciI (S/loS69)
Rhodesia
andby tho Republicof SouthAfrica.
I. The PRESIDENT:in accordancewith our previous
decision11687th meetlngj, 1 propose,if there is no 6, My delegationwishesalsoto extend to you its most
objection,to invite the representative
of Zambiato take a llncerecongratuiatlonu
on your assumption
of theoffice of
placeat t&eCounciltable.
Presidentof UIOCouncilfor the month of January--an
honourwhichyou havoJustlyoarnedandwhichdoescn,dit
At the invitation of the PTcskient,Mr, 14JOI( Lusakrc to your greatcountry, Indonesia,with which tho Somali
(Zumbb)twk a place at the Owtcil table,
DemocrutlcRepublicanjuyufrsternalrelations.

‘7, Both as an East African country and asa member:of the
Oryanlzatlon 6f African Unity, nvy cou:itry fools closely
involved In the hnmcdlate problems which have lad to tho
calling of this meetlag of UI~ Security Counoll, My
~‘delcgatlonhas always taken an aotlve part in dlsousslonsof
,-~-thewider, problem of colonialism and racism in southern
Afrloa, and it Is of course within this wldor context ?hat thy

the cause of justice in Southern Rhodasla and to the
authority of the United N@iops, I .r@fa; of ceutse, to q!
UnltodStates of America.
---L ~_ /z;
-.
-. ._1.I, .-0110 cannothelpcontrastilythh a&on with that of
Zambln, u comparativelysmall, dovelopIngcountry, I i:----;
Because
of Its needfor transitfaoiiltlarfor Itsmslnoxport, -1 mm:
-: :
ooppor,Zambiahad.boonunable-tooarry out fully the
eoonomlo‘sanctlonslmposcdby tho Security Ccurloll
.- -~‘.L- “ngni~lst
the Illegalr&,huein SouthernRhodee&,
Now,with
tremendous
sacrlficato Its cconomloUfoandIn thefaceof
fhrontsof oggrosslon
from SouthernRhode&aandSouth
Afrlou, thoZamblanGovernniont
hascalledon Itspeopleto
makothe sacrlficcs
whichtheappllcatlon
of crmiprohenslve
econombsanctions
againstSouthernRhodosln
will ant&
In the tremendous
taskof raroutln~Its oxports,Zambia
will receivethe valuableco-operationof nolghbourhlg
independent
Africancountrlcs,

8, WC havo, on many oocaslons, together WIUI the other
poace~lovlngand antl.colonlallst do~egotlons,warnod the
world Orgnnlzatloa,esl~clally the Security Counoll, of tho
dangerposed to international peace and soourlty asu result
of the gf,‘avosltuatlon that prevails In southern Afrloa. This
sltuatlon Juts boon sufflolcntly descrlbod in dotall iti recant
years III each of the reports of the SpecialCommltteo on
tho Sltuatloii with regard to the Imp~ementatlonof the
D8olantlon 011 the Grant@ of Indopondoncoto COhIflial
Couutrlos’olid Peoples.TIIOdcterloration of tho situation In
tho roglon has omphasizodonto a&Ill that this Is ludeod a
dangerous situation which must not be ncglectad and tint
those who havo special rosponslbllltlos in regard to this
problem must not shirk thoso responslbilltlos,

12. The exmpla givenby Zambinand Its nolghbours
In
UIUfulfllilngof International
obligations
isonethat mustbe
takonto hcnrtby manyotherStuteawhich,with muohless
or Uttlehard&p to thoms&os,
couldtakostepsto observe
sanctions
strictly andensurethat their natlonalsdid not
engagein il1lclt tradewith SouthernRho&df~,ThisIs a
clonr responsibilityof MemberStates,lndlvlduallyand
colleotivel~,slnoeArtlclo 49 of the Chartorstatosthat
Members
-shall joln In affordlng mutual assist&co
-Ia
carrying out measures
decldodup011 by the Sccurlty

9. Tho UlogalSmith r&glmo’sdecision to throaton Zambia
wlth oconomlc blackmatl and mllltary aggression and
Zamblp’s courageousdeclslon to Jot11 in Ulo full h~pl0111e11~
tatlon of the sanctions agalast Southern Rhodesia arb
symptomatic of two things: first, tho continuing lntranslgc~lco
of the Lr!th r6gime,which continues to consolidate
Its illegal powers; and second, the dotcrminatlon of those
who llnvo a concern for justlce III Southern Rhodesinto aot
with solidarity in tho strugglefor freedom, Both the United
Kingdom, as the admlnlsterlng Powor, and the Security
Council must co11vi11ce tho world, in thoory as WOUas la
proctlco, that It is Indeed tho struggle for froodom and not
the racist domination of whites ovor blacks In southern
Africa which has their.po1itloaland moral support,

counoil.

13, The SecurityCOUIICU’Srosponslbilltlas,
of course,go
further. As the malnorganwith primaryrosponsibllity
for
the malntcntmco
of lnternatlonul
peaceandsacurity,it hns
the duty to consult,If requiredto do so,with anyStat0
which hasspecialeconomloproblemsarlslngfrom tho
cnrryhigout of enforcement
measures.
obviously,this is ~
tho casewith Zambia,It Isthe hopeof mydelegation
thut
the SccurltyCouncilwill nowsatup appropriate
maohlnery
to ascertahl
the bestwaysof asslstiag
Zambiato developits
alternatlvoroad,air andsearoutesfor the transportof Its
oxports formerly sent thro@ SouthernRhodesia.
The
Security Councilmustalsodo Its utmostto cnllst the
supportof UIOSOStateswhicharoin a posltlonto as&t the
Zamblan
Government
andpeoplein theirhorolotank.

10. As ‘far as the Security Counoil Is concerned, its
Involvementwith tho problem of Southern Rhodesla bcgan
In an impressive way, but that involvement soetlu to be
steadlly weakening. The Southern RhodesIan situation Is
the onlj, ona which has so far called for the applicationof
cconomlc sanotlons under Chapter VII of tho Charter. But
what has become of the hlltlal recognltlon of the rosponslbility of the United NaUons to avert throats to hlternutlonal peace and security such as that presentod by yet
another explosive situation In southern Africa? What has
becomeof the Inltla1recognltlon that the world community
has a duty to combat the lntolarable arroganceof the,whlte
mlnority r0gimeIn Southern Rhodesia which opealy socks
to deny the basic human rights to tho majority of the
pcoplo of Zimbabwe In thalr own native land’/ What indeed
has becomeof tho economicsanctions which woro Imposed
as a result of the mcognitlon by the Unltod Nations of Its
responsiblll;y and duty In this matter? Tho situation tlow Is
that clandestinetrade with Southurn Rhodesia Is carrlod on
to the pcslnt whom sanctions can be seenoporatlng mom Ill
tho breach than In the observance. In addltlon, [I supor
Power with spcclal rosponsibilltics for world Icadarship,
both In tho moral sphere und hi the sphoro of practical
politlcs, has openly flouted sanctions without any compelllng reasons,so thut It rtis sat un exampleof hidifference to

14. Anothergraverospondbllltyof the SccurltyCounoll
mustbe the condemnation
of UIO overt actsof ~~reeskn~
whlohthe lllcgalSmithr6ghneIsdlrectlngtowardaZambia,
with the strongsupportOYSouthAfrloa, Its partnerand
menrorin racistoppre@,rr,
15. As we nU know, many peoplehavebeonklllod or ’
woundedIII Zamblaby landmh~es
laldLnLamblantorrltory
by the SouthoraRhodaslaa
forcos,and SouthAfrica ha1
sent scvcnl thousandtroopsto supportthe illagaland
ltrsanoSmllh @me, So Zamblanoltizanr have fallen
vlcthna to the armlasof hatrod,opprarrlonand racial
dlscrlmlnation.
16, If tho UnltcdNatlonehaaa gonoral
rcsponslbllity
for
tt~alrtt~lnlng
peacela andnroundRhodasia
in theco.ntaxtof
Its concernto endculonlellsm
andruelrmIn SouthAfrica,
the United Kingdomhas a lipoclalresponsibilityusthe
2

the -movementhe led and his hopesfor pencofulncgoUution
with the PortugueseGovernment, which he carrlod side by
side with his dstorminatiail to gain, by force of arms, tho -_::
freedom that could not be acquired by peaceful.moans, ‘:
Those~thingoare bt#g said; thesepraisesare bclng sungby ,.~
many. who, durhlg Cabral’s llfothne, had tho power at the
very least,~to rafrahl f@m ,aotlons ‘and policies ,which :
materially strongth~ned tha Portuguese in their unJust colonial war but who, far from supporting Cobral’sjust
cause,gave material sld aud moral comfort to his enomios,
the enemiesof justice and freedom in Africa, Aud so 1 ngnln
ask for clear thhting on the quostlon of tho’strug@ofor
freedom in Africa and on the particular aspect of that
strugglewe arenow consldcrhlg.

rdmiidstoring Power of the T@tory, for there ia no doubt
&iitSWW
as to the status of the Territory, Southern
i ~1Rhode&+is a Brkh colony under British responsibility and
ir.& the I@ qf Territories that have nllt yet at&bad their
~~~-~y!y!y!Q!
~+p~Ufy+!~
$m@F.cql$!~
~,=, rub’.
‘-~- .~
_~~__
‘17, ’Throug.t&t tie history of. the Southern ‘Rhodes&m
problem,‘my Government hasalwaystitahled thnt it was
the clear duty of the Govornmont of the United Kingdom
to make the rebel r&me understand,without any shadow
of doubt, that it wasdetermhled to bring about a just
rocbty In Southern Rhodesia and preparedto useits vastly
superior forcesto attain that end. Throughout the history
of the Southern Khodoslan problem, the British Government hastreated tho rebelswith kid glovea,with the result
Uut wehavethis continually detcrlorating situation,

21. Tiro United Khudom, the ad~ninlsteringPoworof the
colony of Southern Rhodesi& must not-us it did In this
Counoil in Septemberof last year-turn nsldofrom the tusk
18, Speakingon the question of Southern Rhodesiaat the
host s&on of the General AsomblyJ my dclegntion of attempting to develop tbrther initlatlvos thot will cnoblo
expressedthe view that, with the failure of the Pearce the African majority, whose troubles and trials and hopos
Commlsaloa and the clear expression by the Africa1 for a better future we all blow only too well, to axcrciso
fully their politIcal, civil and social rights, and remove onto
majority of its wish08and espiratlons, the hour of truth of
and for ail the threat to peace and security in southern
the United Khigdom In Southern Rhodesiahad come. My
delogatlon now bellevoathat. the hour of truth has come Africa. The Security Council, with its grnvo rosponsibllity
for tho mah~tcnanaeof peace,must cnsurothat Zambia will
also for the intetnational community, whichhas to facethe
Issueshi that area without equivocation, Straight answers not be the subJectof ag&Fesslonaor! that It will bc fully
supported’ in its efforts tG carry out its intornotionol
must be given here to thesequestions:are we or are wenot
pledged to do our utmost to put down an illegal and unjust rosponsibilltlea vis&vis the tiicgn! r&imo in Southurn
Rhodesia.
d&me in Southern Rhodesia? Do we or do we not
considerjuet the struggleof tho national movementswhich
22. Hlnally, my dOh?gationfully supports tho 12.point
seek to Iiborate the African majority from the hllnunonity
of upart&&I? Wheredo our sympathiesaud responslbllities proposal suggestedby tho representativeof Zambia in his
asMstiber Stateslie? I do not think those questionshave statement of Monday last /1687tll metirtgl us a guldclino
been clearly thought through to their loglcal conolwlonsby for the courseof notion to be taken by the Council.
many Statesaround t&stable.
23. Mr. .MADDY (Guinea) (Irtterprertrflon jiom ~~e~tcli):
19, Iu reaffirming Zambia’s solidarity with the gallant My dok?gPtionhoard with hitorost and emotion the hnpop
people strugglingfor fwdom In southern Africa, President tant statement of tho ropresentativoof Zambia, kubas.
Kaunda has obviously thought those questions through sador Lusaka libbkl.1. Once agoln the Security Councii is
wl,th a clear senseof history. He kr~owsthot the freedom dealing with a complnlnt of an independent and sovoroign
fighters aro seekingthe sameliberation from oppressiveand African State agahlst repeated acts of aggrestion porpc.
unjust rule that has in the past 300 yearshad to be fought troted by the racltit and colonialist forces.ofSouth Africa,
for by many of the countries today representedin the and Southern Rhodesia.
U&d Natkma. And yet come of ‘Umsecountries seemto
24, It will be rccallod Qot, before the shameful aggression
seethemselvesasan axalusive club whosemembership has of
22 November 1970 by the Portuguesecolonldists agah&t
now bean closed. In effect, they seam to be toiling tho the Ropublio of Guhioa, my delogatlon had very ofton
African !lberaUon movements that it wasall right for thorn, drawn
the attention of world public ophlicm to the grave
In theil thne-if I may quote Shakespeare-“to take arms dangersthreatening our countries. The enemiesof Africa
againsta seaof troubles and, by opposing, end them”, tlut
the freedom of peoples dcscrlbed that declaration as
there is a marked reluctancein many quartersto go beyond and
fantasy. Despite the warnings and despite the condone.
tho mere theoretical recognition of thc]ustncssof the cuuso notlun by our Orgonizutlon of the izascistLisbon r(lgi~nc,
of the Africannrtional liberation movements.
the latter still carrlcdout o barbarousaggressionagulnrt my
coulltly,
20, In this context it is pertinent to cull to mind the
terrible tragedyof thz assassinationof knflcor Cabrai,the 25. If we carefully study those ~untrlcs In Africa that
Secrstar~Gsneral of the African Party car UIC Indepen- have sufforad aggrassion,WCshall sco that they are the
dance of Guinea (Bissau) and tho Cepc Verdo Islands Rcpublb of Guinoo, the Republic of Senegel, the United
(PAIGC), whosedeath is an incalculable lossto the causeof
Kopublic of Tanzunla and the Kcpubllc of Zambia. ail
African freedom. NOW that he is dead there Is wldospread hdependont countries of Africa that welcomed their
rescognltionof his qualitios, ids groutabiiitles asu Isadcr, hiu suffering brothers doprivcd of thelr lands, their goods and
resistanceto oppression,his niodoratlon hi the conduct of ail freedonls.
-d
26, ‘HIU coulplaint of tho Hvpublic of Zarubia regwrdlng
the actsof aggrossloncommitted by the white minority of
3

3% Rafora 1 conclude, Mr. Prasldent, 08 bahnlf of .my
delegationntny I thank you and eonnratutatayou cm the

_-34, ML IX3 GUIRINGAUD (Prance) ~~~r~c~~a~~r~~~~
@on
~8vmhJ: Tha statements wa. have listenad to with dta
.greatasP attent!an
for F!m pnst two days th Ms c!um~bar~~sspc&l!y Fhasc of tha Afrt~an dalagatlons, nrambars QF
I noit~mambars of the Caunail-have stresad the rtr~ng
feelhigs arcatad by the worsatllng of ralatione betwaan
Zambia and Southern Rhodasia. They hava shown that, by
clushg
t!~aborder with Bnubla nrn! trying to orgnnhe sn
econm!c
b!ockpda againsFthat country, tha raba! taadars
of Snlisbuy have arousedgonars! raprobation,
divisto~~
.’ “Our mts~icm w&s, f!rss of ‘ell, to p&ok8
,, wnurig black and mixad*btood fighters; sacondly, to Fsko
s aWntngo of 011th, discl!~!inarys~matlons Fakan tylainst
Uio nationalists; thirdly, to sat the mcmtcrs of the
IlbcraFlon movements against t.!lair loaders; fourt!s!y, to
~,proniota tribal strife; f!tX!y, to makc troubla in GU~IICII,
Tn~wmta
and Zambia in order to carry out subversivu
activitioa agrdnst t!ia UbaraFlon movements tn chore
countries; and, s!xFWq, to ntrlkc 1973 tha yaar of
Uq$!etion

of tllc nat!o11a!ist mwemer,ts

35, 2%~ Prcnch dolagation, for its !~art, wlshcs to stata
that it deplores ttds in!FIativa-a scandalous Initiativa, as IF
has ima cnl!ed by ona of Fha mambars of t!~c Counci!,
becauseit anab!esnn i!lagalrtSglmoto !mwsa its low upon 5
Mambr State of tha Unltad bhtloris-rind
tha sarlous
lrmcldantswltieh fuivc nccompanladit, somo of wtich Iurva
resulted in tha loss of human lives, including F!IOSDof II
numbar of civilians,Wanlso dhpprovc
of the systemof
colioctivetInas sat up by t!m Rllodaslsn
authoritlasin
violattonuf internntionallaw. Waconsidarth.sFal! ~hosc
massurds
deal II heavyblow to tha Improvcmantof.an
ahwiJyratharFoilsc .Wintiai In that pnrt of Africa,

In Africa.“’

Thosa Bra soma datnils of Flds dlaholic plumeonccivadby
Fllaintarrurtionaltmparlallstoegr$nstAfrica, snd wo wsnt to
warn world public opinion of Fleagrava sieuatlon w!Lh
axists on our continent, and for which the Pretoria.
§s!!sbury.Lisban coalition is rasponaib!e.
,_

36. Ragrattabla
11s
thcsadcvalopmonts
m5y ba, they coma
asno greata!!rprlsato us. In imposing aaonumla sanatlons
agsinstt!ia Smith r6glma-sanctions
w!iia!t France has
’ 29, Africa, that devalophngcontinant, zeds peacain ordar nlwaysfait couldnot &~~a bringabouta solutionof La
Rflados!M
problam’but in favour of whic!~my country
~.to progress, but t!urt lo possible only ~if we can enjoy
votedlo 1968in orderto brine
Powar
plitlml, economic and socla! stability, because wit!iour
c to tha
--- ndministaring
-.-----.
.&a asslstunca
it hadrequested-the
SacurityCourdlknc~
political stability thp?Acan be no ca~motnla progress, wd
that a~enomicdifflcultias would result not only for
witliout
cao~~cm!a prograss there a511 !x no sec!5! growt!~.
SoutharnRhodesia
but tt!sofor tlla nelgllbouring
countrias
My dctcgatlon
cwldemiis
th acts of sggress!on and the
whichin tho pasthadmadoupt!~ Padaration
of Rhodaslrr
‘cconomloblockade decked ugrrirlvtZsmb!n,
and Nyssa!andand whoseties of mutual dapandence
cspaciallyhr regardFQcommunications
andtransport,ware
30, We teak rmta of the shtamant
made by the rcprosaii.
tativa of tile Unltad Klngdom (Ib.M/ regmdlng the daslees pNcu!arly close. Dy dint of its gaographlclocation,
,oT his Govarnment to assist the Republic of Lmbla, My Zambiawas in .tha most vulnarhblapooltion,and t!m
of resolutions
253(1968)and277(1970),pars.
daiogetion would llko to sea thosa desires very spacd!!y provisions
show thst tlia COUIIO~! was
transformed into concrete sots, WC woold ~lso !nslsF upon graphs15 and 16 rasgcotivaly,
tllat couldbeclrusad
to ilnmbfsby the
tho immodiatc witltdrawal of all Scutlr African forcee from nwnraof Fhodamage
of ssnctlons.
Thoseresolutions
indacdrequest
thal Territory snd the full lm$ementation of a!! resc4IuUons impsitio~i
rcforrtng to Soutllarn Rhcdal. Py such a courageousand Membar.Statesto grsnl Fhutcountry priority asslsaanc
tuudablogesture tlto Un:itedKingdom, as the administering with &4view to hc!plil& it so!vathe spcclfJl acQllQnlfc
WV!I~C!I it is likely to faca bacausa
of. the
Power, would prove that,it has decidedto put an end to tlia problams
implamentntion
of Counci!daclslons.
Inn Sndt!i rcballh
uguinst f?er Majesty’s Govetnmcnt and
ClXlWll.

37. ?%acountrlasnafgl~bouring
on Kllodash,IIOWOVCF,
werewillingto bcurthe consequences
of tha ln~~si~fon
of
snnations.
hmbia, III particular,limitedIts tradarchttlonr
wit!1 R!lodasiaLISittuch ~4 possible.If wa take t!la
Qures-tltoy ara rutliar old, since they go back to
!968-which waresubmittadto the Cuuncii by t!la Govc~n.
mcnt of PresidentKuundaiwe ~/~~~6~A~~~,~
4 10
ckidh?r ius8/, wo8(36
tiut he FLU-L-b$veeu~hdc~i~
andhmbla, whic!~in 1965accounted
for 33.7percanto!
that country’strade,droppadtu I0.S percantIn 3967,tu~d
tf~t a!i t!~emass~~as
tskansftar the uniiatara!daciaratton
of Indspandonca
by Rhodorle
caused
Zambiau lossof $195

3 I, We need WI recsli tha vrirloueraeoluriuns udupFsdby
tho Sacurlty
Cour~ai! and tlib General Assembly on tlla
KI1wics1u11 q14csti0,. Wlw is irupottnnt
at Fld.9 ytoge 1s to saa
w!iet!iar we can develop ways nnd nic~1nsof et~s~rii~g

ras!Ect for tha sanctions wldch, unfortunatafy, ara systamntkdly

violated

by cartuiu

Moraber~

of UIO O~gaganizatiao,

includingsome pcrrnanent membnrsof the CouncU.
32. 3310 GUIW~II
delrgetloit
thus
rind suggcsiiuns
iwda

cIIdurr&c tlte reawmwds.
by cha raprasntatlva

of

Zumbia,and urges thclr instant iinpian~anteFion.
4

:~million. It is clear,howaver,that Zambia, like oUtcr African
countries naigltb~urittg on Rhodesia, was, becauseof its
geograpldc position, still delmttdent on Rhoda& for. Ute
--~.tuutsitof Its 4:vtt goads..Tosurviveit had to mah~taittsome
~~-economic ties, attd of coursethe coutttrlcs wllch voted in
,.~favourof sanctions,it~cludit~gmhte, never considered the

hope that Utoseentrusted with the heavy task of seekinga
solutiou to this dIfficttlt decolottization problem will know
.how to discharge their duty in conformity with their

41, ,‘A.s1 coihe to tho end of my statement on Utls ltctn of
‘our ‘agenda I should like, Mr, President, to addressto you
ottr c4ttgratulations and our thanks-congratulations on the
38. That is wlty -wejoin most willingly in tlte tribute
most
competent manner in which you have prcslded over
wltlclt severaldelegatiottshave already paid to Utc courage our debates
during this month, which is also the first mottrlt
slio~n by tltc Govcrnmettl and people of Zantbla by of your particlpaU4n
in the work of Ute Council, and our
refusingto take ndvatttageof the exceptionsgranted by the thanks
for
the
way
in
which,
during this month of Jattuary,
Ian Smith r&dtne for the trattsuortaUott of cotmer from you guided the work of Ute committee
entrusted witlt the
Zambia. By &king up tltc chall&tge hurled at -(him, they
task of preparing for our seriesof meetings in Panuma,I am
showedthat they weredatcrtttitted fully to hnplcment Ute convittccd that tha succassof that specialsessionawoyfrom
resolutions of Utc Security Couttcil, dcsplta their own Headquarterswlll be due to a large extent to tho wisdom
difficultl~s and the higher coststttcy would haveto pay for
more saver0 sattctiotts. \\fe noted with sathfactiott Uto and talent with which you guided that proparutorywork.
statcmettt made last Mottday by Uto rcprcsentativc of 42, Sir LaurenceMCINTYRE (Australia): WChavelistcttcd
Zambia, according to whom Utc closing of the bordar wlth close attention to all the speakerswho have ulreudy
betwatt his country and Rhodesia offered “a golden takan part in this debate. Wo Ustenedto the rcprcsontativc
opportunity” [see 1687tlt meeting,pura,371 for inten. of
Zambia with particular attention, becuuscit Is Znmbla
sifyhtg tho sanotlottsr0glmc.
that is bearing the bnmediate brunt of the crisis thnt has
from the deplorable action of Utc illegal r6gittte in
39. Tho determination shown by Zambia, Its cleapcut arisen
Rhodesla
in closhtg the border with Zamblo.
desireto find permanent waysfor replacing UN chanttcl for
its imports and exports, should result itt reducing Ute hard 43. We believe t!tat this development is deplorable on two
currettcy eartthtgsof tho Salisburyr&itne and, Utercfora,in principal
First of all, it threatensto hiip4se II scvore
increasing its economic difficultlcs, and In Ute lottg run economiccounts.
strain.on
Zambia, at least in the short term, and
should make it the maln victim of tho closing of the border, an acute psychologIcal
physlcal strain as ~011.It cuts
The tightening of the vice around Rhodesia should render Zumbia off front its mainrind
sources
channelsof imparted
nugatory the adoption of new sattctiotts,but Utc occasion supplies and it is bound to raiseand
fortnldablo problems for
~cottld be taken t4 rcaffintt the tteed strictly to observe Zambia
in the export of its copper attd otltcr c4mtttoditles
those already decided by Security Council rcsolutlons on which it primarily depends for its natlonul livcllltood.
253 (1968) atjd 277 (1970), cspcclallyIn the fbtanclal field. None of us hero can fail to have the fullest sympathy for
Further-attd this is a dcclsiott to be taken by the the Government and people of Zambia ill Utc situation in
Council-Utc httcrnational comtnuttity should ettdcavourto which they find Utemselvcs,and with It a dcsirc to help
IImit the damageswhich Zambia and other African coutt. Utctn in any way that may bo practlcublc. Secondly, the
tries too will incvltably suffer. Tlte dispatch of II team of Rhodesian action has created, in a shtgulurly provocative
experts, which would assesstho assistancewhiclt Zambla fashion, a newareaof tension, a ttewand critical flnsh.polttt
would requlrc to put together a systemof cotntttuttlcations in Ute trollbled southern African sccnc,with the prcdlctublo
--enabling It to mdntain its economy as proposed by accompaniment of more violence and more deuth, Tbls cun
Mr, Lusaka in his statement, could constitute a good only present another serious set-backto hopes that, glvon
approaclt to the problettt,
thne, we might all help to accelcratua processof pcuccful
,
aud orderly changein that disturbed areaof the yorld.
140. Whiia the &.xtch delegation deeply doploros Ute
eventsof recant daysand their immediate consequencesfor 44. For these reasons,we.fully share the condemnatlott
Zambia, it is also worried about Ute results of the prcscnt that we have heard expressedaround tltis .tablo of the
crisis for the fut4m It fearsthat this crish will tlot foster aggressiveand dangerously provocative action of the Rho.
the solution of the politlcnl problem of Rhodesia und that dcsiatt rebel r&me in closing the border with Zunthlu. II
the exceptiottal measures ,just taken by SaHsbury will Utcre is any consolation to be drawtt frottt this Iumcntublc
furtltcr delay Ute libaralizatlon of political tttutltods and Utc davelopmcnt, whichIs llighly doubtful, it cun only Hc.in tltc
return to individual freedoms which all of us wish to see expectation that Uto Rhodesian@#me, by u declsio~twhich
btstallcd in Rhodesia. Despite this cottccrn,wa ttevertltelcss is from every point of VIOWas perilous as it IS impetuous,
take n4to of the fuct that the Hritish dalegatlon reaffirmed will have done damagoto Its own position III boUt thc short
in its atatetttcnt that tit0 objective remains the sonrchfor a and longer tcrnt.
lust and acceptoblcpolitical scttlemcnt in Southern Rho.
dais ,JI&ld, pm 123J. The Iirench dclcgutiun, whoso 45. Alto Attstraltun Govcrnmcnt hasrepcatcdly madeclear
cortstuttt thonls bus bectt that ftntdantcntal responsibility for
its aversion to the blinkcrcd and reptcssivc~Cgitttc In
the s&ion of the RhodesIanproblem and for leading the Rhodosia attd its abhorrence of the pcrlicieri of s!xiaI auld
country to sel~dctern~lttationin conformity with the freely tuckd dlarin~huti4tt that arc being pursuedby that rhgItttc,
expressedwishesof the populotht belongsto \‘hc udminis. At the twcttt~scvettth sessionof the Gettcrul Assentblytlty
.terhg Power, wishesto take note of that statement, We delegation voted In litvour of wetdutlotts 2045 (XXVII) anI1

border and offer practical assistsncoto Zsmbia, and will at
the sametime represent,we hope, a cons&uotlvccontribu.
self~detormlnatfonand independenceon the basisof major* Uon towardsa solutibn, by peacefuland not violent means,
7~-pityrule. It must ~XIthe tssk of all of us to induce Ian SmOth, toj, then
and dlffloult
Africa,
~- -,complex
li. ,,I ..:.
1’ problems
1: ; -,, of southern
._,_.i: pi, _ ~~‘.“‘.his ‘~otleaguasand the white inlnority u a whole to
.;‘,rocognMthat there can be no genuine peace throughout _51, Mr. JANKOWITSQ1 (Austria): The Council continues _ _
southern Africa and no securefiture for Rhodesia as lonu to debate the complaint by’ Zambia concernbtg the dtua.
Uon on ,its frontier with Rhodosla, My delegation has
lhtonad with the closestattention to the prcvlousspeakers ‘~
46. In opening this debate /1687th.meer@/, the repre. in this debatti, in partlcuttu to speakers from African
sontattvcof Zambia made a number of proposals that ho countries, members and nonmembers of the Council, who
would wish to seeincorporated ln any decision reachedby haveglvan us their views on this quostlon.
thpi CouncUon the agendaitem before It, My delegation an
support the main thrust and purpose of those propod,
52. The reprosentatlvoof Zambia lnformed us two days
which wo have carefuUy studled, They appear to resolve age/1687th nleerdrtgl,in the clearestpossibleterms, of the
themselves into dlffcrlng orders of priority and cogency, extremely dangeroussituation ttut hasdevelopedalong the
and nqt all of them can be expected to command an equal border between Zambia and Rhodcsla rind of the fatal
casualtloscausedby this situaUon 111roceht days,I should
degreepf acceptanceby the council asa whole.
Uko to extend, on behalf of my Government, our most
slncero condolencesto the Government of Zambia and to
47. I do not intend, at this stage,to comment lndlviduslly
on all theseproposals,but I can say,first of all, that wecun the fan&es of the vlctlms. Austria deeply deplores these
join III condemnation of the economlu and military pressure acts of violence that have nut ouly causeda most alamdnlg
that the Rhodesian rt!gimo has brought to bear upon aggravationof thti situation In the area,but also resultedJn
Zombla by its closure of the border. We would also the death of innocent pooplo,
condemn In the strongestterms the presenceof any foreign
forcesin RhodesIs,about whichmilch hasalready beenssld 53, Since the potltlcal sltuatlon In Rhodesia has P direct
in the Council und much written iii the press,and we would bearing on this questlon ond since, on the other hand, this
is the first thne that Austrln has stutcd its position on the
nntunrlly support u cdl for their whhdrswal,
Rhode&n question In this chumbcr, I should Uke to
48. Oa the question of IiI~~rcrasing
the effectivenessof the elaborate rapidly on the attitude my Government has
ssnctlonsa@nst Rhodasir:, we are of coursestill awaiting consistently taken on this questlon in the past.
Uic lntest report of the Security Council Commlttee
established in pursuasii%of resolution 255’(1968), The 54. After the unilateral declarstton of indopendenco,the
Counclt may well consider it useful to explore possible Austrian Federal Government decldcd, on 23 November
waysof extending the ncope of ssnctlons. But the main 1965, not to recognizethe Ulcgal regime in Salisbury,‘Ihls
objootlvc, as waspolnted out by the ropresenlatlvcof the decision wascommunlcn:atedto the Secretary.Caneralby a
United Kingdom /lbfd,j, must be to make the existing letter dated 26 January 1966 [S/711.5/, It wasin this way
range‘of sanctions fully effective, wMch has clearly not that Austria clearly manlfostcd that it could neverapprove
been tbc caseup to the present, I might note hero that the of a policy of social and racial discrimination by II small
AustrPllun Government has taken a number of steps in mltlority without regard to and even against the will of the
recent we&s to identify and closeany loophobs that may vastmajority in the country,
remain In respectof its own domestlc measuresto apply the
SS. The decision not to rocognlzo the Ulegal rt$$ne in
tinctlons r0solMlon8,
SaIlsbury wasfollowed by cconomb moasurcstaken bnme.
49, On the question of the se&up. economic difflcutttes diately. The rn& important one wasthe decisbl of tha
forccd on Zambia as a result of the closure,af the border, Austriaa Gwwmmt
to str>pull imports of tobacco from
we nota that the representativeof Zambia has omphasizod Rhodes& by the r\ustrisn Stute monopoly for tobacco. In
the Import&ice of maintaining alternative road, rall and sea the succeedingyears,Austria has, without prejudice to the
communlcatlons with the outside world. It may well be question of prindple arIsIng In this context from Austria’s
that a survey of Zambia’s needs In this regard by a statusof permanent noutmtlty-a status I referredto in my
communbarlons expert or experts, as recommended by statement before this CouncU on 16 January of this year
AmbassadorLusaka, might offer the best meansof atab- /168&h nfeelbrgl-ecccpted tlio sanctionsimposed by the
tlshing what fbrther actlon might be rec,uirad to help Security CouncU on Soutbcrn Rhodcsiu in resolutlous
Zambia to sustainits economy, .
232 (1966), 253 (1968) and 277 (1970), and bus, in so far
aa they affcftad Austria, provided for the implementation
50, Those arc merely preliminary comments on the of the relevant provisions, 1 should tlke to refer In this
Zamblan proposals,and they are not lntonded to be In any connexion to notes addressedto the SccrctaryCcneralon
scnscexclusive or final, My delcgathi wilt wait before 28 February 1967 [see S/7781/Add42,atmex~, 31 July
commenting furthor until dcfidlivc proposalsbegin to take 196glsee S/8786, mnex II/ and 28 June 1970/see S/9853
shape for the Council’s considaratlon, Lat me simply of1 July 1970,m~wxI/J.
repeut, In conclusion, that we have great aympatby for
*ambia In the intolerable situstlon In which il tinds itsctf. 56, As a consequence of tbut policy, total Austrian
V!:,‘ashall do our best to help the Counrll In rcachlng Imports from Southern Rhodesle dropped from appruxia
decislous that wUt reduce the present tenslon along the matety 7,000 tons in 1965 to only 228 tons In 19G9.They
2946 (XYb+W), thus convaylng the iId! endorsement of my
Government of the right of the people of Rhodesia to

6

have ceased altogether since 1970. The composjtion of
Austrian imports during tho last years before the rcsolu.
tjons on sanctions shows, moreover, that only tobacco was
~I~.lmported ln any slzablo quantity, This most substantjal
import jtcm has been ellmlnatod camj~lotoly,‘not withput,
. ~-:- oe$aln~ec_onomlo
sacrlflces, It fell to zero jn 1968,
-::, ,:. ,:-. ; in _.~~ ._-I I~1-T ‘I:;‘. ‘. ., --:I..: FT-.-1m1,.
: 57. I.&t me now turn to the complajnt of Zambia, I\s I
~-have demonctratcd with rogord to my own count&Y, iho
sanctions orders of tho Security Councn dld have economl,:
and admlnlstratjvo effects on all oountrlos which prcvjously
had economic rolotjons wltll Rhodosio, It goes without
saying that those effocto woro magnjfjedln countdos wjllch
had partjcularly close rclatlons wlth Southorn Rhodeslo,
Among theso, Zombln can ho sajd to have a sj~ecjoljlovjtjon
6jncoI as the Nortliorn Rhodesin of co!?mlaltlmcs, It was
most closely llnkcd to tho economy of Rhodosln untjl Its
own lndopendoncojn Ootobor 1964. Tliat such a sjtuutjon
cannot be revorscd h a mattor of months, or uvon a fow
years, seams equally clear, and 1should llko to quota horu a
passage from the reply Zambja nave on 23 February 1967
to the Secretary.Geueral on carrying out the sanctions, u
passagowhich soems relevant in this context:
“Altho;lgh the Government oj the Republc of Ztunbjo
does not beljovo that the measures sdoptod hy the
Securjty Councfl would be effectjve enough to bring
down the lllegnl r&me, and despjto thy fact that
Zpmbjn’s and Southern Rhodosla’s economlos hi~vc i’or
the past 70 yoars been jnoxtrjcnbly jolnod like Slumasc
twins, and whereas any snactjons olmed nt disrupting tho
economy of Southern IUlodesle arc bound to djsrupt Uio
economy of Zombla, the Government of the Republic of
Zambja is prepared to give Its maxjmum co.oporntlon In
the imploiiientntloii of rosolutlon 232 (19&j), and in fact
it has aheody adopted a policy which alms at soverlngall
economic and trado connexjons with Soutjlern I~lodcsja,
To achieve this the Government of Zambja has already
Imposed for.reaching and more extensjve voluntary sanp
tjons ngolnst Southern Rhodosja.

the spcclallzed ngencjcsand other lntaraatlonal orgnnjza.
tlons to extend aslstance to, Zambia as a rnattor of
,, prlorlty, wlth a view to helping Zambla ~solvc such
-:’ cconomjo problems OSZambjn hod been confronted wjth
ash result of tho doclslons of tllo Security Council, I wl8h
::.Ito- report wjth deep roaret thot uo Membeor,States,
‘speojalized agenclos or other-lntcrnatjonal organjzatlons
:.havo gjvon Zambia offoctlvo assistance as a roault of theso
.-:rosolutjons.‘! /See ,!#98S3/Add,irl, of I @vo,!w 1970,
autiw.I,l

60, h UiC )‘NJH that hINO fOIlowed,%mbjahOS under*
taken the RrOateSt effort8 jn order to comply wlth 80i1Cs,
tlons,rindthoseoffortswcronot leastamongtho actswhjch
oarncdZambjuand Its I’rcsidont,Mr, KormathKnundn,tjlo
8ynlpathyandadmlrntlonof manycountrjos,lncludjngmy
own*Zamblnwrtalnjy hasborn0tho brunt andhasbconjn
the forefront of the strugpjoof At&n to golnfi11freedom
andlndopondenoo
of tho contlnont.
61, As lll0 resultof SovorfII~ it8 last aConotulc
tlos with
Rhodosjn
durjngrcc~nt wooks,Zamblutodny fncosd now
and moro sorjoussituatjon. My dalogationis thcrsforo
canvjncodthat the roquostoxpressod
by Zaa~bla,basedon
Artlclos 49 and 50 of tho Charterund on the aforomon.
tjonod provlslons of rosolutlons 253(1968) ond
277(1970), for cconomjcassjstnrlco
by Unllod Natlons
orgunlzatjons
andby MemberStntesdeserves
mostserjous
cousldoratlon
by tills Cuuucll.Wefoolthat suchasslstancc
shouldcnubloZambiato reinforceIts cconomjcIndupon.
doncofrom Rhodoslaand coatrjbuto to dlmlnjshlngtj~o
dangerof a confrontotjonIllongtile commonborderjlnc,
62. Austriaholdsthe .flrm bollof-which It ha8oxprossod
the alid agah jn the comj%tentogansof UICUnited
Natjons-that docolonlzutionln arcnswhere colonialism
porslstsshouldprogross
by the fastestmouns
posslblo,but
tjlat peacofujmeansconstltutofflo bestandsafestwayto a
last&
.L of the problemsIrJicront ln Uils procuss.
Au&la &iefore feels that the contlnuodpro%ncaon
IUiodesjanterritory of non~I&odesjanforces must bo
deploredusit contributesto the r&o of tonslonIn tlio nrca
ancjcouldwidendiescopeof col!fliot.

“Since the unilateral declaration of indopcndorrce by
the mjnorlty white &line In Southern Hhodeoja,Zambia
has spent woli over $90 mjlljon hnpiemontlug Its policy of
soverjng its trade and oconomjc tics with South~*l’rr 63, l[lle reprosontotlveof ZamblaIn hjs 8tatemonthos
suucstod,amongotllor mensuros,
new efforts In ordorto
!Ulodosla I , ?’ [see S/7781jAdd.2, am~ix./
ensurethe strlotostcompljancewith sanctions,
In vlow of
what
I
have
sajd
earlier,
the
necotijty
to
ensuro
the
strlctost
58, mually illuminating nre trade statjstjcs for 1965,
CompllanCe
with SecurityCoutlo~ dcclslons
otl wlctiolls on
which 8hOW Zambia jn the first place among Uie countrjss
lmportlng from Southcra Rllodesla, rcccivjng roughly 25 a unlvorspIbasiscertainly exists.Zuubin, 1~the light of
recentdevelopments,
hasnow madeu newandlmportant
per cent of Southern Rhodesia’s exports,
coiitrlbutjoii, jiivolvlnggreatsucriflC0,
to this end.llut wo
huvc to racognLL0
the t’uct thut saucticlsare not yet as
59. Zambia’s spccjal position was rccognizod by this
effectiveusthey shouldbeundthut consjderublo
trudc from
CouacU when, In pnragraph 15 of resolution 253 (lY88)
andto SouthernRhodosja
is stljl contjnulnjj,ThuCommjtaud paragraph 16 of resolution 277 (j970), It requcstcd
Isnowactlvcjy ongagod
In a stud>of thjs
Member Stabs, tjlo Unlted Nations and the spucjalhed teeon Sanctjonsa
mattor
and
should
present
u
roport
to
tho
CXJIICIIwlthjil
agencies to extend nsslstance to Zambje wjth a view to
tho tioxt month.Wo fcol that, jr, the ljght of th18 report,
hetpjn8 It solve Its economic problems. I should jlke to
tcchnlcul
quote in this connexlon from the reply given by Zambja OII which wo ho-w will contain all die necessary
jnformatjoii oil posslblljtiusto eiif1lrr.e~uctlotif, tlit,
10 July 1970, on the lmplementatjon of resolutions
Couuejj wjll bc able to consjdcrwlwtcver stepsarc
232 (1966), 253 (jY68)ond 277 (1970):
uecossary.
“Security Council resolutions 253 (1YGtl) und
277 (1970) requested Mcmbcr St&s, the lhltcd Nations,

64, Someother posslbiilU0sof actlon for the Council have
bon mentioned,in considering them we should, however,
not loso sight of the underlying politIcal goals that we are
pursuing. l’qr more then seven years the political problti
of Southern Rl+d@a has remahed witI> us; if, any change
+ perceptible, It ,is a change for the worse, ,Succesaive
United ylngdom Governments have devoteda greeSdaal of
l~ollticaleffort to a sojut&i of this prciSlemand w9 do not
hesitate to pay tribute to thesa endeavours.In particular we
wclcon~o
the decision taken by th0 United Kingdom
Govcnunent to respect fully the verdict of,rhe people of
Zimbabwe exprossadthrough the PearceCommission.
65. It is our firm bellof that the success of any action
taken by this CouncU and by the ~rguiization It&elf
dependsstrongly on tho contlnucd co*pperationand good.
will of ail parties czracerned.
GG It is the primary task df tho Council to pursue the
maintenanceof international peaceend security. Without
any doubt, the situation as it exists today in Rhodesiaand
as It has developedparticularly aftcr tiu un23teral and
hostile act of the illegal Smith r6gime against Zambia, is
disrupting the security of the area, In consldoslng any
ocrioa the Council might wish to take Irl thls context, we
should carefully examine whether such action can cffecm
lively contribute to a lapid eilmlna:1onof the existing
threat to the pcrtce in a part of the continent alrdady torn
by to7 many years of tenslon, conflict and confrontation.
My dolegation is ,eady to associate itself with ali efforts
mcethig those requirements.
67.’ Mr. IVllELIPS (United States of Ame.;ca): bcent
cvcnts along the Zamii~Khodesian border are causes for
concern on the part of members of the Security Council.
The Incidents described to UC by the representative of
Zambia /lb87tlr neetlry/ and the subsequent closing by
the Smith r&ime of its border with Zambia demonstrate
the tetision which can arise in the southern part of Africa.
68. In previous meetings, the Se-curity Council has been
prlmurlly concerned with deveioynaentsoccurring within
the Te,rritory of Southcm Khodesla as well as with the
cffoctivoness of sanct\oqs. During this series of meetings,
however, our attention has: also been directed to events
wi1lc11i~~voivca Member Btate of the United Nations. Even
though we arc always aware of the po+biilty of lncldents
occurring in an drea of tension such as this, we had ail
hoped, 1 am .sure, that the problems could havo been
,substantiaily contalnad to a certain degree within the
borders of Southern Rhodesia. It wovld have been better
for Rhod0sia not to involve another country throu& a
scrics of Incidents and III closing 1110 border, Unhappily,
however, this has not beenthe case.
6Y. Turning to the complaint r&cd by Zambia, it is clear
that, in vlcw of the economic re!ationships that existed
bctweti,l Zambia and Southern Rhodesia prior to the illegal
drclare~lun of indcpendoncc, It :vouid have imposed a
hcuvy cconomlz hurden lbr Zambia to sever all its links
wiP1 kuthern Rhodesia. Despite this, Zumblo has since
1065 done its best to comply with the w~crlons Instituted
:IgainstSouthern Rhodesis. It was clear ut the outset that, it
it was IO reduce Its dcpcndence on Southern Rhodrsiu,

Zambia would require outside assistance, This assistance
was almost immediately forthcoming, Many M,smbeyStat@.,
including the United States, respondedto Zambia’s request
for help during the early days of s&n&ions, During the
period January through April 1966 it provided, at a cost of
$4.5 million, a comprehensive aIrlIft for the trwlsport of
petroleum Products. During that period, llnited States
planes made some SOOround trips, trunsporting 4 million
gallons of .such prodncts from other points In Afrlco XI
Zambia-a unique, costly, but vory necessary airlift. In
addition, the United States provided some $38 miilion
towards the construction of the groat north road, which 110s
enabled Zambia to transport, by truck, its copper to the
United Republic of Tanzenla for export to other parts of
the world u:d to tra.lsport its imports,
70. Additional assistancewas also provided by my Govern.
merit as well as by other countries, Tills assistance hns
strengthenedZambia’s ability to wcathcr the adverseeffects
on its economy of the al~pllcationof sanctions ugalnst
Southern Rhodesia.
71, The United States has followed Zambia’s plight v&h
close attention, and we IIWJObeen in close touch with the
Zamblan Government S~IICC the border was closed. We arc
very much av+rueof the problems for Zambiaresulting fram
this act. It is unfortunate that the closing of the Zambian
Southcrn Rhode&n border hcs forced Zambia to take
drastic measur’c.?and seek altcrnatc routes for its goods, 7%e
present difficult circumstances in whlc11Zamblntlnd3 itscif
obviously underscore the needto examinecarefully sippro.
priate ways in wlhh Zambia might be assisted.
72. ‘llle United States iias long held the view that the
problem of Southern Rhodosla should be resolved through
peaceful means. The imposition of sanctions against that
Territory was ono of the peacefulways 111which the United
Kingdon. and the United Nations could help bring an and
to the rebellion against Her Majesty’s Govcrnn~0nt,Unfor.
tunately, sanctions have not yet brought about the desired
results.
73. Southern Rhodesia has contlnucd to flout world
public oplnlon. Its obstlnatc rofusoi to agree to the
principle of ssif~dctermlhation for all of its population end
to accept the prlncipie of majority rule 1133on!y served to
exacerbatein already tell%3 situ.ation.Its wllilngness to take
action against a nclghbourhg country makes it most,
difficult to achievethe peaceful sottlemont of the problem
which we ail seek.
74, The Smith r~glmepersists in its rebolllonand, further.
more, Is rapidly enactingand enforcing racist laws dizcr!minatlng b0:wcen tlie races and huposlagabhorrent collc5ivve
punishment. Mnng Africun States ha*revoiced their opposl.
tion to these racbt politics. The Unitod States also cannot
condune the actlonr taken by the Smith rilgimeboth inside
and outside Southern Rhod0sia. The United States bclicves
that sanctions should be muintaincdand tightenedand that
further attempts should bc made to achieve a peaceful
settlement. WC are fully conscious of the fact that there arc
those in some quarters who feel that additional measures
should bc undertak0n. These are matters of which the
Security Council Commitice established in pursuance of

the Council regardhlg this aggressivecampafgnnow being
ya@d
I
.,
,. ,
..
“-”against
“\ . Zambia.
*
81, the Council hasverj aften examined shnillr situations
involving the ,&pub& of Guinea, the People’sRepublic of
the Congo, ‘Uo Unit$d Republic of ,Trur&rda and Scncgal,
cduntrbs which in .thd past have .slso been victims of
prwocations an!?.attacks. from the coloni$ist and Ffcist
e,ncla~ whicl~tiil persistor! African y,
;
:

t’esolution
t’esohtlon 253 (1968) hasbeen
ken seizedsincethe sduptlon
sdupth of
~.resolution.320 (1972), 1 am sure.‘that this Committee,
~~~~
,., ~.resoiution
awareof the ,urgency of makIng a repnrt !o the Council,
‘=---y: .‘wiU
wiU examine My *&e various suggestionsthat have
hay?.bean
+a4
.inadeIn order to r&der v-$0?, lnpre
effeotivc,
. ,’?. ,,’
.:
:
.-..s
:
!I
,’
,~.
pi
c,-,-T-75.’ ‘But in deliberating this question, both the Committed
.-..-‘and .the .Security Council should examine all the affect4
A.;. whiih might. follow from the acceptancecf thw suggce
tions. Whilb we all hope that the rebellion will end at tho
earliest possible date, we wish meanwltis to keep the
Rhodcsian populntion informed of what is happening
outside Rhodesia, it is necessaryto maintain a free flow of
CO~~~I&XUO~, if only to avoid holphlg the minority
r6glmo further to consolidate its position by our dropping
downPcurtohl nround its people, Suchan act would, In our
view, be totally ineffective-indeed, counterproductive-in
induchlg the r8gimo to changaits oppressivepolicies.

82. We should like to point out, however,that we believe

that, contrary to what might be gatheredfrom someof the
statements made ham, the Security Council ‘ie not dealhig
with a COlilpldllt
of one Member of the Organization
agalnst another. ‘IIlls is not a bilateral dispute wherethe
Security Council can tend its good offices, Rather, UIC
Security Council has before it a question which conc0rns
Ure international community as a whole because,while in
this specificsituaUon we Nnd, on the ono hand, the people
and the Government of Zambia, we find, on the other,
those intereststhat havebeen rep?atediy condemnedby the
international community, interests which representpolitics
that have been vehemently repudiated by the General
Assembly and the Council on many. occasians.Behind
Zambia stand not only its own people but most of world
public opinton, which sharm Zambia’s support for the
African .naUonal liberation movementu, support for the
principle of the sacredright of peoples to !ndependence,
support for the inalienable right of the African population
to dwell in Africa fret from all forms of modern slavery,
such a8 those that stiil exist in southernAfrica-support, in
one word, for principles and tenetswhich the international
community laid downmany yearsago.

76. Our vlewson the cxtcnsion of sanctions have been
made clear time and thnc again ui\d Yneed not repeat them
today. It has boon suggestedtliat a team of United Nations
expertsbe sent to Ziunbiu to assess
the economic situation.
The United State; supports this suggestionand wishesto
propose that, innsmuch as there is airendy cnpnble United
NaUonsrepresentationon the spot, the Resident Rcprescn.
tative of the United Nutions Development Programme
might be requcotcdhnmediatcly to undertake this task for
the Sccuilty Council, WCwould hope that whoeverunder.
takes such a task would draw on all the previous studies
made after the unilateral dcclaratlon of hidependence,It is
of coursenecessaryto oxamine all aspectsof the problem,
and my dolcgation can conceivaof circumstancesin c~hich
it might be highly desirable that a roprcsent8Uveof ,tie
Secretary.Generalvisit the area to examine both the
. .~..~.:
political and the military situation,

83. Thu; we feel that the duty of the Security CouncU is
not merely to expressits support for the people and the
Government of Zambia and adopt measuresin defenceof
77. Pinally, the United States is very gratified to noto its just position, but also to stand up and &fend itself,
from the statemont of the United Khlgdom representative defend the agreements it previously approved, defend n
[&ld.] that his Government has been in touch wiLh both very claar4zut policy that has been spelt out on many
sidesand that they have made clear their desire to seean occasionsby the General Assembly.To do so the Security
end to the confrontation, the reopening of the border and Council mud adopt measuresthat not only wilt atleviate
an early return to peacefulconditions. Wewarmly asspci$e the immediate dlfflcuities of Zambia, but also wili va!idnte
and hnplement the decisions that have been repeatedly
ourselveswith thc~e hopesand obJectives. ,,
adoPted here regnrding the inalienable right of tho Wm.
babwe people to freedom and independence, with full
78. The PRESIDENT: The next name on ‘the list of
respect,for the stated viewsvd d+ref of the majority of
speakersis that of the representativeof Cuba. 1 invite’idm
‘> :
. ,,‘.
the.pdpulution.~
..,,
to take a .place at the Council table,,and fo make II@
:
,
statement.
..,
’
84. ‘Only when the problem of the survival of: ~lonialism
79. Mr. AWRCON (Cuba) (interpretationfrom Spat&h): and r&m in Africa has been solvedonce and for all, wili it
Mr. President, may 1 first of ti expressto you and, through be poonojbleto safeguardthe security, the Independenceand
you, to the membersof the Council our thanks for ollo~lng
the territorial hltegrity of the newAfrican nations. And the
us to take part in this Important d&ate br. which the probkms of colonialism and r&an can be settled only if
Security Council Is engagedunder your wise and skilful
determIned measuresare adopted to wipe them out.
leadership.
85. My delegation felt that it wasIta bounden duty to
participate in this debnte of this Council In order to expross
M). I do not intend to make a lengthy statement in thir
debatesince a nutnber of speakershavenlrecdy spelledout
our solidarity with the people of Zambiv and the Govern.
in detuli the slgnlitcanceof the situation fachig us because merit of Zambia, presided over by Kaaneth Kaunda, the
of the pruvocatlonsand attach of which our sisterrepublic eminent African kader. We feel that tho problem confront.
of Zambia has been the Vkihl during the iart few We&,,.
ing that ration today bar uspcctsthat are fundumentat alsil
and also shlce we huv? heard a verycomPlete strtsment by to aE1the nations of the third world and all the antI.
.knbassador Lusnka / J687tlr meeting]whichenlightened cdrmlallet forces. If todtly hlirbia !s the victim 01
Y

i-

1’

sggrsrsions,of a blockade, of provocatlouscarried out by
the illepl r6ghne iu Southern Rhodesia and the racist
-, @me
ha Soutil Africa and their hnporleiist and colonialist
..;- lo& and masters acting behind the scena, it is purely
becausethat small developh~gcountry-which hasolready
j mt~.-‘,bqrno the great burdens of its colonial: hedtege, cotnm
~~~-~pcundod by -the~~dlfflcultles caused ‘by its lsnd&oked
gcograpldcaiimation and tho fact that It is surroundedby
~.-. : 1~osUier~glmcs-iis adoptod aud adheredto II firm p&ion
In the dofoncoof the basicprinciples titat underly the very
concept of the third world,

those threats are partlcuIsrly alarm@ since they soamto
form part of a odoiUallnt escalation in Africa of which the
first sign wasthe coward&assaasltutiottof hflcar Cabral,
lb ie an oloquent fact that I0 awession ha0 taken plsce
preciselyquiust a country ‘tu~athas aiwaystaken a vory
valiant stand of v&lance and strnrggleIn Africa and It] the
t&d world againat the permanent aggrasslonof racismand
colonialism. Therefore we canaot avoid the faet that the
southern aelghbours of Zambia expect fhoir aggreatilonto
.:
intimidate that cpu,ntry,
~.

92, The sealing off by the iiIe@i rdglmc of Salisburyof Its
frontior with Zambia constltutos typical economic amma.
sion against Zambia, ail the more dosorvlngof condetu.
nation since that country is fighting In partktdarly adverse
circumstances to achieve hrdopendont dovciopmont~ T&e
Government of Zambia is even forced, at the cost of Breat
sacriflcos,to find dlfforont waysof shlpplng Its oxports,
wilch are vltai to it. For ail theser(rasot16,
wa havefollowed
with admlration tho decision of Zambia to comply fully
with the sanctions that wore decreed by the Security
87. My dologotion appeals to the Couocll to act in
Couucll in resoiutlon 253 (19681, even though Uls would
accordance wlth the s.ugSostionsmade by Ambassador dpU an lttcroascin ltardshlp to Its own ccononty.
Lusaka, for wo consldcr that that would be the only way
adequately to meet the present situation. We use this 93, However,tho aggressIonof tho SaIlsburyrt5ghnoIs not
opportuuity to expressagla to the Covcrnment and people limlted to an economic blockade. There hss been a
of Zambia our complete support In thesedifficult times and doploymont of miiitary forcesand a sorlesof Incidents that
in general,as has alwaysbcou the case,WCsupport thorn in
constitute a warlike throat to the sovereigntyof ZambIa,
their unfiag&g strugglefor African liberation.
which becomesovan mom gravesince it has the effective
suPport of South Africa, a powerful neighbou: of Rhodesia
88. We fully understand that solldarlty among the peoples with the sameracist theories,
of the UUrd world, the peoples of As&, AFrlcuand Latin
America, is moro Important than ovor ot this stagein the 94, Furthermore, we cannot deny that the constant lack
struggle for the liberation of our peoples becausethe of compliance with the economic osnctionsimposedby the
resistanceto these movements by the colon&&t r&mea
CounciI stands In the way of the full application of the
hasbecomemore obdurate. It is not a colncidcncothat the Declaration on tho Grunting of Independence to Colotllal
aggressionagainst Zambia hasbeen Intensified iatoiy, at the Countries and Peoples, contained In General Aasetnbly
very moment. whenone of the greatestleadersof the third
resolution 1514 (XV), to the colonial Territory of Southern
world, Amflcnr Cabrul, was being tnowod down at the Rhodesia, Thls laok of compliance is thus bolstering the
crimIna1hand: of colonialism,
iilegal rdgimo of Salisbury in its aggressionagainstZambia,

86. It is becauseof Its dofencc of the rIglit of African
peoples and bcauso of Its dotarm~~od and consistent
support for the African Iibcration movements, that Zatnbln
hasearnsd the right to universal soildarlty and ttto support
of all ?ho flghthlg peoples of the third world. So, too,
Zambia hss camed the right to specificdecigIonsfrom this
Councli to help it, partlcular~ to overcomethe additional
difilcuitlcs that the prosentsituntion hascreated.

89. Both phenomenaare facetsof the samecolonIsIIst und
racist arrogance; they arc both facets of the complete
flouting by the colonltdlsdsand racistsof the sacredrights
of peoples. Such au attitude can be met only by oven
greatersolidarity on our part, by evenmore detormhlation
on our part and on the part of all the antlcolonialist and
anti&npcrlallat forcesof the world. Therefore, we repeet
our constant rcadlnessto partlcipato In that contlnulns
.effort made by the peoples of Asia, Africa at~d Lotin
America.

95. This picture of inqroasod~rassmont is aggravatedby
the presence of South Africsu forces on the soli of
Southerr Rhodes& and on the very frontier with Zambia,
and thesefaces aro not there to hcip fight alleged terrorism
but are true expeditionary forcessent to support 8gsres.
sign.
96. in the it&t of this sitwtlon and uttder the law and in
conformity with the clear de&Ions of the Security Council,
rewated bv-f the General Assembly,we find that Rhodesia is
b& 8 British colony. The unlisteral declaration of indepen.
dencoof 1965 doesnot grant logsi statusto Utor&hue thut
at present holds power in tho ‘i’erritory, and therefore the
reaponslbliity of the United Kingdom as administerfng
PowerstUi stands,

90. Mr. I%‘i<UZ DE CULlLLAK (Pm) (lnrerpretatlmr
from Spmlshj: WClistened with greatattuntiou to the very
clear and calm statemertt of the representativeof Zambia,
Mr. Paul Lusska/1687th meetby/, on the graveeventsthnt
huvarecently affected his country, p.swoil as on the coursa
of sction he recommcrtdodto the Council.

97. Now WI must admit with disiiiusionment that, hsd the
people of Zhrrbabwobean given the rIght frecIy to decide
thoh own fate in tlmo, the liberstlon movement would uot
axlst today In Southern Rhodesia, a il~ratlon tnovetnont
which, becauseIt receivesassistuncefrom Zambia, is the
pretext thut the Smith minority has adduced for the
awcrrion ir hascommItted.

91. Tlia Security Council Ir today confronted by a
ciesr.cut caseof throats to pc~ccand security In the region,
and theroforc the Council should, promptly and with,
determination, adopi the measuresprovided for In the
Charter of the Unltcd Nations. My dolcgatlon beile*.%sthat
10

98, My Government bellovos that it is now up to the 106, Wo axeconfronted by Psituation which, without any
Security Council, as the organ of the United .NaUons doubt, is a provooliUon and a throat to pence on the
onhustod with the ntitonance of lntornatlonal ~!ace and aonthumt, !i’he economic blockade imposed on Zambia by
secuslty,promptly to assumethe responsibilitiesincumbent -the racist rbglmo of P&ode&a and the militruy deployment
upon it and to ndo$t the nocowuy moarwali to help the
::~country. that hasbeen attacked, Thobemeasuresshould he
designed to ffie southem “Africa from -the ’ colonirdist
~=~~oscalatlon to .which I rsforred at the kigh~hg
of this 107. The ropresentatlvsof Zambia, ~Mr.~Lusaka /1687tfr
ftato[@J[lt. .:_I1.:~_-“...‘_1-‘. ~I_.~
.--..~. ~.-- .’i- : ,:,.’ .,,.. meet&/, listed ovents that leave no room for doubt
~~i_.~regardingtho gravity of the crlsls that that rcglon of Africa
% hong thn idativos of the COUMU should be is undargohu at prosont, Howovor, the problem becomes
included an immediate withdrawal of the South Afrloan oven more complex because,as Mr, Lusaka pointed out,
there are South African troops on Rhodesian’soil, whichis
milhary forcesat present stationed on Southern Rhododn~
roll-for they in themselves conatltuto an element of an open threat to o Member State of UICUnltod Natlons.
friction 111 the roglon-and the adoptlon by the logithnate
administering Powerof meansat Its disposalto put an end 108. The colonlallst forces, awareof the fact that the
struggle of the pcoplos for their Ilberation cannot bo
ta the act of aggrosfdon
of the illegal Smith i@huo~
contahiod, are resorting to all stepsin their mad do&c to
100. Purthermore, wo conslder it i~dlspensnblo to assess mahitain In e.tistenco a system which is contrary to all
the sanctionsagainstthe rbglmo and, If necessary,increase tenetsof the Chartor of the Unltcd Natlous,
thorn, At the uaU10 timo we should consider action as&t
Zambia in its difficult task of dealing with the economic 109. My Goverruncnt condemns tho cggrcssionthat the
racist a~!thorlUes of Rhodesia are launching against the
problems that this aggrasslonhas createdfor it.
Republlo of ?ambla and gives all its support to any
101. It Is lmperatlve that we act with Calnebut we must MBQSur06 that might ensuro for that State its torrltorkd
also act with doterminatIon and efficiency in order to integrity and soverolgnty.
discourage an aggrcsslonin which Jl the aggravating
110. We should urgently try to avoid that infamous
oircumstancosareadded to one anothor, becauseit not only
blockade
and at all costsstop the incursionsof mercenaries
threatens lnternatlonal poaca and security but also itself
rt6ms from complete contempt for the elementary norms that sowterror and death among Ppeople whole-hearted!y
of internatIonal law. These norms have been honourod by struggling to emergefrom underdovclopmcnt.
intornatlonal usageand they have also boen onshrinod in the
t%arter and the resolutions of the General Assembly, and 111. Wewishcategoricallyto statethat Panama rcpudlates
thoy constltuto the slrrc quu w.w for civllized coexistence the aNa~~ceof the colonialists who keep alive racial
discrin~nation and apurtheidIn Khodcsia, in South Africa
amoug States.
and In Portugal, and we denouncethose systemsascontrary
102. Mr. BOYD (Panama) (&mpretutfot~from Spovkh): to human rights and all tho principles of international law
On 9 January last, the illegal authorities of Rhodoslasealed sot forth in the Chartor.
tho frontler of IU~odoslnwith Zambia and prohlbited all
traffic between them in order to blockade Zambia and 112 The delegntion of Panama wishes to assure the
force it to abandon its dotormhled stand in favour of the delogatlons of Guinea, Kenya, and the Sudan that, asfar aa
we are concerned,we shall be highly gratified to support
liberallon of the people of Zimbabwe.
any draft resolution they may seefit to submit in support
103. Th9 Ian Smith racistsadopted as their pretext the of Zambia.
fact that two South African policemen had been killed by 113, Since today is 3 1 January, the last day of tho month
elements that they contended the Lusaka Government
which, iii uccordanccwith the rules of proceduo,
protected, We have heard that Rhodesian forces have during
representativeof hdo~csio will be President of the
crossed the frontier WMI Zambia and laid mines on tho
Council this year, wo wish to oxprcssour wholeshcnrted
Zsmblan soil and adopted an aggressivestand that has thanks
to you, Mr. President. WCcongratulate you on the
causedconsiderablemater&I damage,
offIclont wayin which you hare presidedover our debates.
We should particularly like to recall that the positive results
104. Among UI~ throats that havo bean mentioned, we of
the forthcoming meetings of the Security Council in
IWO bon most deeply concernedover the fact that South
will, as tho reprcscntativo of Franc- :ras just
Africa hassent a force of 4,000 men to repressthe freedom Panama
corra!tly
pointed out, alwaysbe linked to the work done
muvementsof tha noble people of Zhnbabwoand &o to by tho Security
council Committee ou Council Meetings
threaten the t@torlal integrity of Zambia.
swayfrom Headquartersover which you skilfully presldod
with prudence, blent and cnorgy. Parumu has already
10.5, The determined antl~colonlallst stand of Panama linked your name with its hIstory. You have Icd us along
plecosus shouldor to shouldor with Zambla with regardto the
mart difficult part of tho road to the meotlngs of the
the complrlnt that the latter has brought to this Cou~ldl.
Security Council in Latin America, ml for U-at we thank
Prom the very beglnning of our consultatlone, we agread
that this body should meet urgently la order to conplrjer you.
measuresto be adopted hi the casethat Zambia hasbrought 114. Mr. ABlXJLLA (Sudan): l)uriq the lasi iwo days,a
to the Couucll.
large number of speakersrepresentingAfrica, Latin Amcr-

ica, the Arab world and ,&a non&nod lworld, the rofleotod upon and Judged agtinst the common ochninal
~hesidellt of tit0 or~iziluon
of Afrban IJnity, the nature sharad by tires0 three c6gimosand the Inhuman
Chairman of tho Committee of ‘Wonty.Fows and, not briea and humlllatlons they infl!ot upon the millions’ of
~, least, the representativeof Zambia himself, have,.spok?n,If
Afrkxnu ‘they 4cy in vain perpetually to exploit and
those speakerahave manifested anything, It ia their pave ~dominnto.‘XI is no wonder they .are drawn together in. an
concernover the recent developmentsIn Africa, whioh pose attempt ,’ to preserve their morbid ~6ghncs, which are
_~a threat not only to Zambia-sarioua ~8sthe, throat to ‘-meeting wlth mounting resistancefrom .Uiosc they oppress _
-=Zamb& may be-but alo to internatIonal. peace and from wlthln ,and overw!@$nlg condon~natlqn
with.
:
~.. from
., ._(
,
security in southern Akica. Had the ovetitsthat havetaken out,....-~~ ”
place during this month of January been individual or
Isolated, the occasion would not have drawn.the mass 120. The orimlnal aots we aro dlscussinji today call for
demoiastrntlon and cwxw the Council haa witnbased more than more condemnation by tho Council, since this,
togellrcrr with other n~easucos,has not dotorred those
during the last two days,
r&mea from following the course they havo defiantly
115, My delegation cannot be persuadedto belleve that chosen to fdlow in southorn Afrim. The reprcsontotiveof
the trenchorousmurder of Amilcar Cabllal by the agentsof Zambta hasalready given the Counoil an accountof t!lo acts
Portugal wasnot a planned murder oxtcutod at a time when the robe1r6gimo of Southern Rhodesia, In collusionwith
all was,set for a dociaivo declaration by Cabral of thrr and with sub&&al military support from tho racist rbglmo
deciskut of PAIGC on the ftture of Guinerr (Bias@ and of Sotith Africa, has committed against Ms country and
CnpeVordo.This la not the first black murk in the recordof people, In a fit of frenzyand fear, sparked.
off by the armed
USenotorious Portuguesecolonial system in Afrlca,‘Bef~:~ rerintanoasf the nlllllons of Zimbabweanswhom he and his
the murder of Cabral, the Portuguese had arranged the white mCnor#y clique ottcmpt to subjugate, tho robe1Ion
murder of EdualQ Mondlano, tho leader of.MoZamblquO. Smith decided to close the border between Zambia und
None of those criminal acts, however,hasstopped or will Southern Rhodesia. hi his false caiculatlons, that decision,
stop the liberation strugglesymbolizcd by thoseIwo heroes coupled wrth military nmtifesttitlons, wasto blackmail and
during thair Uvos.On the contrary, the armod atn@o In acaroboth Zambia and the llberatlon movement in Zlm.
Guinea (Blasau)and CapeVordo till contlnuo.to IIW#fy
babwo. To hta dlsappointmont and that of his nccompllcos
and gather force in the march towards*he logical goal.
in Protsria and Lisbon, Zambia dealt a blow to his dosigns
and, hIdeed; to the economy of the illegal rbglmo.
116. Nobody could be swayed into baM’lng that the
recent air bombardment of Tanza&n vlllagos by Portue 121. My delogatlon, followlng my Government’s wishes,
gueseplanes Wasaccidental. All those criminnl aota foL coltoratesIts full support for and admiratton of our sister
lowed the decision of the Council laat Novmber [muhZambia for tho courageousnot it has undertaken at great
tion 322(1972)] to call on Portugal to nogotiato with the
cost and tremendous sacrifice.As a land.lockod country,
parties concerned-meaning the Uberation movemanta-a whore traditional routes of communioatlon until rocontly
peaceful settlement In tho walled PorSuguescTorritorba.
ran through Southern Rhode& it will nowllovo to re+outo
This is Portugal’s answerto the Council’s call, and Its reply Its exports and imports nlong rough and longer routes to
to those members of the Counoll who championod’thal
tho north through friendly countries and ports,
gttusehere,
122. The Council cannot fall to ranllzs that such a
I1 7. Is it a coinoldoncoor an Isolated incident &t South deohdonby Zambia constitutes a substantial contribution
Africa .has sent more mllltary troops to the illegal whho
to the strengthening of the mandnted sanrtlons appinstthe
minority r@me in Rhodesia in time f0r the robe1Ian !Mth
rebel rd#mo in Southern Rhodeslo. In tho meanthne, the
to conduct a campaign of terror and blac,kmaU agahW Council cannot fall to appreoiatethat Zambia hasmade this
&mbla and to doolde, agalnst ita real interoat, oti the contribution in the face of dtf~iculties and at a cost that it
closureof the border w&Zambia? ,,
ia beyond Its meansto meet with its limtod cesourcos.
118. Finally, Is it pooalbleto believe,by any stretchof the 123, My delegation will therefore support any measucos
hnaginatlon, that the assas&atlon of Cab&, tha bombard. the Counoll consldorsappropriate to alloviato the burden
mant of peacefulTanzanian vil!agea by the PorWpueso,tlie
imposed upon Zambia by the rebel r6ghno of Southern
massivereinforcement of South African troops in Rhodesia, Rhodaala.
It Is our strong belief that Zambia took the right
thb consequentaggressIonby the racist rdglmeof Ian Smith
decjoion at tho ri&t time, for It is most probable that, as
and the blockado imposed on Zumbia oii 9 January are all
as the rebel r&imc of lan Smith exhts, slmilac and
Isolated and accldental events takjng place within such a long
pechapcgravor acts of aggcosslonmay be committed again
short ‘period of ho?
by that r6gimeagalnqt Zambia.
11% My delegation cefusosto take seriously any attempt
124. The rltuatlon in southern Africa is loaded with
to undorestimato tho provity of thoso crhni~l actsthrough dangor that will contQue to threaton International peace
flat denials by those who committed thorn; nor can we and racurlty in the area as long es the present pcrllous
acceptany argument that may be advancedto oxplain thonr condiUona ace not traatod with the nocoasatydeclsivcnars
as is&tad lncldents with no muter plan behind thorn, by this Cuuncll, whose primary rasponslbility18 UN
Those horrid and crhnlnal actscan make senseo?ly when maintenanceof ht!ornatl@d pe~cc and sccurlty.
3 Spccbl Cc~~w~lttcs on the Slturtton with rcp$d to Lo tmptetucntutton of lha Decbratlon
on the Granthy
of lndapairdqncts to
Colanbl Couiitrb8 md Peoytea

125, My delegation fully sharesthe viewsoxpressedhere
by ~aoy dolegatlons that tho provocativeand crimln~l acts
12

com.mltted recently by the minority racist rdglme of
13& In conclusion, may wti impress on the Council the
!$out.l~ern
Rhodesin constitute only one aspect d s con.
importance of conslderlng the complaint of Zambia in the
certod offensive strategy by the Salisbury&etorla.Usbon
context of the threat to international peaceand security in
maxis.With tho~alarming pace at which South Africa Is southern Africa, ccmstituted~ by ~the aggr~lv0 ;1lld con.
,~_lntcnsifylng its offonskc .millts~y capacity, with the sub- catod strategy of the three colonialist and racist r6gimcs
~_htantlal military und financial aid Portugal receives, and .thnt exist in southern Africa. r\s such, any mensums that
--through
UIO consldorable support the rebel r6ghne ~oS_.:nlay ba taken to 0nsuro the political and economic intcg~ity
?3outhira Rhodesia ‘Is rccelvlng frow thosa allies, it is
of Zambia should not overlook tho imnortanco of sccurltv
Inevitable that this conc0~tc~ strategy will repeat Its
and peacein th ’ region and in Africa & a whole, whbh wiil
provocntlve and aggrossivoacts on a scat0 and scope much
continue to be threotenod by $ouU: Africa, Port_ugalml
more dangerous than that of the aggression we are dcallng the rebel r6glmoIn Zimbabwe,
wltl~ today. In this strntogy, the racist r6glme in Zimbabwe
131. The PRESIDENT: Allow m now, hi my capacity as
is at onc0 tho slmarhead and UIC buffer Toriitory wNoli
both South Africa and Portugal sustain, exploit arid representative of INDONESIA, to address myself to th0
Item before the Council,
ceoyuratc with In carrying out their hostile designs api~at
nolghbouring Stat0s for the subjugation and sxploltatlon of
132. WC 810 consldorlng tho latest threat against th0
the mlllio~~s
of Africans they dominate,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Zambia-.a thront
126. Among UIOthree r6glmcs, the robcl minority r6glme which is but a part of a continued process of dCsporatC
attempts on th0 part of Uu colonial and racist I’owcrs to
Is unlquc haslllucll
BS, cvcr slncc
1965, its oxistencn
has
halt the march of freedom in Africa and to keep tlicir
bcon condemned, It will IX recdlod that the Secldty
Council dotcrmlnod in that year that the Government CC politlcal and economic oppression entrenched in tht part
of the world.
UIC United Kingdom, UJC administering Powor, should put
an end to the rcbcl rbgimc la Southern Rhodesia, and “take
133, This Is not UIC first tlmo that Zambia has co~nc lo the
all othor appropriate measures which would prove effective
h eliminating the authority of the usurpers and in bringing Council to present its complaints and appealto this body to
tho minority rdgimc in Southern Rhodesia to an lmmcdlatc exercice the rcsponsibilitles assignedtc it by the Charter. In
October 1971, this Council mot to consider a series of
end” [~csolutiur~217(1965)/a
systematic and premcdltated violations. of the sovereignty,
air space and territorial tntcgrity of Zambia /I59Of/1 lo
127. Even at that early stag0 the Council dotermined that
J592d metiags/, The Councilthen hadUIOopportunity
the continuance of the r6gbne constituted a threat to
againstUJO aggressor,
but
international l~oaccand security. It is thorefora dcplorablo to tekc appropriatemeasures
tht,
ever since 19G5, the Govermncnt of the United regrettablyfailedto do so aud, instead,adopteda rather
ugainstthe Protoriorbgimc.Thefailureof tho
Kingdom has virtually duclincd to tilfil its rosponslbillty as mild consure
Councilto take swift and offcctivo action againstSouth
admlnlstoring Powcr, to tho extent of what is ofton
Africa could bo viewedby the mombers
of the Prctorla~
descrlbcd as soiling out the five and a half ~nfllionAfricans
SaIlsbury-Lisbon
axls
only
as
a
licot~co
for
further
aggrosslvc
to the racist whit0 minority r6gimc in Zimbabwe. Because
Afrlc3a Statos.
of this betrayal and th0 dofereuce oxtandcd by the actsdircctodagainstlndopcndent
admhdstcring Powor to the whltc minority r6glm0, tho
134, The illegalSalisburyrbgimohas,for son10
yours,f0lt
lattor lgs started to spread its atrocltics beyond the border
the hoatof the independcnco
struggle.Encourugcd
by the
of Zimbabwe.
Council’sincffectiv0ness
in its actionsandin ai attempt
to
divert
attention
from
its
troublod
domestic
conditions,
the
128, Africa hi particular,andthe pcacc~loving
countriesIII
minority &he
of Ian S~nil hasnow ombarkcd611
general-indccdthis Council-cannotabsolvethe Govern. Ulegal
against
mcnt of the UnltedKingdomfrom fulfilling its moraland neweffortsto put military andeconombprossurcs
Zambia.
It
has
done
so
in
view
of
tho
victorlcs
scored
by
political responsibilitytowardsthe peopleof Zimbabwe,
freedomfighters.It trlcsto put the blameon
andno useof the veto canclearits conscience
beforethe the Zimbabwe
peopleof Zimbabweor world public opit~ionfor thl~ Zambla,which in no way had utly rosponsibllityfor tho
abdicationof rosponslbility.
With the verdict of the Pearce activitiesof thosefreedomfightersin their ownterritory,
Commlsslon
and the rejectionof tha mlnorlty regimeby 135. The stubbornrefusalof the illegalSmithr6glmctu
the overwhelming
majorityof the peopleof Zimbabwe,and effect peacefulchanges
suchasareproposedin the Lusaka
tho ovorwholmlng
supportof internationalpublic.opinion Declarationhas mude I! imperativefor the peopleof
asrupresented
in the GonoralAssemblyandthema]orityof Zimbabweto intensify their struggleto crchicvoself:
this Council,the Govornmcntof the UnltadKingdomhas &terminationandfreedom.
nll the supportit cnn obtain for irading the colony to
wlf.datermination
and indepondcnco
throughuniversalsuf. 136. Sinceits unilateraldccluratlonof indcpo~ldonce
ir
frage,secretballotundthe principleof oneman,onevote. 1965,the Illegalracistrigimeof IUII Smithhascontinuedtc
deny the black lwoplo of Zimbabwethosefuudanlcntul
129. l’hc SccurltyCouncil,too, hasan oxtra role to play freedomswhich ar0 their birthright, andhasbc~os~~u BVCI~
hi Southurnf<hodesia.
For ruasons
of whichthe CouiictlI3 moreoppressive
III Its treatmentof the indigenous
Africatls
aware,sanctionsugainstthe r6gimohave to be furthor who constitute95 parcentof the populution.
stlongthoacdby extcudlngthe blockadoto the port 01
Louronc;cr
Murquusand by runctivutingtha hlr)okadeof
137. I shrillnot tax the Council’s
paticaccby enumer:~tln~
Lldrain thePortugucsc
Torritorlcs,
the Inhumanactsperpctrntcdby the illegalSmithr6gimc
13

~undcr tic guise of “cmergcncy measures”, ngninst the
indigenous peaplc of the Territory, Our coUcnguc from
Znmbia Ambassador Lusaka. nlrcndv enumerated them In

fuli.scaicwar, thcrcby cndan~erhig
the pcaccC the rcglou,
For these rcasous,the 1Sccurlty Council
should net
promptly to prcvvent.thc situntlonfrom detorloratlng,I[
bcllcvc.thnt suchprcveutivcaotisrlcouldbetakeuwlth the
full cq-ppcratiouof th6~G~y~Yument
pf.thc .ufl!je? Xhl&~

II. ‘connot‘bc deuicd thnt It rcmalns’
icgnliy the
responsibility
of the Covcrnmcntof thu lhlitcd Klngc!om,
as admNstcrlugI’owcr,‘.to onsurcthat tho uuncccptnblc
stntcof affairshi SouthernNlodcslnIs broughtto nnand.
It Is thereforeIucumbcutup011
the BritishGovcrmuontto
‘do all withln Its powerto tcrmhlatcthe mluorlty rule II)
Zhubabwcnud uot to hltcrprct the rejectlou of the
provisions
of the Ilomc~SmithAgrecmcntby thepeopleof
Zbnbabwcns rm opportunlty to extricate itself from its
dutiesto the Indigenous
p~oplc,
?’
I38.

142. My dcicgatlouQnrcs the pride-wltlr -.whlch the
pcoplcsof Africa vlcw the aouragcous
dctcrmh~atlonof
Znmbinto uphold the pri~~cipics
of the Charterand the
rightsauddi&ultyof mnu,wi~iicfachaetheprovocativeand
crlmbmiactsof the romnluiug
coio~~lnl undracistr&ghncs
la
southcrii Africa, We must face the fact thnt thclr Just
strugglewill lnq~osc n heavy burdenupon UIC ~?copie
of
‘Imbin, lu view of the forcgohlg,my dclcgntkmIs of Urc
oplulon thnt the proposnls
put forwnrd by the rcprcsolb
tntivc of Zcmiblntbiiy mcrlt theserious
oousidcrntlon
of the
Counciluudshouldbc usednsn bnsisfor dccisious
oudfor
coucrctcmcnsurcs
to botnkcuby thoCou~icll,

139, My,dclcgatl~u
believes
thut rcsoiutiou2945(XXVII),
ndoptcdby the GoucraiAsnem’bly
,011
7 Dcccmbcr1972by
an ovcrwhchnlug
mnjority, aud other relatedrcsoiutlons
nddptedby the Sccurlty Couucll
shouldserveasn cicnr 143. lndoncstnfor its part, togcthcr with other uonmandateto the BritishGovcmmcutto tnkethe neccssnry aligucdcomitrics,ludicatcdn weekagoits solldnritywith
i!mblt~.
1 shouldllkc to rcitcrntc thut ludoncslastsnds
stepsto accordtheIudlg~aous
pcopicof Uu Territory n lift
af dlgulty and freedom,as providedfor lu the Charter ready to supportany mcnsurcs
to niicvlnteihc burdenof
which‘WCas Mombe:sof rhls world Organizatim~
stnud Zambiaoudits pooplcasn cousequcncc
of its stcadfnst
Pud
consistoutlyposflvc stnndou the stru&p;(o
of peoplesfor
plcdgcdto uphold,
_.
thclr freedomundiudepcudcnco,
140. The right of the poop10 to uchlcvc~lf-dctcnl~i~latio~~
and Indcpcudcncc
is nt the very foundationof the Unltcd 144. In cunciusion,
uiy delcgntiouwould iikc to express
NntlonsoudIsembodied
In theDeclarationon UIC Grantlug the view that, as long ns the root cnuseswiiici~iic h
of Gudcpondoucc
to CoionlnlCount&sandPeoples.
I[udeed, colonin!Ln,rnclsm,aud illegalmhlorlty r8glmcscontlauc
tilt timeIsion,7 slnca goue dicn Uic struggle of n pcopicfor
to exist, the UnitedNntionsrind the SecurityCotmcllwill
freedomcnnbc summnrllydismissed
0sbeingdisruptiveof
coutlnucto be fnccdby cv~utsUkothosenowtakingpincc
the lntcrnai order of n colonialterritory without the in Znmbln.TodnyIt IS Znmbln,ycstcrdnyIt wus UIC Uuitcd
hitcrnntlonnlcomm@ty exprcsdugstrongoppositionto
Republicof TtuIunnin,GuhieanudSenegal,
tmdwhokuows
andrncismat baywill striketomorrow?
sucha myopicviewof man’squestfor thercnlizationof his wherecoioninlism
dignity.
145. My dclcgetlousiuccrcly hopes thnt the Council,
141. It isthereforeal!the morecondcn~nabic.ti~nt,
hlstcnd togetherwith other UuitcdNntlousbodiescouccruodwith
of loltintiug the necessary
stepstownrdsthe Implomcuta- the problemsof dccoloniznthl, iikc the Committeeof
tion of GeneralAsscmbiyrcsoiutl\~n1514(XV), the Iiicgr!i Twenty-four, wlil bc nblc to cradlcntcthe root cnuscs
rEghucof Im Smiti~,.h
its desperate
efforts to crushthe which, u~llcss cibub~ted,will coutlnucto be n threat to
iucvitnbieoppositionof tha mn]drltyof thepopuintton,not pcaccandsecurity. :
only closedthe border betwceathe British colony of
SouthernRhodcsinandZtmlblaand hnposed
an economic 146. I sinli now speakasI’KBSIDSNTof the Council.
blockndc,but furthermorecommittedactsof subversion
and snbotugeagahlvtZambin, In nddition, its troops, 147. Beforend]ournlngthe meeting,I shouldlike, ns I
rcportcdto bc rclnforccdby some4,000manfrom South have arrivedat the end of my term asPresidentof the
for
Africa, woredeployedniongthe 4OO~mlic~iong
border.It IS Councii,to expressmv shiccrcthunksaudapprcointlon
the cwopcrationand urrdcrstnndiug
shown by all my
furthermorereportedthat the SouthAfrican railways9~
c~lieugucs dtirlngmy tom of office. They havebeenmost
stol.pcducceptinggocdsdestlncdfor Zambia,wl~lio similar
cuusldcrutcand helpfulto me us a uewcOmcr
to the work
stops11nvc
been takenbv Portugui
at the port of Bcirn.111is
of the Cuuncll,whomthe nlphubcticaiorderpluccdIII the
serlcs
of aggrcsslvc
actscommiltrrl by thcscci~l011ln1 uud
ruclst I’owcrsIn southcruAfrica nguiustZumblawill uot Cilulr.
only
cnusccomldcrabiccco~~o~ulc difficulty to thnt cuuw
try, but, if ilot urrcubd forthwlth, mny well lend to n

14
e---e--

Price:SlJ.9. 1.co(orcqulvllsnt
Inolhar
-.--.---...-

73.t)2026.

curranclct)

-.-.

_-

_ -__.-.... __~_

_~

.-.. .-----L-.-

._.-

Imemhor

_._.

IY76-1

.-.’

,z

~ wi#
