S/PV.7310

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7310th meeting

Wednesday, 12 November 2014, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Quinlan .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Australia)

Members:

Argentina .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Makadjibeye
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Yong Zhao
Mr. Bertoux
Mrs. Kawar
Mrs. Jakubonė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laro
Ms. Paik Ji-ah
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Power

Agenda
The situation in Liberia

14-62247 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1462247*

S/PV.7310

The situation in Liberia

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Liberia
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Liberia to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Per Thöresson, representative of the Chair of the
Liberia configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
and Deputy Permanent Representative of Sweden here
in New York, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous: I wish to begin by expressing my
deep appreciation for the Security Council’s efforts to
mobilize support to defeat the Ebola epidemic, which,
as we all know, has had serious political, security and
social effects on all of the countries affected.
A month ago, I had the opportunity to brief the
Council on the implications for peace and security of
the Ebola crisis (see S/PV.7279). While I spoke then to
the political and security ramifications of the health
emergency for all the countries in West Africa where
we have peacekeeping operations deployed, including
Mali and Côte d’Ivoire, my focus was nevertheless on
Liberia, the country most affected by Ebola. Today, I
will again focus on Liberia, but I will attempt to look
beyond the immediate health crisis to what we, as an
international community deeply committed to that
country, can continue to do in order to keep its longerterm interests in our sights.
There have been several significant developments in
the past month. In early October, the President accepted
the resignation of her Minister of Justice, Ms. Christiana
Tah, after more than five years of service. In departing,
Ms. Tah publicly claimed that she had been thwarted in
her efforts to carry out her responsibility for steering

2/6

12/11/2014

the national security institutions that come under her
Ministry’s authority. A few days ago, the Independent
National Commission on Human Rights released a
report challenging the findings of a board of inquiry on
the army’s actions while it was enforcing the quarantine
of an Ebola-affected community in Monrovia. Five
soldiers were found guilty of disciplinary offences
related to the incident and have been demoted and
sentenced to be kept in custody, but the question of
criminal prosecution remains.
Following direction from the President and the
legislature, the national body responsible for elections
has held consultations with various stakeholders on
how to proceed with the senatorial elections that
under normal circumstances would have been held on
14 October. Many in civil society have raised serious
concerns about the appropriateness of proceeding
with senatorial elections, while the electoral body has
recommended to the legislature that they be held on
16 December. That is currently under consideration.
Yesterday, the 90-day state of emergency imposed
by the President in response to the health emergency
expired, and the legislature is discussing its possible
extension.
Last month, I spoke about our fear that reversals
could be triggered by the Ebola crisis. The Council
is familiar with the challenges facing Liberia, and
they have been exacerbated by the health emergency.
The political and social divisions in Liberia are
deepening, the already weak national institutions are
looking increasingly vulnerable, and in the current
circumstances the very survival of the country’s
economically most vulnerable people is at risk. As I
said last month, even the small dignities of our shared
humanity, the ability to touch and comfort loved ones,
have all disappeared in the context of Ebola.
However, in the midst of this serious crisis there
is some good news. We are no longer seeing signs that
security could seriously deteriorate further, which, the
Council will recall, was our fear in late August and early
September. And while the crisis has put unprecedented
pressure on public institutions to perform, and it is true
that they have not always been successful, some areas
of strength have also been demonstrated. For instance,
local officials have responded to challenges at their
level in a manner we had not seen before, offering
a unique opportunity for decentralizing services.
Furthermore, the fact that the national human rights
commission demanded accountability for the actions

14-62247

12/11/2014

The situation in Liberia

of the security forces at West Point has created an
important opportunity to enhance democratic oversight
of the security forces. Those are goals we have been
working on for years, goals that we had observed there
was a worrying lack of urgency to achieve.
For Liberia, this is clearly a moment of national
tragedy. As the Minister of Defence told the Council
in September, the very existence of the nation is at
stake. But even at such a difficult juncture, there is
an opportunity to mobilize the urgency required for
transformation. And we must encourage the people and
Government of Liberia to seize that opportunity, not
only to address the immediate crisis but also to rebuild
the country after Ebola. The people of Liberia have
demonstrated considerable resilience throughout the
Ebola crisis, and we are impressed by their strength.
We must provide them with whatever assistance we
can, and consider how best we can support not only the
Ebola response, but also, and perhaps most critically, the
post-Ebola reconstruction effort that will be required.
In August, the Secretary-General made a series
of recommendations (see S/2014/598) on how the
United Nations could revise its engagement in Liberia,
including with respect to enhancing the political role
of the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL)
and drawing down its uniformed presence. In the
current circumstances, we are of the view that it
would be appropriate to extend UNMIL’s mandate
until September 2015, while taking forward the set
of recommendations on political issues and deferring
consideration of the drawdown of troops and police
until such time as the appropriate health authorities
inform us that the Ebola crisis is over.
As a representative of the international community,
we must seize the current moment and see how best we
may collectively help to transform it into one that is
positively catalytic for the country. As the SecretaryGeneral put it in his report in August, we may have
to reimagine our engagement in Liberia. Even as the
international community scales up its response to the
immediate challenge of defeating Ebola, we must also
consider how we may collectively support the rebuilding
of Liberia in the wake of the disease.
The President: I thank Mr. Ladsous for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Chair of the Liberia configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission.

S/PV.7310

Mr. Thöresson: I would like to begin by expressing
my deepest condolences to the families and friends of
all those who have perished in the Ebola epidemic. I
would like to commend the Government of Liberia and
all Liberians for their resilience and determination, and
I pay tribute to the many brave health-care workers
engaged in the medical response. I would also like to
express my appreciation for the support provided by
the United Nations and other international partners.
While there seem to be some encouraging signs, it is
far too early for the international community to lower
its guard. Continued attention and massive efforts are
still needed.
On 3 November, the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) country configurations of Guinea, Sierra Leone
and Liberia held a second joint meeting on the Ebola
crisis. The joint format of the meetings underlines the
importance of the regional dimension of the crisis,
and the need for continued close regional cooperation.
Lessons should be drawn from the regional approach
in the international response to Ebola so that we may
also enhance regional coordination in our support for
peacebuilding.
At that joint meeting, we identified three
priority areas for the PBC. The first is delivering
on commitments. We should urge that the generous
commitments and pledges made to the global Ebola
response be translated into action on the ground as
quickly as possible, and that a strong international
presence remain to facilitate effective delivery of that
support.
Secondly,
we
should
address
immediate
peacebuilding needs. A comprehensive approach
that meets the broader security, developmental and
governance challenges alongside the medical publichealth response is critical. One example, which we
highlighted previously in our statement to the Council
in September (see S/PV.7260), is the time-dependent
urgency of addressing the capability and mobility
gaps of the Liberia National Police. Efforts to ensure
the rule of law and the protection of civilians, as well
as confidence-building measures aimed at preventing
further social unrest, should also be encouraged and
supported.
Thirdly, we should prepare for the medium term.
We must begin planning for enhanced and accelerated
peacebuilding support in the immediate aftermath of
the crisis now, not least because of the severe impact

14-622473/6

S/PV.7310

The situation in Liberia

the epidemic has had on the economy, which will
have consequences for Liberia’s ability to implement
its commitments. The PBC will therefore request the
Secretary-General to make a comprehensive assessment
of Ebola’s impact on peacebuilding priorities, including
with recommendations for focused and effective
international support.
Considering the importance of the economic
dimension to this crisis, we had invited senior
representatives from the World Bank to our meeting
last week to provide an assessment of the economic
impact. According to the World Bank, the two-year
regional financial impact could reach $32.6 billion
by the end of 2015. The World Bank also indicated
that Liberia’s revised 2014-2015 budget has an unmet
financing gap of more than half of the budget deficit
projected at over $300 million. A recent assessment by
the United Nations Development Programme points to
the negative impact on domestic revenue generation
and increased pressures on State expenditures.
As the Permanent Representative of Liberia,
Ambassador Kamara, stated at our meeting last week,
tensions will be rising and public confidence will be
eroding as the gaps between the expectations of the
people and the capacity of the Government to deliver
grow wider. Social cohesion in Liberian society is being
tested by this crisis, with increasing risks for disorder
and political instability. As partners, we should help
counter these risks, including by supporting efforts
to improve State-society relations. Full transparency
in the implementation of our support will be one
important factor to help restore public confidence. As
we have stated before, it is the Ebola virus that should
be isolated, not the countries affected. Strengthening
international and regional cooperation will continue
to be vital to ease the burden of the crisis. We must
help create the necessary conditions and advocate for
businesses to return to Liberia. Suspended flights to
Liberia should resume to facilitate this cooperation.
Due to the increasing risks for instability and the
continued need for effective delivery of support, there
is great need to maintain strong international presence
in Liberia. The decision to extend the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in Liberia is therefore welcomed.
We must also ensure that no gaps are left when the
drawdown of the Mission eventually resumes, not least
in view of the upcoming presidential and parliamentary
elections. A new approach to international development

4/6

12/11/2014

cooperation may be needed to ensure that support is
effective and contributing to sustainable results.
The PBC will continue to apply available
peacebuilding instruments flexibly, adapting to evolving
needs. The Statement of Mutual Commitments, with
targets on strengthening the rule of law, supporting
security sector reform and promoting national
reconciliation, will have to be reviewed and updated.
The Peacebuilding Fund-supported projects currently
being implemented in Liberia should also be calibrated
and tailored to meet the needs in the current situation.
The requested assessment from the Secretary-General
on the impact of Ebola on peacebuilding will in this
regard be a critical input to our continued efforts.
The President: I thank Mr. Thöresson for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Liberia.
Ms. Kamara (Liberia): I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for this month. I also extend to you and to
the other members of the Council the deep appreciation
of my President, the Government and the people of
Liberia for the steadfast support that the Council has
given to Liberia over the years and for its continued
engagement with Liberia.
I thank the previous speakers, Mr. Ladsous and the
representative of Ambassador Grunditz, for sharing
their perspectives with us.
The last couple of months have been critical for
Liberia. The outbreak of the Ebola disease and its rapid
spread presented multiple challenges to the country.
The devastating effects of the disease are very present.
The World Bank recently gave a gloomy depiction of
the economic effects of the disease on the three most
affected countries — Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone.
With budget shortfalls and a projected negative domestic
revenue generating capacity, the Government’s ability
to meet its responsibility to the Liberian people remains
greatly hampered.
Agricultural activities continue to suffer. In many
locations, marketplaces remain closed and access to
basic food items especially for rural communities
is constrained. Schools remain closed, greatly
undermining efforts to rebuild and strengthen the
educational system. Needless to say, peacebuilding
activities have also been disrupted.

14-62247

12/11/2014

The situation in Liberia

The state of emergency declared by President Sirleaf
three months ago has expired. During the emergency,
certain rights enjoyed by the Liberian people under
the Constitution were suspended. Consequently, the
Government could not conduct the senatorial election
in October, intended to replace 15 Senators whose
tenure will expire early next year. The new date for
the elections, 16 December, was set by the legislature
yesterday. It is hoped that conditions in the country
will have improved significantly to permit the smooth
conduct of elections next month.
Reports are now emerging that the spread of the
disease may be declining in Liberia. This is, of course,
a welcome development for the Government and
people of Liberia, indeed for the global community.
But caution must be exercised so as not to induce
complacency in the fight against the disease. The
disease is unpredictable and one infection can have a
cascading effect. The expiry of the state of emergency
means the restoration of certain freedoms, including the
freedom of movement and assembly. As people move
and interact, the likelihood of the virus resurfacing in
areas thought to be under control remains high. The
Government of Liberia is committed to continuing
its vigilance, including collaboration with the other
affected countries. At the same time, the Government
is already reflecting on the initial steps that must be
taken to begin early recovery. The continued robust and
coordinated support of the international community
at the regional and global levels is also essential for
the success of this fight. This effort embodies the
imperative for commitments and pledges to be fulfilled.
Without underestimating the resilience of the
Liberian people in the face of this pandemic, we must
acknowledge that the scaled-up international assistance
has been indispensable to the progress made so far in
containing the disease in Liberia. I wish, therefore, again
to thank the Secretary-General, the Security Council,
the President of the General Assembly and the entire
membership of the United Nations for the support which
Liberia is receiving. I also commend the leadership of
our continental and regional organizations, the Africa
Union and the Economic Community of West African
States for their strong support in mitigating the effects
of the disease.
Almost three months ago, the Security Council
convened (see S/PV.7263) to consider the twentyeighth report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations Mission in Liberia

S/PV.7310

(S/2014/598). Appreciating the magnitude of the Ebola
crisis, the Council, in its wisdom, decided to suspend
consideration of the recommendation contained in the
report and approved a three-month technical rollover
of the mandate of United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL). That was a significant decision, and another
demonstration of the Council’s commitment to its
Charter obligation to maintain international peace
and security. The decision implicitly recognized that
the disease had the potential to undermine the gains
made by UNMIL in stabilizing the security situation
in Liberia. The withdrawal of peacekeepers from the
country at that critical juncture would have had a serious
psychological consequence on our people. It would have
sent an unintended message that the country was being
isolated and not the disease. A strong international
presence in the country was important then and it
remains a critical stabilizing factor in a situation where
the social, political and economic environment is fluid
and delicate.
As difficult as it has been for members of the Mission
to remain in Liberia with the disease causing havoc
around them, police- and troop-contributing countries
have shown their commitment, not only to the Mission
but also to the core values of peacekeeping, by assisting
Liberia in preserving national stability. They deserve
special commendation. We appeal to them to stay the
course in Liberia. I thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Karin Landgren, for her
personal support and engagement, and pay tribute to
the peacekeepers and police units for their courage and
strong sense of duty. In a sombre reflection, I again
extend, on behalf of the Government and the people of
Liberia, and in my own name, profound condolences
to the families of two UNMIL staff members who lost
their lives due to Ebola.
My Government believes that the situation has not
ameliorated sufficiently to withstand drastic changes
that could affect the prevailing equilibrium in regard
to peace, security and social cohesion. From a cursory
assessment of the impact it is evident that the disease
has accentuated fragilities and vulnerabilities, which
have the potential to trigger violence if not adequately
addressed. Unemployment, especially among the youth,
is being exacerbated by the suspension of business
operations in the private sector. Public confidence will
continue to erode in the coming months if financial
constraints further impede service delivery. A major
problem revolving around the means of livelihood can
already be foreseen, underscoring the need for social

14-622475/6

S/PV.7310

The situation in Liberia

safety nets to assist acutely vulnerable groups, such as
orphaned children and widows.
The success achieved in the fight against the
disease needs to be monitored both in the short and
long term, as the political and social environments in
Liberia remain vulnerable to shocks. It is our hope that,
in its deliberations, the Council will bear in mind the
incessant and unremitting threat posed by the virus,
including the threat to the peace and security of the
country and to social cohesion.
As we are all aware, peacekeeping missions, such as
UNMIL, have valuable assets — human and material.
We believe that the UNMIL assets would make a
difference if deployed to complement the efforts of
the Government, the United Nations Mission for Ebola
Emergency Response and partners to strengthen the
response to the virus.

6/6

12/11/2014

In this light, my Government appeals to the Council
to extend the mandate of UNMIL for the full one-year
period and to defer further any consideration of the
recommendations in the Secretary-General’s twentyeighth progress report pertaining to the reconfiguration
of the Mission. We humbly suggest that a declaration
by the World Health Organization that Liberia is Ebolafree should provide an opportunity for the Council to
authorize a comprehensive assessment of the conditions
on the ground. As was the case in the past, the outcome
of such an assessment would guide further action by
the Council.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.30 a.m.

14-62247
