General Assembly ~- íhirl)-eighth Session

250

1. Takcs note with concern of the reports submitted to
the General Assembly by the Secretary-General on behalf
of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, ,-,
which show a continuing neglect of the observance of thc
principies related to respect for the privileges and immunities of olficials of the Unitcd Nations and the specialized
agencies and related organi ✓ ations:
2. Exprcssc.1 partirnlar conccrn at thc dctention of a
grcat number of officials of the United Nations Relicf and
Works Agcncy for Palcstinc Rcfugccs in thc Ncar East and
about the cases in which full cxercise of the right of functional protcction was impossiblc. as mentioncd in thc
rcports of the Sccretary-General: 57
3. Rcaf/irms thc abow-mcntioncd rcsolutions:
4. Wclcomcs the mcasurcs alrcady taken by thc Secretary-General to enhance the safety and protcction of intcrnational civil scrvants. as outlincd in paragraph 7 of bis
rcport; 58
5. Ca/Is u¡¡on the Sccretary-Gcneral, as chief administrati ve officer of thc Organization. to continue personally
to act as thc focal point in promoting and ensuring the
observan ce of the pri vilcgcs and immunitics of ofücials of
thc U nitcd Nations and thc specialized agencies ami
rclated organizations by using such means as are availahlc
to him:
6. Wclco111cs thc designation hy the Secretary-Gcneral
of officials to takc on spccial rcsponsihilitics for the sccurity and protection of thc Organization's pcrsonncl and
propcrty:
7. Urges thc Sccretary-Cicneral to give priority through
his designatcd olficials, as mentioned in annex III to bis
rcport. 58 to thc rcporting and prompt follow-up of cases of
arres!, dctcntion and possiblc other mattcrs rclating to the
sccurity of officials of thc Unitcd Nations and the specialized agencies and rclatcd organizations:
8. Cafls upon thc staff ofthc Unitcd Nations to comply
with thc obligations arising from the Staff Regulations of
thc Unitcd Nations, in particular regulation 1.8:
9. Requcsts the Secrctary-<iencral, as Chairman of the
Administrativc Committce on Co-ordination. to suggest in
bis annual rcport to be submittcd to the General Assembly
at its thirty-ninth session furthcr mcasures to be taken
with regard to thc safctv and protcction of international
civil servants.
I 041 h plcnary meeting
:!O Dcccmhcr /983

38/231.

Composition of the Secretariat

Thc (icncral :lsscmhlr.
Reaf/irming its prcvious resolutions on pcrsonncl policy

and in particular resolutions 33/ 143 of 20 December 1978,
35/210 of 17 Decembcr 1980 and 37/235 of21 Deccmber
1982,
Noting that sorne limited progress has bcen made with
respect to thc situation of unrcpresented and underreprcscntcd Member Statcs and towards a balanced and cquitablc geographical distribution of staff in the Secretariat.
Conccrned by the lack of progrcss, especially in thc past
ycar, towards increasing the proportion of women in the
Sccretariat and, in particular. the failure to reach the target
set in section 111 ofresolution 331143.
Rccogni=ing the central role of thc Otlice of Personncl
Services in the implcmcntation of personncl policics.
57 A/C.5!J8/l 7 and Corr. l and •\dd 1 \ ( .5 18 1X
5SA/C.5/38;\7 and ( orr 1
5'l .\/181347 and Con 1

1. Takes note llf thc rcport of the Sccrctary-( icneral on
thc composition of the Secretariat: '''
1
( ·a/Is upon thc Secretary-Gencral to continuL' to
make cvcrv effort to cnsure thc implcrnrntation ofthc provisions o(thc previous rcsolutions of the General Assemhly, in particular of resolutinns 33/ 143. 35/2 1O and 3 7
235:
3. Rcqucsts the Sccrctary-Gcneral to make spccial
cfforts to mect tlw goals and ohjectivcs establishcd with
rc,pcct to:
(a) Thc situat1on of unrepresented and undcrrcprcsentcd Mcmhcr States:
(h) Thc recn11trncnt. carcn dcvelopmcnt and promotlon of women:
(e) Thc achicwment of a balanced and equitable geographical distrihution of staff throughout the Secretaria!:
4. Rcqucsrs tlw Secretary-General to strcngthen thc
role of the Office of Pcrsonnel Scrvices of the Departrnent
of Administration and Managemcnt in ali personnel matters throughout the Secrctariat:
5. Rcaftirms il.1 rcqucst to thc Sccrctary-General in paragraph 8 of resolution 3 7/235 A to report to the General
Assemhly at its thirty-ninth session on progress made in
the implementation of ali aspects of personnel polic}
reform.
!04rh ¡1/cnarr 111ccri11g
:!O /)ffcmhcr I 983

38/232.

llnited Nations common system: report of
the International Civil Sen-ice Commission

Fhc ( icncral . l1sc111hf1·.
llal'ing constdcrcd 1rith apprcciation the report of the
lnternational Ci,il Service Commission for the year
1983. 60
Reaf/inning thc central role of the Commission within
thc United Nations common systcm in the devclopment
of a single unified international civil service through thc
application of common pcrsonnel standards and arrangcmcnts.
Rcaf/inning thc importancc of rcspcct for thesc common
standards and arrangements hy ali organÍlations membcrs
of the common ,ystem.

1. l 'rgcs ali organi1.ations conccrned to implemcnt the
dccisions of the lntcrnatlonal Civil Servicc ( 'ommissinn
and to act positively on thc rccommcndations ofthc Commission in accordancc with its statutc:
2. Urges thc executivc heads of organi1.ations conccrned. after consultation with thc Commission, to report
to their respcctiw governing bodies such dccisions or proposals as would modify thc rccommendations of the Commission:
3. Caf/s upon ali organirntions of thc llnitcd Nations
common system to bring to thc attention of thc Commission ali matters relating to salaries, allowances, beneht~
and other conditions of employment so as to ensure their
uniform application throughout the common systcm;
4. Reaf/irms the principies embodied in the statute of
thc Commission as approvcd in General Assembly rcsolution 3357 (XXIX) of 18 Decemher 1974. in particular arti)f/tt'!ul Rt't'ord\ , 1 ' rhe t
l '>\t'mh/1·, I h1rt1·-c1i,:hrli
,u,·nt 'i11 3111A: J8 111). and A _,s ,o Add. l
Ml

(

H'!llTa/

\nHon .

.

'iu¡1f'/,·
