S/PV.9208

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9208th meeting

Tuesday, 6 December 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Kamboj. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Mythen
Mrs. Toroitich
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Ms. Carty

Agenda
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-72481 (E)
*2272481*

S/PV.9208

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

have fled, been uprooted from their homes, separated
from their families or put at risk of violence.

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Germany, Latvia, Poland and
Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

06/12/2022

its

I give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: I thank you, Madam President, for
the opportunity to speak here on this very important
occasion on issues of humanitarian assistance in
Ukraine. If I may, our briefing today will focus on
the widespread death, destruction, displacement
and suffering caused by this senseless war, ongoing
humanitarian operations and the challenges that the
humanitarian community continues to face.

Winter has now arrived across Ukraine.
Temperatures are already below freezing and are
expected to drop to below -20°C. The attacks on
Ukraine’s energy infrastructure, including power
stations and heating plants, have left millions of people
without access to heat, electricity and water, adding
another dangerous dimension to the humanitarian crisis
caused by the war.
As a result of the attacks on civilian infrastructure,
people are being deprived of health care, and
children of education. In Ukraine today, the ability
of civilians to survive is under attack. Amid freezing
temperatures and destruction, people at the highest
risk are the already vulnerable — among them
the elderly, those with disabilities and the many
millions displaced — essentially because of a lack of
essential services.
International humanitarian law speaks for itself:
objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian
population must be protected. Constant care must be
taken to spare civilians and civilian objects throughout
all military operations.
Gender-based violence targeting women and girls
continues to be pervasive and — to be very clear — the
number of cases continues to be underreported.

Over 14 million people remain forcibly displaced
from their homes in Ukraine, including 6.5 million
internally displaced persons and over 7.8 million
others across Europe. According to the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
as of 1 December, 17,023 civilians had been killed since
24 February 2022, including 419 children. However, I
think we all know that the real toll is far greater.

Our work is to safeguard lives and preserve dignity.
The humanitarian community remains committed
to stay and deliver. Almost 690 humanitarian
partners — the majority of which are local front-line
organizations — continue to provide life-critical aid and
protection to 13.5 million people in Ukraine — I do not
apologize for this stream of really terrifying statistics.
Those people continue to work against the clock
to support civilians. Over the past few months, in
preparation for the winter, humanitarians have provided
more than 630,000 civilians with different kinds of
direct winter assistance, and 400 generators have been
distributed to critical facilities.

The World Health Organization reports at least
715 attacks on health care in the country, including
630 that impacted health facilities and 61 that affected
personnel. Those attacks in Ukraine represent more than
70 per cent of all attacks on health-care infrastructure
reported worldwide this year. Since February, 1,148
children have been killed or injured, while millions

Since October, the sustained attacks on Ukraine’s
energy infrastructure have created a new level of need
that impacts the whole country and increases and
exacerbates the needs caused by the war. The scale of the
destruction of the electrical and heating infrastructure
requires the international community’s enhanced
support to the Government of Ukraine beyond what

2/25

22-72481

06/12/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

humanitarians can provide. Indeed, discussions to that
end are ongoing in Kyiv and elsewhere.
In recent weeks, more areas have become accessible
in eastern and southern oblasts, thereby allowing
humanitarians to reach entirely new communities with
assistance. We are grateful for that. Our teams are
responding, and inter-agency convoys are moving to
bring aid to areas where Ukraine has recently regained
control. In Kherson, for example, convoys have
delivered much-needed potable water for thousands of
civilians, medical supplies to treat 100,000 people for
up to three months and assistance for women and girls’
reproductive health. And food assistance has been
delivered in Kherson for nearly 100,000 civilians.
Humanitarians working to respond to genderbased violence, including in particular local women’s
organizations, are also seeking to scale up the delivery
of essential services for their clients. An integrated
network of spaces and providers has been delivering
survivor-centred services for women, girls, boys and
men who have been subject to gender-based violence.
Those efforts and activities, which began when the war
started, continue.
It is very difficult to imagine, but 765,000 children
have received psychosocial support to help them deal
with the effects of war and displacement. Mobile teams
are operating in centres for internally displaced persons
and identifying, registering, assessing and providing
direct support to children with protection needs.
None of that would be possible without the
unprecedented support from Member States and other
donors to the Ukraine flash appeal. As a result of
that generosity, to date we have received $3.1 billion
of the $4.3 billion requested through the end of the
year. To date, we have transferred almost $1 billion
in humanitarian cash transfers to approximately than
4.3 million people. Cash as a mode of delivery has
reached maturity in the case of the tragic events in
Ukraine. More must be done, of course, to continue
to close the funding shortfall. We will soon be issuing
plans for 2023.
While there have been improvements, as I have said,
in humanitarian access, the biggest challenge remains
impediments to reaching areas in Donetsk, Luhansk,
Kherson and Zaporizhzhya. Discussions continue
between the United Nations and the parties to facilitate
unimpeded access to those areas. It is vital that we get
the convoys through to deliver relief items. As we have

S/PV.9208

discussed previously in this Chamber, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs has a presence
in Moscow, and I continue to personally engage key
interlocutors for access in meetings in Moscow, Kyiv
and elsewhere.
Today, of the 13.5 million people who have received
assistance since February, 1 million of them are in areas
outside of the Government of Ukraine’s control. They
have been reached thanks to humanitarian partners still
positioned in areas of Donetsk and Luhansk, where
humanitarian operations began in 2014 as a result of the
invasion. While we continue to provide support in those
regions through those local partners — and there are
still international staff in those areas — our response is
neither regular nor at the right scale. Under international
humanitarian law, all parties should allow and facilitate
the rapid and unimpeded passage of humanitarian relief
for civilians in need and must ensure that humanitarian
personnel have the freedom of movement required for
their work.
In areas where the Government of Ukraine has
recently regained control, the presence of landmines and
explosive remnants of war is a major concern — both
for communities and for the humanitarians who serve
them — as they cause delays to, and impede the
restoration of, essential services, including electricity.
States must bolster their support for clearance to
prevent further casualties due to landmines. That will
ensure quicker, more effective access to livelihoods
and essential services. Information on mines and used
or abandoned explosive ordnance should be shared by
those in the know at the earliest possible time.
Last week, in Geneva, I launched the Global
Humanitarian Overview 2023, which is our annual
assessment of global humanitarian needs for next
year and how to respond to them. At the beginning
of 2022, 274 million people needed humanitarian
assistance. For 2023, the projected number has grown
to 339 million. That is an increase of approximately
24 per cent, with 65 million more people who have
arrived on our doorstep. It represents 1 in every 23
people on the planet. As we have said publicly, that is
equivalent to the population of the third-most populous
country in the world. That is a record appeal, and it will
be difficult to get the adequate funding. But it is also
a stark reminder of how fast humanitarian needs are
accelerating. That is especially true for Ukraine.

22-724813/25

S/PV.9208

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

I conclude partly with the situation in Ukraine,
of course, and the urgent needs that we are seeing as
we move into winter and in the light of the damage to
infrastructure and the potential for more displacement,
but I place that within the larger context of a world gone
mad, where 1 in 23 people around the globe are in need of
humanitarian assistance. It is an unimaginable picture.
The President: I thank Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Griffiths for his briefing and all United Nations
agencies for the work they are carrying out in very
difficult conditions in Ukraine.
Russia continues its aggression and is now using
winter as a weapon of war. France condemns, in the
strongest possible terms, Russia’s ongoing massive
attacks against Ukraine’s entire territory. Yesterday,
once again, such attacks claimed the lives of many
civilians and damaged essential infrastructure. France
expresses its condolences to the victims and their
families. That systematic targeting, at a time when
temperatures are now below zero, reflects a clear
desire on the part of Russia to make the Ukrainian
people suffer and to deprive them of water, heating and
electricity in the hope of undermining their resilience.
The cost of the war for children is terrible. More
than 500 medical facilities have been attacked or
destroyed, according to the World Health Organization.
According to UNICEF, 3.3 million children are in need
of assistance today; two thirds of children have been
displaced since 24 February; 2,500 schools have been
destroyed or damaged; and 5 million children are out
of school. France commends the work of UNICEF
and UNESCO to provide those children who have
been displaced with access to education, including via
remote learning.
We condemn all deliberate attacks on schools and
hospitals. Those acts are serious crimes punishable
under international law and are among the grave
violations established by Council resolutions. We
rely on the United Nations Monitoring and Reporting
Mechanism to document those violations and to assign
responsibility. Those who kill children and attack
schools in violation of international humanitarian law
belong on the infamous list of the Secretary-General’s
annual report. In that context, France will continue to
4/25

06/12/2022

lend its full support to the Ukrainian justice system
and to international courts, first and foremost the
International Criminal Court.
We once again call on Russia to respect the order
issued by the International Court of Justice on 16 March,
to put an end to its unjustifiable and devastating war
and to withdraw its troops from Ukrainian territory
within its internationally recognized borders.
France commends the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral, United Nations agencies and the International
Committee of the Red Cross, which have enabled the
evacuation of several hundred civilians and wounded
persons from the besieged areas. It is essential that
those evacuations continue, leaving the evacuees the
choice of their destination. Respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights is non-negotiable.
Humanitarian access must be guaranteed.
Ukraine is standing on the side of peace in the
conflict. While the Ukrainian President presented
his 10-point peace plan to the Group of 20, Russia
responded with massive strikes on Ukrainian cities.
Russia is standing in the way of peace, instead using
escalation in an attempt to break the resistance of the
Ukrainian people. We welcome President Zelenskyy’s
efforts to launch a pathway to peace. France stands
ready to help build a just and lasting peace.
We remain fully mobilized in support of Ukraine
and the Ukrainian people. In view of the emergency and
as winter sets in, France and Ukraine are organizing
an international conference in Paris on 13 December in
order to support Ukrainian civil society. The aim of the
conference is to mobilize and coordinate assistance to
help the Ukrainian population survive the winter, with
a focus on five priority areas: energy, water, food and
health infrastructure and transport networks.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank Under-Secretary-General Martin
Griffiths for his briefing.
Mexico notes with great concern that, as expected,
the cold temperatures are creating a new dimension to
the humanitarian crisis in Ukraine. Regrettably, the
needs of the people will continue to grow as the conflict
continues and winter advances.
This situation is also the result of the intense
attacks on Ukraine’s electricity infrastructure network,
which have left more than 10 million people without
electricity and many more without heating. Efforts to
repair the damage have thus far been insufficient.
22-72481

06/12/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

As we heard, the health sector is one of the most
severely affected by the disruption to the electricity
supply. Seventy per cent of attacks on health
infrastructure around the world in recent months have
occurred in Ukraine. Hospitals and medical centres
are reported to be operating below minimum hygiene
standards owing to water shortages and power outages.
It is difficult to maintain the operation of such facilities
without those basic supplies.
In addition, the large-scale destruction of basic
infrastructure creates chains of obstacles to the
production and procurement of medical supplies
and medicines. Moreover, health workers have been
forced to abandon their jobs, and even their homes, as
part of the serious problem of internal displacement
exacerbated by the energy crisis. As a result, the civilian
population, the main victim of the conflict, is finding it
increasingly difficult to access health services at a time
when they are most needed.
We reiterate our urgent call to put an end to these
attacks and to redouble efforts to rebuild the electricity
grid in order to ensure the supply of priority services.
It is particularly important to guarantee the electricity
supply to the Zaporizhzhya and South Ukraine nuclear
power plants in order to avoid a nuclear accident.
As we have stressed on previous occasions,
international humanitarian law unequivocally provides
for the protection of civilians and civilian objects. These
attacks must therefore be stopped, and the effects of
hostilities on the civilian population must be mitigated
as much as possible.
The conflict has drastically changed the reality
for millions of Ukrainian children. In addition to the
lack of access to health services I noted, more than
3.6 million children are affected by the disruption of
school services. Children also represent almost 20 per
cent of the displaced population, thereby increasing the
risk of them contracting diseases or becoming victims of
violence or trafficking as they are separated from their
families. Children will also pay the highest price in terms
of mental health. Under-Secretary-General Griffiths
briefed us all — 675,000 children have already received
some type of psychosocial support. That support has
been possible only through great effort. Nevertheless,
we stress that at least double — an estimated 1.5 million
children — are at risk of depression, anxiety, posttraumatic stress disorder and other conditions requiring
long-term mental health interventions. Psychosocial
support will therefore need to continue be a critical

S/PV.9208

part of the humanitarian response. We will therefore
continue to insist on this issue and count on the support
of the members of the Council.
It is also essential to ensure progress in the relevant
investigations so as to ensure accountability. In that regard, we will closely follow the work of the International Criminal Court, which is responsible for such tasks.
In addition to the efforts and solidarity of
the international community to assist the civilian
population, we must explore new mediation options
so that dialogue and diplomacy find greater scope for
action. That was the case with the Black Sea Grain
Initiative, which has been a critical humanitarian effort
and demonstrates that there is room for agreement at
the negotiating table.
We reiterate our readiness to work for peace and
stability in Ukraine, in full respect of its sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence.
Ms. Koumby Missambo (Gabon) (spoke in French):
I thank Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths
for his briefing and welcome the participation of the
representatives of Ukraine, Latvia, Poland, Germany
and the European Union in this meeting.
We continue to follow the developments in the ongoing war in Ukraine. The scale of destruction is intensifying without the slightest encouraging sign on the
horizon of the will, even if tiny, to silence the weapons.
The war in Ukraine is clearly exacerbating the world’s
exponentially growing humanitarian needs. The failure
of the belligerents to comply with international humanitarian law, including the use or threat of use of weapons
of mass destruction, compounds the ravages of the war.
The results are well known: many displaced
persons, mostly women and children, whose most basic
needs are no longer met. The Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine, established by the
Human Rights Council, cites the increased threat to
the rights and lives of young people, compounded by
attacks on civilian infrastructure, which in turn amplify
immediate humanitarian needs. In addition, women
and girls are exposed to greater risk of sexual violence.
As temperatures continue to drop, many families
in Ukraine are without electricity, heating and drinking
water. That will certainly complicate the situation of
vulnerable people, as well as the working conditions of
humanitarian workers on the ground. To date, nearly
9.3 million people are in need of food and livelihood

22-724815/25

S/PV.9208

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

06/12/2022

assistance, and 14.5 million people are waiting for
health assistance, according to the latest report from the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.

the war. And it is time for the Council to return to the
heart of its primary vocation to work to ensure global
peace and security.

This situation should concern us all. My country
calls on the warring parties to respect their commitments
under international humanitarian law. We also call
on the parties to refrain from using weapons that
have indiscriminate effects, which inflict additional
suffering on civilians.

Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Martin Griffiths for updating the Security
Council on the recent developments in the humanitarian
crisis in Ukraine, which helps us better understand the
effects of the conflict, in particular on vulnerable parts
of the Ukrainian population.

I would like to stress that landmines and unexploded
remnants of war under snow and ice pose a particular
threat to civilian populations, and I echo the appeal
made by the International Committee of the Red Cross
for the parties to “mark and clear the contaminated
areas as soon as possible and inform civilians of the
dangers”. It is critical for the parties to ensure that those
unexploded remnants of war do not impede access to
essential services or put populations and humanitarian
workers at additional risk.
My country welcomes the renewal of the Black Sea
Grain Initiative. Agreement on the Initiative sends a
positive signal offering hope that the parties can build
on its momentum in order to negotiate an end to the
fighting. We will continue to support the search for a
solution and urge all the parties to commit to doing the
same in order to put an end to the cycle of suffering,
terror and belligerence. Prolonging the war would only
add to the already horrific toll of devastation, loss of
life, shattered lives and destroyed infrastructure. But
worst of all, it would worsen the invisible wounds and
stoke resentment and animosity, subsequently further
decreasing the odds of achieving a peaceful coexistence.
In that regard, I would like to urge the parties to
refrain from any radical rhetoric that could complicate
the political outcome. I reiterate my country’s continuing
call to the Security Council to keep the diplomatic
channels open, as well as to encourage the parties to
meet and engage in dialogue in order to consider all
possible avenues for ending the conflict. We remain
attentive to the various initiatives and other offers of
mediation aimed at encouraging the parties to consider
ending the war, with a view to achieving lasting peace
and peaceful coexistence.
In the face of the turmoil and despair of the
populations that have been weakened by months of
war already, it is not enough for us to increase the
number of Council meetings to hear the international
community’s perspective without ever offering a real
alternative to the war. It is time to negotiate an end to
6/25

We welcome the recent visit to Ukraine by the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry.
Brazil fully shares the perception expressed by
Commissioner Pablo de Greiff in a statement on
Friday about the need for a victim-centred approach.
From that perspective, nothing is more urgent than
the establishment of a ceasefire between the parties,
without preconditions.
We also take note of statements made by Western
leaders over the past week about their willingness to
engage in dialogue with Russia to end the hostilities.
Although it is qualified by references to certain
conditions, it is an important positive signal. Those
declarations have to translate into the establishment of
a mechanism for conducting negotiations in a pragmatic
and objective manner. Brazil believes that the Council
could — and should — serve as a platform to initiate
that dialogue and to explore proposals presented by
other members for that purpose.
Meanwhile, we have a priority to uphold the
protection of the civilian population, particularly
children, as well as full respect for international
humanitarian law. Attacks against civilian targets
constitute violations of international law and
international humanitarian law. The condemnation of
such attacks must therefore be accompanied by practical
measures to end victims’ suffering and ensure lasting
peace. Brazil is gravely concerned about the fact that
serious violations against children may go unchecked
in Ukraine.
The end of the conflict depends on a political solution
that offers guarantees to ensure that the destruction
we have witnessed over the past nine months is not
repeated. The time has come for a deeper reflection
on the European regional security architecture, taking
into account the concerns of all States and the need to
protect their sovereignty and territorial integrity.
22-72481

06/12/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Martin
Griffiths for his briefing.
At present, the crisis in Ukraine is still unfolding.
The humanitarian situation is deteriorating. And its
spillover effects continue to increase. Conflicts and
wars have no winners, and bloodshed and confrontation
will only bring suffering to the people. Resolving the
crisis in Ukraine through political means is in the best
interests of the countries concerned and serves the
common interests of all countries of the world. China
calls on the international community to support all
efforts to seek a peaceful resolution of the Ukrainian
crisis, step up good-offices and mediation efforts and
encourage the parties concerned to resume negotiations
as soon as possible in order to reach an early ceasefire
and cessation of hostilities. In the face of a global,
compounded crisis such as the one in Ukraine, we
must adhere to a people-centred approach, prioritize
humankind and spare no effort to mitigate the spillover
effects of the crisis. In that connection, I would like to
highlight the following four points.
First, we need to reduce the humanitarian cost.
The parties to the conflict should strictly uphold
international humanitarian law, refrain from launching
attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure, ensure
the normal operation of key public services such
as energy, health-care and education services and
strive to eliminate security risks in nuclear facilities
and supplies. The recent widespread power outage
in the Republic of Moldova was a cause for concern.
The parties concerned must exercise prudence and
restraint in order to prevent the war from spilling
over into Ukraine’s neighbours. In particular, they
should refrain from causing misunderstandings or
miscalculations, while also being vigilant against the
risk of bloc confrontation.
Secondly, we need to step up humanitarian
assistance. The people of Ukraine are experiencing the
dual challenges of war and a tough winter, with severe
shortages of water, electricity and heating supplies,
resulting in a significant increase in humanitarian
needs. The international community and humanitarian
agencies should help Ukraine repair its damaged
infrastructure as soon as possible, provide winter
supplies and heating equipment to the Ukrainian
people and address the basic livelihood needs of
vulnerable groups such as refugees and displaced
persons. Children are most vulnerable to attacks and

S/PV.9208

injuries in armed conflict and should therefore receive
priority protection. China calls for the special needs of
children to be fully taken into account in humanitarian
operations, for targeted assistance to be provided to
them and for efforts to be taken to prevent and eliminate
violations against them.
Thirdly, we need to manage and control the
conflict’s spillover effects. The current global food
and energy crises are not problems of production-anddemand — they are supply chain problems, in addition
to the disruption of international cooperation. China
firmly opposes any attempt to politicize food and energy
issues and use them as tools and weapons and calls for
the removal of unilateral sanctions. Instead, we should
maintain the momentum of global economic recovery
and reduce the impact of the crises on developing
countries and focus on the implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
We are pleased to see the renewal and continued
implementation of the Black Sea Grain Initiative.
We welcome Russia’s donation of fertilizers to
developing countries with food shortages. We thank the
United Nations for coordinating that work.
Fourthly, with regard to respecting the rights of
prisoners of war, under the Third Geneva Convention,
prisoners of war are entitled to humane treatment and
protection from torture, ill treatment and other harm.
The parties to the conflict should strictly uphold
relevant international law and respect the basic rights
of prisoners of war. China welcomes the recent periodic
exchanges of prisoners of war between Russia and
Ukraine and commends the United Arab Emirates
invitation to both sides to discuss prisoners of war and
ammonia exports. We hope that those positive contacts
and interaction will help both sides build mutual trust
and lay the foundation for the gradual resumption
of negotiations.
I would like to reiterate that, with regard to the issue
of Ukraine, China has always stood on the side of peace,
dialogue and humanity. We will continue to work with
all peace-loving countries to advocate the resolution
of conflicts through negotiations and the settlement of
disputes through consultations. We support all efforts
that are conducive to a political solution to the crisis
in Ukraine and to the restoration of peace and stability
in Europe.

22-724817/25

S/PV.9208

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Ms. Carty (United States of America): I
thank Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for his
briefing today.
Last Thursday, the United Nations released its
Global Humanitarian Overview 2023, which set
another record, with 339 million people in need of
assistance and a price tag of $51 billion. When the
United Nations launched its humanitarian needs
overview last year, we wondered how much worse it
could get. Tragically, Russia’s illegal war answered
that question. Russia’s aggression triggered one of
the largest refugee and displacement crises since the
Second World War. Hunger, already at extreme levels
because of the coronavirus disease, other conflicts and
climate change, has surged this year because Russia has
disrupted the world’s global food systems.
Russia turned Ukraine’s rolling wheat fields into
battlefields, and it intentionally destroyed the grain that
Ukraine once supplied to the developing world. Now as
Ukraine fights back to reclaim its sovereign territory
and defend its people, President Putin has focused
his ire and fire on Ukraine’s civilian population. As
temperatures plummet, Russia is launching a barrage
of missiles at energy stations, adding to its destruction
of critical infrastructure across Ukraine. The
consequences are horrific and cause needless suffering.
Roads, schools and medical facilities have not been
spared. As a result of the repeated strikes, children
cannot attend school, doctors cannot treat the sick and
families are forced to make decisions about whether
to freeze in their homes or join the millions of others
already displaced in seeking safety from the horrors of
war. We commend the Government and the people of
Ukraine for their tremendous resilience and resolve in
the face of the merciless aggression, and we commend
the work done by the humanitarian community.
Over the past 10 months of Russia’s war, the
United Nations and non-governmental organizations
have delivered principled humanitarian aid under
extraordinarily difficult circumstances. We heard that in
October when Denise Brown, United Nations Resident
and Humanitarian Coordinator in Ukraine, briefed
the Security Council (see S/PV.9161) and described in
sobering detail the human toll of the war. Humanitarian
aid workers have shown that they are willing to stay and
deliver in the face of considerable security risks that
too often have ended in the loss of life.
8/25

06/12/2022

It is notable that, despite all obstacles, aid
agencies in Ukraine managed to implement the
largest humanitarian cash assistance programme in
history, transferring more than $1 billion to 6 million
people. Since 24 February, the United States alone
has provided more than $1.5 billion in humanitarian
aid to support the displaced, including refugees and
other vulnerable populations and communities inside
Ukraine and around the region. But we know that
more will be needed. We applaud France’s initiative to
hold an international conference focused on Ukraine’s
resilience on 13 December. The United States is also
grateful for the United Nations efforts to continue the
Black Sea Grain Initiative, which has succeeded in
getting desperately needed food from Ukraine ports
to world markets. That has helped lower food prices
and ensure that wheat purchased by the World Food
Programme reaches vulnerable people in Yemen,
Ethiopia, Afghanistan and Somalia.
During her recent visit to Ukraine, President
Zelenskyy told Ambassador Thomas-Greenfield that
he seeks a just peace that is based on the Charter of
the United Nations and its principles, which is what the
Council is here to uphold and defend. President Putin’s
escalating barrages on Ukraine’s infrastructure are
evidence that he has no genuine interest in negotiations
or meaningful diplomacy. Instead, he is trying to
break Ukraine’s will to fight by bombing and freezing
its civilians into submission. But he will not succeed,
because Ukraine is fighting for its freedom and for the
future of its children. And we will do everything in our
power to keep hope alive in Ukraine.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths for his very sobering remarks.
Russia’s brutal war of aggression against Ukraine,
in blatant disregard of international law and the Charter
of the United Nations, has and will continue to have
alarming humanitarian consequences. Russia’s warfare
has killed and maimed civilians, including children,
and destroyed homes, hospitals and schools. Their
cynical destruction of Ukraine’s energy infrastructure,
including yesterday’s missile strikes, is already causing
significant suffering and has the potential for further
catastrophic consequences as the winter deepens.
Children, persons with disabilities and the elderly
are in a particularly vulnerable situation. Attacks on
schools and other educational institutions are clearly
in contradiction of resolution 2601 (2021), on the
protection of education in conflict — a resolution Russia
22-72481

06/12/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

voted in favour of and which was unanimously adopted
by the Security Council. Those attacks also constitute
violations of international humanitarian law. They must
stop. Children and other civilians must be protected.
Russia’s war has led to massive displacement. We
are concerned about the risk of sexual and genderbased violence and human trafficking that displaced
people, in particular women and unaccompanied
children, are exposed to. Thousands of Ukrainian
children have reportedly been transferred to Russia
for adoption and naturalization through simplified and
accelerated procedures, without the consent of their
parents or legal guardians. We strongly condemn that
inhumane practice. Nevertheless, throughout the war,
the Ukrainian people have shown great bravery and
resilience. We commend communities, local responders
and humanitarian organizations that continue to serve
people in need. We reiterate our call for safe, rapid and
unimpeded humanitarian access to all people in need,
and we underline the importance of putting children’s
needs at the centre of the humanitarian response.
Numerous reports already point to widespread
violations of international humanitarian law committed
by Russian forces in Ukraine, many of which possibly
amount to war crimes. Individuals at all levels must
be held to account. We are alarmed by the Russian
Federation’s use of the Wagner Group as part of its
warfare. Its members have been accused of committing
numerous violations of international humanitarian law,
including torture, rape and looting. The Wagner Group
is now reportedly recruiting convicted criminals from
prisons in Russia to fight in Ukraine. We are concerned
that soldiers with such backgrounds pose a particular
risk to the civilian population.
In paragraph 313 of his annual report on children
in armed conflict (S/2022/493), the Secretary-General
makes clear that Ukraine will be added as a situation of
concern with immediate effect in next year’s report. We
welcome the engagement of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict with all parties to the conflict. Child protection
issues must urgently be addressed, including the
prevention of violations against children, and we call
on all relevant actors to support and facilitate the work
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
Russia’s war has also aggravated a global food
and energy crisis. It dramatically affects the lives
and futures of children and families in many regions.

S/PV.9208

We welcome the continuation of the Black Sea Grain
Initiative and the efforts of the Secretary-General to
facilitate the availability of food and fertilizers to world
markets. Let me end by reiterating that Ukraine can
count on Norway’s continued support, and we welcome
President Zelenskyy’s peace formula initiative.
Russia must stop the war and fully, immediately and
unconditionally withdraw its forces and military
equipment from Ukraine.
Mrs. Toroitich (Kenya): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Martin Griffiths for his briefing.
We remain concerned by the persisting
humanitarian suffering in Ukraine. It is a shocking
statistic that an estimated 40 per cent of Ukraine’s
power-generation capacity has been damaged or
destroyed by direct attacks. That means that the
country’s energy infrastructure will not meet the needs
of civilians in the coming winter season, no doubt
sharply increasing their suffering. We condemn all
attacks on civilian infrastructure, in particular water
and power infrastructure. We also note and condemn
attacks on residential buildings and other civilian
objects. Our repeated calls for a cessation of hostilities
and for dialogue leading to a mediated settlement have
not been heeded. Indeed, the strategic considerations
of all the combatants and their allies indicate their
continuing resistance to negotiation. If that persists,
then we must insist on minimizing the harm to civilians
by all actors agreeing to a humanitarian exception.
We welcome the recent agreement by all parties
to roll over the Black Sea Grain Initiative. We also
applaud the efforts of the Secretary-General to
remove the obstacles to exporting food and fertilizers,
including from the Russian Federation. The Initiative,
which is anchored by Türkiye and the United Nations,
is the clearest example of the humanitarian exception.
The humanitarian consequences of the war are not
limited to Ukraine. Our own food security in Africa
has deteriorated and may get worse if fertilizer costs
remain high owing to the war. The fact is that, since
March, the transit and trans-shipment in ports of
Russian fertilizers and raw materials through nearby
countries have fallen by 90 per cent. Overall, Russian
fertilizer supplies to world markets have decreased
sharply, leading to the rise in prices. The consequences
are being felt at families’ dining tables, as farmers pass
on their higher costs and grow less food.

22-724819/25

S/PV.9208

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

The challenges will grow as the strategic grain
reserves of several wealthy countries run low. They
will probably return to the food markets to restock next
year or in 2024, at a time when African farmers may
still be struggling to afford fertilizers. The food prices
in such a scenario will rise so sharply that widespread
humanitarian suffering will be the result. We may
recall the violent uprisings in 2011, which were credibly
linked to high food prices. Similar protests may occur
in the next few years, with results similar to the spread
of terrorism that followed the political turmoil in 2011.
In other words, higher fertilizer prices leading to
further food insecurity and poverty may manifest as
threats to regional and international peace and security.
We therefore urge the Secretary-General, the World
Food Programme and related institutions to link food
and security. If they do so, they will realize the need
to redouble their efforts to comprehensively open up
the flow of phosphates, ammonia and other fertilizer
components. The clearest metric of success is a return
to the production levels prior to the war.
There must also be more visible action against the
fear of sanctions exposure by the banking and insurance industries in dealing with food and fertilizer supply chains. Countries through which those goods are
shipped must remove all official and unofficial blockading actions to reflect their humanitarian responsibility. Of course, the most humanitarian action would be
for the military attack on Ukraine’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity to stop. As long as the war persists,
it can easily escalate to the use of weapons of mass destruction. Such an escalation would no doubt further
increase the suffering of Ukrainians and hundreds of
millions of other people around the world.
It is time for responsible leadership that has an
appetite for the prevention and mitigation of the risk
of escalation. Such leadership will embrace discreet
and even secret diplomatic channels. It will act on
the understanding that peace in Europe requires a
fundamental reset of the European security order. It
will know the limits of using military means to rebuild
that order, given the risks of escalation. It will have
the political courage to pursue a practical strategic
outcome for security and stability. Given the evidence
since March, the Security Council will only endorse
and give further legality to agreements reached. While
waiting for such a welcome development, the Council
must redouble its attention to the humanitarian situation
arising from the war. Reports by the Secretariat need
to inform the Council of the humanitarian impacts,
10/25

06/12/2022

not only in Ukraine but globally with regard to food
and energy security. If the blockages continue, then
the Council should adopt a draft resolution that all
countries remove all barriers to the export and shipment
of food and fertilizer products as key to the prevention
of insecurity and threats to international peace.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The topic of today’s meeting, as established
by its Western initiators, was to be the situation of
children. Setting aside the tall tales about the fate
of Ukrainian children and the insinuations about
what Russia is allegedly doing to them, the fact that
our Western colleagues are paying attention to that
issue is positive. However, if representatives claim
to be objective, they need to talk about the root
cause of the crisis — Ukraine’s long-standing crimes
against civilians and children in Donbas. The West is
shamefully trying to hide that. One can lose one’s career
for mentioning that in the media. It is much easier stay
quiet, as otherwise the humanitarian nature of the Kyiv
regime falls apart. That is clearly why the page about
the Alley of Angels — the memorial in Donetsk to the
children who have died in the war that Kyiv has been
waging against the Donbas since 2014 — was recently
deleted from the English version of Wikipedia. Why
confuse Western readers in whom it might provoke
uncomfortable questions?
In particular, why would the average Westerner
want to know that Ukrainian shelling in the Donbas has
killed more than 250 children since 2014, nearly 140 of
whom have died since the beginning of 2022? Sadly,
new names, including those of children, continue to be
added to the list of those killed or wounded as a result
of shelling by the Armed Forces of Ukraine. That is
because they are firing at the peaceful towns and cities
of the Donbas almost non-stop, although our Western
colleagues would rather shamedfacedly turn their backs
on these facts.
They also ignore the fact that while the children
of Donbas have been the targets of Ukraine’s neoNazis, for the past eight years their own children have
become the target audience for disgusting neo-Nazi and
Russophobic propaganda. There are numerous examples
on the Internet of children participating in neo-Nazi
mob rallies and torchlight parades and being trained
in paramilitary camps in a spirit of rabid Russophobia
and antisemitism. As a result, an entire generation of
Ukrainian children and adolescents has grown up with
a poisoned mentality and the belief that it is their job to
22-72481

06/12/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

kill anyone linked to Russia. A telling example of this
was some photos that ended up on social networks of
letters to the Russian equivalent of Santa Claus asking
for presents written by two boys, one from Donetsk
and one from Ukraine. The child from Donetsk, who
was born and had lived his entire life amid bombing,
asks for just one thing — for the shelling to stop. The
Ukrainian boy asks for a machine gun so he can kill
Russians and set fire to the Kremlin. We all know that
children’s words reflect the values and mindset of an
entire society. Draw your own conclusions.
In the context of respect for the rights of children
in Ukraine, we cannot fail to mention the activity
of the notorious Mirotvorets (Peacemaker) website,
where nationalists post the personal information of
people whom they consider enemies of Ukraine. The
result of this exposure is that they can be persecuted,
tormented and not uncommonly physically annihilated,
as happened with the Russian journalist Darya Dugina.
As Russian activists have established, 327 children’s
personal information was posted on this criminal
website. As soon as we found out about it, as long
ago as July, we immediately informed the SecretaryGeneral and the Executive Director of UNICEF. We
now have a question — what has UNICEF done since
it received our request and what is its view of the
publication of the personal information of minors on
the Internet? Has there been any reaction to it from the
Ukrainian authorities?
At the General Assembly debate on the Ukrainian
crisis it has been clear that a significant majority of
Member States are interested in seeing a diplomatic
solution to the situation in Ukraine. We take that
message extremely seriously and affirm our willingness
to engage in negotiations to eliminate the reasons that
forced us to launch the special military operation in
Ukraine. That argument makes sense to almost every
State except those of the collective West and the Kyiv
regime. They are pursuing a different logic, despite
the obvious military realities on the ground, one in
which military action must lead to Russia’s defeat. That
is why what we are now seeing is the continuation of
the West’s war on Russia, to the last Ukrainian. The
situation leaves us no option but to continue to work
to fulfil the aims of the special military operation by
military means, and the entire Ukrainian people are
suffering because of it, as they are exploited by the West
and the criminal Ukrainian regime as cannon fodder.
The fact that the West has no interest in a political
and diplomatic solution to the Ukrainian crisis was

S/PV.9208

emphasized by the outcome of the NATO Council
meeting in Bucharest on 29 and 30 November. By
increasing its supply of weapons to Kyiv, the West is
attesting to its desire not only to further escalate the
situation in Ukraine but to destabilize the situation in
Europe generally. It is already becoming clear that the
uncontrolled supply of weapons being pumped into the
Kyiv regime is becoming a global problem, despite its
failure to have a decisive impact on the ground. There
is growing evidence that Western weapons destined for
Ukraine are increasingly falling into the hands of various
armed groups and terrorists, not only in Europe, but also
\in the Middle East and Africa. President Muhammadu
Buhari of Nigeria has stated that the conflict in Ukraine
is a major source of weapons for terrorists in the Lake
Chad basin. Transnational criminal groups are involved
in smuggling and money-laundering and officials
in States that are sending weapons are clearly mixed
up in their criminal schemes. The issue poses a real
threat to international peace and security and merits the
Council’s focused attention, which is why we are asking
the Indian presidency to convene a separate Security
Council meeting about it on Friday, 9 December.
By some strange logic, Western countries are
promising to continue supplying weapons to Ukraine
“for as long as it takes”, while claiming that they are
doing it for the sake of peace. The European Union,
for example, is even financing its supplies through the
Europe Peace Foundation, apparently to confuse its
own taxpayers. However, Kyiv has its own response
to the question of why they need so many weapons.
Oleksiy Danilov, Secretary of Ukraine’s National
Security and Defence Council, recently said openly
that his country needs weapons because the Russians
“must be destroyed so they cease to exist as a country”.
According to Mr. Danilov, sitting down with Moscow
at the negotiating table is beneath the Ukrainian people.
I believe that there is no need to explain why we
have to respond to such hateful rhetoric from Kyiv,
and that we will counter its hostile actions, including
by carrying out strikes on infrastructure that is used
for military supplies, logistics and communications for
the Ukrainian military formations. In other words, we
will weaken the military capabilities of the Zelenskyy
regime. The facilities referred to in this regard are
being put out of commission by high-precision strikes.
There would be no damage to the civilian infrastructure
of Ukrainian cities at all if Ukrainian air-defence
systems were not deployed in residential area. Despite
the obvious realty, Russia is also blamed for the

22-7248111/25

S/PV.9208

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

consequences caused by falling Ukrainian air-defence
missiles, which some would try to pass off as Russian
attacks on civilian infrastructure. The Ukrainian
anti-aircraft missiles that landed in Poland and just
yesterday in Moldova are a clear demonstration of the
danger posed by the weapons used by the Ukrainian
Armed Forces not only to their own citizens but also to
the people of neighbouring States.
By the way, I should point out that it was not we
who came up with the truth that energy and transport
infrastructure is part of a State’s military potential.
The Western countries that are now accusing Russia
of deliberately harming civilians appear to have
forgotten their own bombing of Yugoslavia’s peaceful
cities during Kosovo’s forcible separation from it in
the 1990s. I offer a very telling comment by Mr. Jamie
Shea, the then-spokesperson of NATO at a briefing on
25 May 1999. I will quote the full question and answer
of this official NATO representative. The question was:
“[I]f you say that the [Yugoslav] army has a lot of
back-up generators, why are you depriving 70 per
cent of the country of not only electricity, but also
water supply ... because you say you [NATO] are
only targeting military targets?”
The response was:
“Yes, I am afraid electricity also drives
command-and-control systems. If President
Milošević really wants all of his population to
have water and electricity, all he has to do is
accept NATO’s five conditions and we will stop
this campaign. But as long as he does not do so we
will continue to attack those targets [that] provide
the electricity for his armed forces. If that has
civilian consequences, it is for him [Milošević] to
deal with”.
That was how NATO formulated its position some 20
years ago on the significance of strikes on civilian
infrastructure for a State’s defence capabilities. But
the standards being applied in Ukraine today are very
different from the ones used in Serbia in the 1990s.
In breaking the military backbone of the Kyiv
regime, we are taking into account the fact that its
policies and most recent moves leave no doubt about
its criminal and hateful nature. Besides continuing its
cleansing of the political field before the very eyes of
our Western colleagues and with their tacit consent,
Ukraine’s leadership has now turned to combating
dissenters on the religious front as well. The mockery
12/25

06/12/2022

that is the decision seeking to make it impossible
for religious organizations affiliated with centres
of influence in the Russian Federation to operate in
Ukraine is in essence a ban on freedom of religion, a
key right in a democratic State, which is what the Kyiv
authorities so desperately want to seem to be. At the
Holy Dormition Kyiv-Pechersk Lavra — an Orthodox
monastery of immense significance for both Russian
and Ukrainian believers — the security service of
Ukraine conducted raids, in an attempt to find a socalled Russian world cell. What will come next? There
will be a ban on praying in Russian. There have already
been statements published on social media that, in
certain churches, one can see warnings to worshippers
praying in Russian that their prayers will apparently not
be heard, and that they will be afflicted with illness
and sorrow. That is an excellent illustration of precisely
how low Ukraine is willing to stoop these days.
Over the past eight years, our Western colleagues
have created an anti-Russian monster in Ukraine,
turning a blind eye to the horrific crimes committed
against its own citizens, including the murder of
civilians in Donbas, the glorification of Nazi criminals
and their accomplices and the persecution of the
Russian-speaking population in their own country.
The Kyiv regime was forgiven for all it has done in
the expectation that someday, full of hatred, it would
rise up against Russia and become an instrument in the
geopolitical struggle of the United States and its NATO
allies with Russia. The disruption of those aggressive
plans is why such fierce criticism is being hurled at our
country, but they come as no surprise and will not stop
us. All the goals of the special military operation will
be fulfilled, one way or another. If that cannot be done
peacefully, with Ukraine becoming a normal, goodneighbourly State that poses no threat to Russia, then
those goals will be achieved by military means. Due
to the thoughtless actions of the Western countries’
vassal regime, the responsibility for the suffering of
the civil population of Ukraine lies with the Zelenskyy
regime and its Western sponsors, who set out to defeat
Russia on the battlefield. That is their choice, not ours,
and until those in Kyiv and in the West finally see the
light, we will defend our interests with all the means at
our disposal.
In conclusion, I would like to say that I will not
listen to the acerbic and eloquent remarks of the
representative of the Kyiv regime, who Friday before
last, one more time “diplomatically” tweeted on the
22-72481

06/12/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

matter in such a spectacular way. If anyone present is
unfamiliar with his creative comments, I thoroughly
recommend that they read his tweets. As we said
previously, they serve as a clear demonstration of the
“high standards” of Ukrainian diplomacy.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths for his very stark briefing on the
humanitarian situation in Ukraine, and indeed across
the world.
Ukraine saw the season’s first falls of snow in
November, just days after Russia launched new attacks
on energy infrastructure and caused widespread
blackouts across the country. Now, at the start of
December, those attacks have continued as the harsh
cold winter we feared begins to set in. It brings with
it new dimensions to the humanitarian crisis caused
by Russia’s war. Rather than herald the beginning of a
peaceful and joyful season, this year’s winter threatens
the lives of millions of men, women and children
across Ukraine. Millions of civilians are being forced
to endure plummeting temperatures without the basic
necessities of heat, food or light.
Ireland condemns in the strongest possible terms
the attacks by the Russian Federation on critical
civilian infrastructure in Ukraine. We recall yet again
the basic principles of international humanitarian law,
which must be respected; they include the prohibition
of indiscriminate and disproportionate attacks and the
obligation to take all feasible precautions in attack.
Russia often tells us — as we have heard again here
today — that those attacks have been on military targets
or on infrastructure supporting the Ukrainian military,
but the images of people living in the dark, queuing for
life-sustaining food and huddling together to stay warm
tell a very different story.
Ireland regrets that the insecurity and obstacles
imposed by Russia continue to restrict humanitarian
access along the front lines and in areas not under
Ukraine’s control. Those actions are simply inhumane
and unacceptable. The level of damage or destruction to
other civilian infrastructure, including homes, hospitals
and schools, creates further challenges this winter and
may well provoke a new wave of displacement. Ireland
is deeply concerned by the reports of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees that this unjustified
war has led to 6.9 million internally displaced people in
Ukraine and more than 7.8 million refugees. Those are
not merely statistics — each person has had their life

S/PV.9208

upended. We are talking about children, the elderly, the
infirm and those with disabilities — vulnerable people
in a situation beyond their control who seek shelter
and safety.
As we know from our work in the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict, children in war
suffer most, often with life-altering consequences.
Millions of children across Ukraine are being robbed
by the war of their childhoods and futures, forced to
leave their homes and communities, their educational
facilities destroyed by Russian missiles and their right
to education denied. That will have profound impacts,
not only on their development but also on society as a
whole. The reverberations of the war reach far beyond
Ukraine’s borders and will also reach beyond this
generation of children in Ukraine.
A new wave of displacement would exacerbate
concerns for the protection of women and children, who
as we know are particularly vulnerable to trafficking,
sexual exploitation and abuse, as highlighted earlier
by Under-Secretary-General Griffiths. As the Council
has heard before from Special Representative Patten,
conflict-related sexual violence, including mass rape
and the rape of children, has been a consistent feature
of the war. But rape is not an inevitable by-product of
war; it is an act that may constitute a war crime, leaving
victims and their communities with life-long effects
and trauma.
Ireland strongly supports Special Representative
Patten’s calls for swift and rigorous investigations to
ensure accountability as a central pillar of deterrence,
prevention and non-repetition. As she previously
informed the Council, the failure to acknowledge and
investigate such crimes is the surest sign that violations
will continue unabated.
I conclude, as I always do in our discussions on
Ukraine, with the unfailing demand that Russia cease
its senseless war. Russia is the sole party that has
brought war, terror, conflict and hunger to the people of
Ukraine since its illegal invasion in February. I speak to
Russia directly, therefore, when I say that it is never too
late for dialogue and diplomacy. Ireland renews its call
on Russia to immediately cease hostilities, withdraw
its forces and commit to resolving all outstanding
issues peacefully and in line with the Charter of the
United Nations.

22-7248113/25

S/PV.9208

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for his
sobering briefing on the situation in Ukraine.
Over the course of the past few weeks, the
humanitarian community has focused its attention
on addressing the impact of winter in Ukraine. As
the cold weather sets in, we have seen humanitarian
actors rise to the occasion in support of those most in
need. As we heard again today, the situation remains
critical — especially in areas that have experienced
or continue to experience heavy fighting and shelling.
In places like Mykolayiv and Kherson, the lack of
electricity, running water and heating, in addition to
the scarcity of food and medicine, has put considerable
pressure on humanitarian response efforts. We
commend the work not only of the United Nations and
other major aid organizations but also of local first
responders and community organizations, who have
deployed innovative measures to address ever-growing
needs, whether by allocating generators, setting up
mobile heating and charging stations or urgently
repairing electricity grids and damaged water systems.
Winter also brings new and unforeseen dangers.
Landmines and unexploded munitions are now
concealed by snow and ice. We are deeply concerned
by reports that the lack of heating has driven people,
including children, to gather firewood in forests littered
with hidden explosives. The previous time the Council
met to discuss the situation of children in Ukraine
was at the start of the school year in September (see
S/PV.9126). Beyond the importance of education itself
and avoiding a lost generation of students who are denied
opportunity, schooling provides an important source of
stability and peer-bonding that children desperately
need as they cope with the intense trauma of war.
Since September, it is estimated that approximately
2.6 million children in Ukraine are learning online due
to the impacts of war on education, yet even that remote
access to education has been disrupted by blackouts
and emergency power cuts resulting from the conflict’s
impact on energy infrastructure. We reiterate our call
for taking all the necessary measures to prevent the
targeting of civilian infrastructure and ensure that all
children can safely access education.
Children must be protected from the worst impacts
of armed conflict. But the war’s impact on the children
of Ukraine goes beyond the immediate threat to their
physical safety. The psychosocial impacts of the conflict
could engender long-term challenges that affect an entire
14/25

06/12/2022

generation of children. When families are separated
and forced to move or take shelter underground, their
daily activities are severely disrupted and the mental
health of children suffers. We applaud those working
on the ground, particularly community organizations
that have mobilized to provide psychosocial support to
children impacted by the war.
We can and must do more to protect the children
of Ukraine. At the same time, it is critical to ensure
that children elsewhere in the world do not suffer from
the impact of the global food crisis exacerbated by this
war. We were heartened to see the latest Global Food
Price Index of the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, which showed a modest decrease
in global food prices, due in part to the extension of
the Black Sea Grain Initiative. Yet we are still seeing
record-high levels of food prices, which impact the
poorest countries first. Areas where fertilizer is not
available face low harvests that could undermine even
the limited progress made in lowering food prices.
In that regard, we welcome the donation of 260,000
metric tons of Russian fertilizer and the news of the
first shipment that is destined for Malawi. We look
forward to further shipments in the coming months,
as well as other efforts to enhance fertilizer supply.
At the same time, we continue to underline the need
to ensure that the delivery of grain facilitated by the
July Istanbul agreements reaches those most in need.
In that respect, we further welcome the recent arrival
of Ukrainian wheat bound for Ethiopia. We must all
engage in collective efforts to ensure that children do
not go hungry, whether in Ukraine or in other parts of
the world.
Once again, we reiterate the need for de-escalation
and a diplomatic solution to this crisis. For its part,
the Council needs to encourage dialogue and foster
an environment that is conducive to a cessation of
hostilities in order to ultimately bring an end to the
fighting. The United Arab Emirates continues to stand
ready to deploy its good offices and contribute to efforts
aimed at achieving those goals.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): I thank UnderSecretary-General Martin Griffiths for his briefing.
The Security Council is once again convening, in
close succession, on account of the humanitarian crisis
resulting from the unrelenting military bombardments
on civilian populated areas in Ukraine. Despite several
calls by the Council for the protection of civilians, the
22-72481

06/12/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

war in Ukraine continues to unfold, with devastating
impacts on civilians and civilian infrastructure critical
to the survival and livelihoods of the people. The
ordinary people of Ukraine continue to suffer attacks,
in blatant violation of the fundamental principles of
international humanitarian law.
We continue to be deeply concerned about military
hostilities across several front lines, especially the
new wave of missile attacks that began yesterday and
have reportedly claimed some civilian lives. We are
concerned that those attacks are happening at a critical
time when temperatures are dropping and many homes
are already without access to heating or water, thereby
further worsening the humanitarian conditions of
the people.
We are particularly disheartened by the plight
of Ukrainian children, whose childhoods have been
upended by the war. It is not only unfortunate, but
also unacceptable that children — anywhere — should
suffer from the scourge of armed conflict. Thousands
of Ukrainian children have been either killed, maimed
or displaced to unfamiliar environments as a result of
the war. The physical and psychological well-being
of those children is under constant threat from the
persisting violence, disruptions to their education
and, in some cases, sexual abuse and violations.
We register our strong condemnation of all forms of
violations against the rights of children and strongly
support investigations into such cases so as to avoid
impunity against children in Ukraine. We welcome
the differentiated humanitarian assistance that would
ensure that we can meet the specific needs of the
children, especially their psychosocial, health and
nutritional needs.
We urge international support for the restoration
of Ukraine’s energy and water supply infrastructure
that have been damaged or destroyed and hope that
the international conference announced by the French
Government to be held in Paris on 13 December will
help to mobilize resources in order to complement the
efforts of United Nations humanitarian agencies and
further enhance resilience in Ukraine.
The scaling-up of humanitarian assistance,
especially the provision of winterization support,
is important. However, as we have indicated in
previous statements to the Council, such measures are
insufficient to mitigate the full impact of the war. The

S/PV.9208

war must end, and it must end now to prevent further
debilitating humanitarian conditions.
At the founding of the United Nations, world
leaders, having witnessed the ugliness of the two
previous World Wars on our common humanity,
pledged to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war. While a third world war has been kept
at bay, the war in Ukraine has had far-reaching global
consequences. We, who now bear the responsibility
of promoting international peace and security, must
therefore intensify our efforts to bring an end to the
war on Ukraine and, indeed, all conflict situations the
world over.
The war in Ukraine, in our view, has come at a cost
to the world and is an expense that we cannot continue
to afford. We must therefore continue in our efforts
to bring the parties to the negotiating table in order
to chart a political process and a peaceful settlement
of the conflict through the channels of dialogue
and diplomacy.
We welcome reports on the progress being made to
resume ammonia exports through the Black Sea ports.
The unimpeded export of Ukrainian grain and Russian
fertilizers is critical, respectively, to avoid a rebound in
global food price increases and avert a food shortage in
the coming months.
We reiterate our call for an end to the hostilities
and call on the Russian Federation to end its aggression
against Ukraine. The immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of Russian forces from the internationally
recognized territories of Ukraine would provide a
much-needed window for diplomatic consultations
towards a peaceful and comprehensive settlement of the
conflict that lies between the two countries.
We reiterate further our call on the warring sides
to take the necessary measures to protect civilians
from harm and avoid the targeted attacks on Ukraine’s
energy and other critical infrastructure. There is also
a continuing need to address nuclear safety concerns.
In conclusion, I reiterate Ghana’s unwavering
commitment to the sovereignty, political independence
and territorial integrity of Ukraine. We once again
express our solidarity with the people of Ukraine in
these perilous times and reaffirm our support for all
international efforts to restore peace in Ukraine.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths for his update. We commend the

22-7248115/25

S/PV.9208

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

monumental work and commitment of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to Ukraine
and its people, and we understand the uneasiness of
having to bring the never-ending misery of the war to
the Security Council.
Yesterday was the twenty-eighth anniversary of
the Budapest Memorandum on Security Assurances,
a landmark agreement according to which Ukraine
delivered its nuclear arsenal and, in exchange, the
Russian Federation committed to respect Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity. There were no
festivities, no parades in Kyiv or in Moscow. The only
“celebration” was the latest barrage of deadly missiles,
the fifth of its kind against Ukraine, coming from the
east, its neighbour and aggressor, Russia, in a continued
effort to cripple Ukraine’s energy infrastructure.
It was yet another attempt to plunge Ukraine into
darkness and cold, to punish innocent civilians, to disrupt
power and water supplies amid freezing temperatures by
weaponizing winter. We hear that Russia does not target
civilians. The truth is that the only civilians not under
attack are those 17,000 already killed.
Since February, we have heard many times the
Kremlin claim that in its special operation, which has
now entered its tenth month, everything is going to plan.
But we never got a real chance to know what the plan
was exactly, as it kept changing. Was it a three-day walk
into Ukraine in order to take Kyiv and overthrow the
Government? It failed. Was it to wipe Ukraine from the
world map? It nosedived before it even started. Was it
to break the morale of an entire nation and force it into
submission? The contrary has happened.
The reality is that, despite despicable crimes and
widespread human rights abuses, despite continued
vicious attacks on civilian infrastructure and continued
efforts to bring the war into every Ukrainian household,
the aggression has spectacularly failed to break Ukraine.
It has only boosted Ukraine’s resistance and its national
identity. Moreover, the false narrative about Ukraine
has not been able to poison the desire internationally
for truth and peace. Only a few weeks ago, in General
Assembly resolution ES-11/4, 143 Member States said
a resounding no to the annexation of territory by force
and an unquestionable no to a world according to the
Kremlin (see A/ES-11/PV.14).
As we have heard, the situation of children is
particularly worrying. Nearly 6 million of them have
been affected since the start of the war. Many cannot
16/25

06/12/2022

attend their schools because the buildings have been
damaged or demolished, and power cuts are disrupting
online classes. Some 3.4 million Ukrainians need
child-protection care and, as Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths mentioned, 700,000 are enduring injuries and
psychological trauma. For them the scars are deep and
lasting. For them the war has meant the loss of their
education, their health care and a place where they can
grow up healthy. It is needless to remind the Council that
this war continues to take a heavy toll on civilians. I once
again recall the words of Mr. Griffiths, who said it all
in one sentence — this senseless war is causing death,
destruction and displacement. That is what civilians are
enduring there. We commend the efforts of the United
Nations system and humanitarian partners to deliver
critical assistance and ensure protection across the country.
The deliberate destruction or damage of civilian
objects, such as schools, hospitals and energy and
water infrastructure, is a violation of international
humanitarian law. Resolution 2573 (2021), adopted by
the Council only last year, strongly condemns attacks
in situations of armed conflict directed at civilians and
other protected persons that deprive them of objects
indispensable to their survival. Energy, water and
heat are indeed indispensable for survival, and even
more so in wintertime. Those who authorize such
flagrant violations in Ukraine are not merely acting in
contravention of their commitments and obligations,
they are committing crimes. There is also mounting
evidence that Russian forces are committing war
crimes, indiscriminate attacks, torture and sexual and
gender-based violence against the civilian population,
including prisoners. Those crimes are documented, and
they must be investigated and their perpetrators held
accountable. We could not prevent the war, but we must
therefore make sure there is accountability.
It is clear that the cause of this enduring suffering,
including its humanitarian and food-insecurity aspects
and its worldwide impact, lies in the war of choice on
Ukraine. We know how the war started. We do not
know how or when it will end. But we know that the
only way to stop this madness is by immediately and
unconditionally withdrawing all forces and military
equipment from the entire territory of Ukraine,
respecting its internationally recognized borders and
embracing diplomacy. Yes, we need dialogue, but in
freedom, not under coercion. Until then, Ukraine needs
and will have our support, because supporting Ukraine
is supporting everything we stand for.
22-72481

06/12/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I thank Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for his
briefing. As he said, this war is about death, destruction
and displacement.
This is the third time in as many weeks that we have
discussed Russia’s brutal attacks on civilians across
Ukraine. On all three occasions, the United Nations has
underlined the devastating humanitarian impact of the
systematic strikes on Ukraine’s critical infrastructure
and civilian centres. That presents a potentially
catastrophic situation for Ukraine’s brave and
courageous people and for the 690 organizations that
are supporting the humanitarian needs as winter begins
and people are left without water, power or shelter.
We know what Russia is trying to do. It is trying
to bring terror and suffering to the civilian population
in a war of subjugation. It is barbaric, illegal and
horribly cruel. The statistics we have heard from the
United Nations today are shocking. More than 17,000
civilians have been killed in Ukraine by Russia’s
senseless war. That is a devastating number of innocent
lives lost, and we have heard today in particular about
the impact that Russia’s war is having on children in
Ukraine. We heard about the millions forced to flee
their homes and in need of humanitarian assistance and
the hundreds killed, injured or missing; the damage or
destruction of more than 500 schools and the classes that
remain being interrupted by air-raid sirens and power
cuts; the reports that thousands of children have been
forcibly taken to Russia; and the credible allegations of
sexual violence against children by Russian forces. The
trauma inflicted by Russia will last for generations.
The response from the Security Council and the
wider membership of the United Nations has been
consistent. It is a call for an end to conflict and for
peace. Two weeks ago (see S/PV.9202), President
Zelenskyy asked us once again to help end the suffering
of the Ukrainian people and expressed his willingness to
negotiate a peace based on the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations. But Russia is not listening. Its
response has been wave after wave of long-range strikes
and continued, albeit frustrated, efforts to take Ukrainian
territory. It is time for Russia to end this war, withdraw
from Ukrainian territory and commit to dialogue and
negotiations based on international law and the Charter.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of India.

S/PV.9208

Let me begin by thanking Mr. Martin Griffiths for
his briefing on the situation in Ukraine with regard to
the protection of civilians and the situation of children.
India continues to remain concerned about the
situation in Ukraine. The conflict has resulted in the
loss of lives, as well as countless miseries for its people,
particularly women, children and the elderly, with
millions becoming homeless and forced to take shelter
in neighbouring countries. The reports of attacks on
civilians and civilian infrastructure in the recent weeks
are indeed deeply worrying, and we reiterate our grave
concerns in that regard.
Children constitute a third of humankind, and the
most important third, because they are our future. They
are also the most vulnerable to suffering, particularly
in situations of armed conflict, and therefore need
additional protection and care. The conflict in Ukraine
is unquestionably severely impacting the 7.5 million
children across the country. While the protection of the
rights of the child, including their access to education,
is the primary responsibility of national Governments,
the international community has the obligation to do its
utmost to provide succour to children affected by conflict.
India is a signatory to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and appreciates the ongoing efforts, including
by UNICEF, to alleviate children’s suffering. We also
support UNICEF’s efforts to scale up its operations.
As the Council is aware, since the beginning of the
conflict in Ukraine, India has consistently called for
an immediate cessation of hostilities and an end to the
violence. We have urged both sides to return to the path
of diplomacy and dialogue and have also expressed our
support for all diplomatic efforts to end the conflict.
We believe that no solution is worth the cost of innocent
lives. Our Prime Minister has spoken to the Presidents
of Ukraine and Russia on multiple occasions and has
reiterated India’s position. India stands ready to support
all such efforts aimed at de-escalation.
I would also like to point out that the impact of
the Ukraine conflict is not just limited to Europe. The
conflict is exacerbating concerns about food, fertilizer
and fuel security, particularly in developing countries.
It is necessary for all of us to appreciate the importance
of equity, affordability and accessibility with respect to
those critical issues for the global South. Open markets
must not become an argument for perpetuating inequity
and promoting discrimination. India’s approach to the
Ukraine conflict will continue to be people-centred. For
our part, we provide humanitarian assistance to Ukraine

22-7248117/25

S/PV.9208

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

and economic support to some of our neighbours in
the global South that are under economic distress. In
order to help low-income countries fight against price
rises and foodstuff shortages, India has exported more
than 1.8 million tons of wheat to countries in need,
including to Afghanistan, Myanmar, the Sudan and
Yemen. We hope that the international community
will continue to respond positively to the call for
humanitarian assistance. India has to date dispatched
12 consignments of humanitarian aid to Ukraine; at
the request of the Ukrainian Government, India has
also provided financial aid for the reconstruction of an
educational institution. We stand ready to do more.
Let us not forget that the situation has also affected
foreign students, including students from India. India
facilitated the safe return of 22,500 Indian nationals,
most of them students studying in various universities in
Ukraine. Even as we explore options for minimizing the
impacts on our students’ education, we appreciate the
accommodations made by the Ukrainian Government
for medical students in the current academic year.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate that the global
order is anchored in the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, international law and respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I acknowledge what is
left of the delegation of the terrorist Moscow regime in
the permanent seat of the Soviet Union.
Today, on Ukrainian Armed Forces Day, I salute
Ukraine’s heroic and invincible soldiers, who are
fighting for their country, their families, every one of
us and our free future. The aggressor will be defeated,
the dictatorship will fail and the war criminals will
be held to account. This is yet another meeting at
which the representatives of the Russian Federation
try to convince the Security Council of their country’s
readiness for peace. And the hypocrisy of their words
has once again been revealed by the deeds of their
country on the ground.
Yesterday Ukraine sustained another wave
of Russian missile terror. More than 70 missiles
were launched from aircraft and ships to hit critical
infrastructure throughout Ukraine. Ukrainian armed
forces were able to intercept almost 60 of those missiles.
18/25

06/12/2022

We are grateful to the responsible nations throughout
the world that contribute to enhancing Ukraine’s air
defences, and thereby to saving the lives of innocent
civilians. Given the reports on missile fragments being
found in the Republic of Moldova following yesterday’s
strike by Russia, we reiterate that Russian missile
terror poses a dangerous threat, not only to Ukraine
but also to its neighbouring countries. The only way
to prevent a spillover effect is to continue supporting
Ukraine by further strengthening its air-defence and
missile-defence capacities.
In that regard, we also welcome the readiness of our
friends to ensure the provision of immediate assistance
to Ukrainians in meeting their urgent needs and
strengthening the civilian resilience of the Ukrainian
people following the Russian terrorist attacks on their
infrastructure. The international conference on standing
with the Ukrainian people organized by France and
Ukraine, to be held in Paris on 13 December, serves as
a good example of such efforts. We encourage United
Nations Member States and the leadership of the
Secretariat to participate in that event.
It speaks volumes that Moscow decided to attack
Ukraine’s civilian infrastructure and its people on
the anniversary of the Budapest Memorandum. On
5 December 1994 in Budapest, the Kremlin granted
security assurances to Ukraine, committing in particular
to respect Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and
existing borders and reaffirming that none of its
weapons “will ever be used against Ukraine”.
Almost every single day Russia demonstrates that
its assurances are of no worth — whether those that
Moscow gave in the past, those of which they speak
today or those that they may offer in the future. Indeed,
sometimes the Kremlin might seem to take an adequate
position, as former President Yeltsin once did. In his
letter to former President Clinton dated 2 November
1994, Yeltsin conveyed his readiness “to make a decision
now with regard to signing a document on guarantees”.
He also expressed his confidence that “the leaders’
signatures should seal a really milestone document
which would cover all the concerns of Ukraine, which
is fraternal to us”.
The problem is that the post-Soviet transformation
in Russia was not underpinned by de-communization or
the dismantling of its authoritarian style of leadership
and therefore led to Putinism instead of democracy.
The lessons of history must be learned this time so that
past tragedies are not repeated. After the military defeat
22-72481

06/12/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

of Russia, which is imminent, the de-Putinization and
denuclearization of that country must follow. By marking
the anniversary of the Budapest Memorandum with a
missile strike on Ukraine, the Kremlin finally showed
that it has no moral or legal grounds for possessing
nuclear weapons. Therefore, while the armed forces
of Ukraine continue to do their job to defeat Russia
militarily, the international community must start
considering the modalities of post-Putin arrangements
with Moscow, which should include a new Budapest
Memorandum to be signed by Moscow in the context
of its denuclearization. It remains to be seen how soon
after its military defeat and by whom such a document
could be signed on behalf of the territory with an
administrative centre in Moscow. Such an arrangement
would require credible counterparts, and neither Putin
nor any of his cronies can be considered trustworthy.
Ukraine needs peace, and Ukraine wants peace
more than any other country. It is our territory that has
been invaded. It is our people who are being killed. It
is our homes that are being destroyed and robbed by
the Russian army. Please keep that in mind every time
Moscow attempts to wear sheep’s clothing and persuade
us that it is not the aggressor but the victim that resists
peace efforts. Ukraine indeed resists, but not peace of
course — we resist Moscow’s attempts to erase us from
the map. We also resist the Russian strategy to buy time
under the guise of peace efforts in order to replenish
its military arsenal, build strongholds in the occupied
territories and prepare for a new attack, whether in two,
or five or seven years.
Putin’s representative at this meeting talks about
peace, but at the same time his masters in Moscow
claim that Russia will not leave the territory of Ukraine.
In a nutshell, the so-called peace à la Kremlin would be
built on violations of the Charter of the United Nations.
Moscow’s vision of peace also means that all
Ukrainians in the occupied territories would be left in
danger, unprotected from abduction, detention, torture,
looting or execution-style killing. In all the Ukrainian
territories still under Russian control the occupation
authorities regard any local resident as a potential
enemy. That is why, while retreating, Russian troops
are leaving behind mass graves and torture chambers.
That was the case in Kyiv and the northern regions
in April, in the Kharkiv region in September and in
Kherson last month. At the end of November, Ukrainian
law enforcement exhumed a mass grave in the liberated
village of Pravdyne, in the Kherson region. According

S/PV.9208

to eyewitness accounts in April, occupiers killed seven
people, including a teenage girl, in a private house,
which they then blew up. The local residents were
forbidden to bury their remains for a long time. That
is another episode in the Russian war of aggression.
Seven more human lives taken for nothing.
Several days ago, a DNA examination confirmed
that one of the bodies found in the mass grave in Izyum in
the Kharkiv region belonged to a well-known Ukrainian
children’s writer, Volodymyr Vakulenko. His village
near Izyum was occupied at the very beginning of the
invasion and he stayed there because of his son, who
has been diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder. As
a peaceful civilian, his only guilt in the eyes of Russians
was his affiliation with Ukrainian literature. And that
was enough for them to detain Mr. Vakulenko at the
end of March and to kill him. The teenage son of the
Ukrainian writer will live with memories of his father
as one of the heroes. He will read his father’s books,
and they will warm his heart. Let me ask the Russian
diplomats in this Chamber, or what is left of them: what
legacy will they leave their children — volumes of lies
and shameful attempts to whitewash war crimes and
genocide? That is a torturous and painful life to leave
one’s children.
We remain concerned about the vile practices of
family separations and mass deportations of children
from the occupied territories of Ukraine to Russia. To
date, the Ukrainian authorities have identified 12,340
children deported to Russia or to the territories of
Ukraine temporarily occupied by Russia. Until now,
only 119 deported children have been returned to their
relatives in Ukraine. We urge Moscow to cease that
illegal practice and to immediately provide the relevant
United Nations bodies and international organizations
with complete information on the Ukrainian children
abducted or deported to its territory, including those
who have subsequently been adopted or transferred
to foster families. We call on the United Nations
authorities, as well as the international community,
not to be silent about those crimes and to demand that
Russia provide access to those children and facilitate
their safe return and family reunification in line with
the best interests of the children and in accordance with
international law.
In November we informed the Security Council of
the peace formula plan proposed by President Zelenskyy
(see S/PV.9202). It includes 10 steps that would lead
us all to sustainable and lasting peace. Let me remind

22-7248119/25

S/PV.9208

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Council members that the list includes radiation and
nuclear safety, food security, energy security, the
release of all prisoners and deportees, the restoration
of Ukraine’s territorial integrity in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, the withdrawal of
Russian troops, justice, the prevention of ecocide and of
escalation and legal confirmation of the end of the war.
I am grateful to the members of Security Council that
have emphasized the plan’s viability. We invite Member
States to take the lead and to participate in any of the 10
points of the plan. It is time to start its implementation.
I listened carefully to the statement by the
representative of Kenya, especially on the issue of food
security. Let me say it loud and clear — the only root
cause of that problem is the Russian war on Ukraine,
and as soon as the war is stopped, 99 per cent of the
issues the representative raised will be resolved.
Another important development I would therefore
like to touch on is the fact that the past week was the
start of the practical implementation of the Grain from
Ukraine initiative. As of now, more than 30 countries
and the European Union have declared their financial
participation in the humanitarian Grain from Ukraine
programme initiated by President Zelenskyy. Pledges
have already amounted to almost $190 million.
In the framework of the programme, on 4 December
the first ship delivered 25,000 tons of Ukrainian wheat
for Ethiopia through the port of Doraleh in Djibouti.
Yesterday another ship set off for Ethiopia loaded with
30,000 tons of wheat. Two more ships are now being
loaded at the seaport of Chernomorsk, and they are due
to deliver 60,000 tons of wheat for Somalia and the
Sudan. Overall, within the framework of that important
humanitarian initiative, our State is going to send more
than 60 ships to Ethiopia, the Sudan, South Sudan,
Somalia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Kenya, Yemen and other countries. As I have said,
more than 30 countries and international organizations
have already offered their support to the Grain from
Ukraine programme. There are two reasons why the
programme is important. First, it undermines the
Russian propaganda in the countries of the global South
because they see that Russia is a problem while Ukraine
is a rescuer. Secondly, it supports Ukrainian agriculture
and farmers amid the hardship of war. We continue to
work on enlarging the group of countries that support
this humanitarian programme and increasing the scope
of financial contributions to it.
20/25

06/12/2022

We harbour no illusions about Russia’s readiness
for peace. For the time being, it is a militarized and
brainwashed society ruled by war criminals and
educated with hatred. As long as they have resources,
they will continue to attack Ukraine, the global
security architecture and the international order based
on the Charter of the United Nations. Moscow must
be deprived of its ability to produce missiles, finance
military activities in Ukraine and threaten the world
with sabre-rattling. We encourage responsible and
peace-loving nations to continue seeking relevant
opportunities to deprive Moscow of the fossil-fuel
revenues it uses to finance the war. In that regard, the
decision to cap the price of Russian oil is a first step in
the right direction, although the upper limit requires
further adjustments. It is completely useless to beg
Moscow for peace or to appeal to its common sense.
Moscow can only be forced into peace. That is the only
language that it understands and to which it responds.
As soon as the strategy is applied by everyone, a
sustainable peace, as well as renewed respect for the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, will be
within reach.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Latvia.
Mr. Pildegovičs (Latvia): I speak on behalf of the
Baltic States — Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for his
sobering briefing, and I also thank the presidency for
the opportunity to address the Security Council.
Destroying the energy, heat and water supply in
order to inflict pain on people who are already suffering
food and medicine shortages seems to be key to
Russia’s war of terror against civilians in Ukraine. Just
days after Ukraine saw the season’s first snow, Russia’s
strikes caused widespread blackouts and disruptions
of vital services, thereby affecting millions of people,
including children.
With the onset of winter conditions, we face a
completely new dimension of the humanitarian crisis
in Ukraine — a crisis that was deliberately created by
Russia. It has also affected neighbouring countries, such
as the Republic of Moldova, which has also experienced
blackouts. Over the past few weeks, Russia has only
stepped up its indiscriminate attacks on civilians and
critical infrastructure. Russia’s war on Ukraine has
caused immense suffering and psychological trauma,
which particularly affects children. Energy cuts
22-72481

06/12/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

have negatively impacted child-protection activities.
Russia’s aggression has left 3.4 million children in
need of child-protection interventions. Thousands
of Ukrainian children have been forcefully deported
to Russia, which constitutes a war crime. Children
belong with their families, and they must be safely and
immediately returned to their homes.
There must be no impunity for Russia’s crimes
in Ukraine. The international community will hold
Russia’s perpetrators accountable for the crime of
aggression and all other atrocity crimes committed
in and against Ukraine. Therefore, it is imperative to
continue documenting and properly storing evidence,
as well as to continue reporting regularly on all the
war crimes committed throughout Ukraine. In order
to further strengthen international criminal justice
mechanisms, we strongly support the idea of establishing
a special international tribunal to prosecute the crime
of aggression against Ukraine. Currently, there is no
international court or tribunal that could hold Russia’s
top political and military leadership to account for
committing crimes of aggression against Ukraine.
A special international tribunal for the punishment
of the crime of aggression against Ukraine must be
established to fill that jurisdictional vacuum.
Russia could — but chooses not to — stop its war
of aggression and the suffering and crisis it causes to
Ukraine and its people, including its children. Together
with actions aimed at stopping Russia, one of the
international community’s priorities for this winter
should be to ensure protection for the most vulnerable.
Shortages of electricity and fuel add to the challenges
involved in ensuring that children in Ukraine can
continue their education and receive crucial services.
States, civil society organizations, private donors and
United Nations agencies, including UNICEF and other
humanitarian partners, have worked to meet the needs
of millions of people in dire need of assistance. In
addition, in providing aid to Ukraine the Baltic States
are taking the lead in terms of the share of their gross
domestic product. We commend the humanitarians
who continue working through the challenges posed
by energy shortages to support people in Ukraine. We
call upon all relevant United Nations institutions, as
well as the international community, to continue their
life-saving efforts.
Helping Ukraine to restore its energy infrastructure
is especially critical for avoiding the direst humanitarian
consequences. However, insecurity and the obstacles

S/PV.9208

imposed by Russia continue to hinder humanitarian
workers’ capacity to support those in need. The
ongoing war in Ukraine severely disrupts access to
livelihood opportunities and basic services for women
and girls, including life-saving sexual and reproductive
health-care services. There are mounting allegations
of conflict-related sexual violence, including against
children, and other forms of gender-based violence.
Survivors’ access to comprehensive services, including
medical and psychological support, must be ensured.
According to NASA Harvest, Ukraine has lost at least
6 million tons of wheat — worth $1 billion — harvested
in areas controlled by Russia. We would like to reiterate
that the Russian aggression is the direct cause of the
current global food insecurity, not the sanctions aimed
at ending the aggression. We call on Russia to stop
prolonging the inspection of vessels heading to and
from the Black Sea ports, thereby preventing Ukrainian
grain and foodstuffs from reaching millions of people.
We fully support the Secretary-General’s Black Sea
Grain Initiative and the work of the Joint Coordination
Centre and the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development in facilitating trade in food and fertilizer
in order to alleviate global food insecurity. We call for
transparency in that important work. The unhindered
freedom of navigation in the Black Sea is the only
practical way to ensure a reliable flow of Ukraine’s
grain and other food staples. To achieve that, Russia
must immediately, completely and unconditionally
withdraw all of its military forces from the territory of
Ukraine, within its internationally recognized borders.
Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania will continue to
firmly stand up for the Charter of the United Nations,
international law, human rights, peace and security.
Wherever Russia goes, it leaves horror in its wake, and
with every passing day those crimes go unpunished.
However, we believe in the power of the international
community. We are confident that Ukraine will prevail.
We are determined that war criminals will be brought
to justice.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Szczerski (Poland): Let me start by thanking
India for convening today’s important briefing. I also
thank Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths for
his insightful yet grim briefing.
Since 24 February, one of the biggest humanitarian
crises since the Second World War has been unfolding

22-7248121/25

S/PV.9208

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

in Poland’s immediate neighbourhood — in Ukraine.
It has to be stressed that the crisis is purely humanmade and was caused solely by Russia’s unjustified
and unprovoked invasion of Ukraine. Today’s Security
Council briefing on the humanitarian situation in
Ukraine is timely, as it takes place in an increasingly
challenging context for the humanitarian system. It
should be stressed that, unlike in most conflicts in
which a humanitarian crisis accompanies the military
aggression, in the case of the Russian war against
Ukraine the humanitarian crisis is the weapon of war
used on purpose by the aggressor. The sole aim of the
aggressor at this stage is to create and further deepen
the humanitarian crisis in Ukraine. Such actions by the
Russian Federation constitute war crimes and clearly
demonstrate a blatant disregard for international law,
including international humanitarian law. That is why
today’s briefing is indeed timely and pertains to the
very essence of the current phase of Russian aggression
against Ukraine.

06/12/2022

way in the Polish educational system and overcome the
language barrier. There are currently approximately
200,000 refugee children from Ukraine in Polish
schools, including 35,000 in preschool. The Polish
Ministry of Education has also created an online
platform with various educational tools available for
free. The Ministry is organizing special language
courses for teachers from Ukraine, as well as for Polish
teachers, in order to facilitate their communication
with children coming from Ukraine and enable them
to better respond to their educational needs. More than
2,500 Polish and Ukrainian teachers have made use of
that training opportunity so far. Poland pays particular
attention to the needs of children with disabilities.
Children with special educational needs, as well as their
parents, can benefit from psychological and pedagogical
assistance in Polish kindergartens and schools.

Poland has supported Ukraine since the very beginning of the war in a multidimensional way. Poland’s
actions are threefold in nature. First, we host and provide support to the biggest community of Ukrainian
refugees; secondly, we operate as a hub for transferring international humanitarian aid through our border
with Ukraine; and thirdly, like other donors, we deliver
humanitarian aid directly to Ukraine. With regard to
the assistance provided by my country, I should like to
point out that the Polish Government at all levels, as
well as Polish society, stood up and showed solidarity in
times of need: 77 per cent of Poles have been involved
in providing various kinds of assistance to Ukraine and
to Ukrainians who have taken refuge in our country.

Poland is also delivering humanitarian aid directly
to Ukraine. We are providing assistance to the health
sector and to internally displaced Ukrainians by
constructing temporary-housing towns for 20,000
internally displaced persons at an estimated cost
of more than €75 million, coming out of the Polish
national budget. Additionally, in mid-November we
opened two mobile medical units, the first of a planned
total of 12 such units. In 2022 Poland has also financed
humanitarian projects delivered by non-governmental
organizations to the tune of €2.5 million in the areas
of food, health, shelter, water, sanitation and hygiene,
education and logistics. According to the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development’s
preliminary estimates for 2022, Poland will spend
approximately 1.5 per cent of its gross domestic product
on humanitarian assistance.

We make every effort to meet the needs of our
guests. It should be underlined that we have chosen
to provide Ukrainian refugees in Poland with the
same public services and social benefits to which
Polish citizens are entitled, including family benefits
for children, free public health care and education.
Ensuring that children continue their education is
one of our top priorities. We are determined to ensure
that all children affected by the war can continue
their education. Depending on preferences, we offer
enrolment in Polish schools or provide the equipment
necessary for distance-learning within the Ukrainian
educational system. For those who wish to continue
their education in Polish schools, preparatory classes
are organized to help refugee children to find their

Those are considerable costs, and the needs are
growing as we speak. Unfortunately, as long as Russia’s
deliberate attacks on Ukraine’s energy infrastructure
continue, disrupting electricity and heating services
and forcing more people to leave their homes in
freezing temperatures, the number of people in urgent
need of humanitarian help will also grow. Poland
strongly condemns the use of harsh winter conditions
as a weapon of war against civilians in Ukraine. We
have been steadfast in our efforts to provide Ukraine
with as much support as possible in securing energy
supplies for people who are suffering due to Russia’s
actions. Polish institutions are in constant contact
with Ukrenergo to coordinate the supply of power
generators to Ukraine within the framework of the

22/25

22-72481

06/12/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

European Network of Transmission System Operators
for Electricity.
Poland once again strongly urges the Russian
Federation to end its war of choice and respect
international humanitarian law. International law,
respect for humanitarian principles and accountability
are core rules for making the humanitarian system
reliable for civilians. That is of particular importance
for the most defenceless victims of this or any
war — children.
Let me end by saying a few words about an
exhibition recently opened by Poland’s Permanent
Mission to the United Nations, entitled “Mom, I don’t
want war!”, organized thanks to the Polish Ministry of
Foreign Affairs’ archives and Ukrainian partners. The
project consists of two incredibly moving testimonies
of war, with historical drawings by Polish children
from 1946 depicting their experiences during the
Second World War under German occupation, and
contemporary drawings by Ukrainian children related
to the current war waged on them by Russia. It shows
that war always looks the same through the eyes of a
child. The similarity between the historical and presentday drawings is striking. There can unfortunately be no
doubt that children in Syria, Yemen, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo or any other conflict zone would
draw the same images of tanks, bombs, fires, ruined
homes and separated families fleeing their homes.
Children see war and understand the nature of it. We
cannot hide it from children. It traumatizes them just as
much as — and sometimes even more than — adults.
But what is also striking is that the children also draw
their hopes and dreams for the future. Let us therefore
hear a message of hope from 7-year-old Illariia from
Zaporizhzhya in Ukraine, who wrote under her drawing:
“I want peace! I want my family to smile like before.
I want to feel the safe sky and bright warm sun over
my head! I want to go to school! I want to freely
give joy and happiness with my violin playing!”
It is high time to deliver on her very simple hopes and
dreams. There is one State in this Chamber that can
make it happen, if it so chooses. As we heard, the peace
plan is on the table.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.

S/PV.9208

Ms. Leendertse (Germany): I would like to thank
you, Madam President, for the opportunity to speak in
the Council today.
It has been more than nine months now since
Russia started its full-scale aggression against Ukraine.
In recent weeks Russia has waged its war with evermore systematic attacks on civilians and civilian
infrastructure, far from the front lines, with a special
focus on disrupting basic services, such as electricity,
water and heat, during winter. To quote my Foreign
Minister, Ms. Annalena Baerbock, the Russian President
is using the cold as a weapon of war — attacking the
most vulnerable people in Ukraine.
Let me be clear. Those attacks are deliberate
attacks on civilian infrastructure. They are a blatant
breach of international humanitarian law. Article 54,
paragraph 2 of the 1977 Additional Protocol I to the
Geneva Conventions stipulates that “It is prohibited
to attack, destroy, remove or render useless objects
indispensable to the survival of the civilian population”.
The humanitarian impact of these attacks is shocking.
Hospitals, schools, water supply stations, residential
buildings and so forth are clearly not military targets
and serve civilian needs only. Deliberately and
systematically destroying the power supply and heating
systems of an entire country in the midst of winter is
simply barbaric and inhumane. I urge Russia to stop that
cruelty immediately. It will be important to coordinate
all the support for Ukraine’s energy infrastructure
among its international partners and allies. After the
successful Group of Seven Foreign Ministers’ meeting
in Bucharest, the summit in Paris on 13 December will
be the next important step.
Germany will continue to stand by Ukraine in order
to end the war. Last Friday Chancellor Scholz spoke
with President Putin. He urged the swift withdrawal
of Russian troops from Ukraine as a precondition for
any diplomatic solution. Germany welcomes the fact
that President Zelenskyy has articulated his vision for
peace in his 10-point peace formula. We will continue
to support Ukraine for as long as it takes. We will help
Ukraine uphold its resilience. We stand committed to
Ukraine’s sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity within its internationally recognized borders.
It is Russia that needs to reverse its course and
immediately and unconditionally stop its aggression
and withdraw its troops.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Skoog.

22-7248123/25

S/PV.9208

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Mr. Skoog: First, I want to congratulate you
personally, Madam President, and India for acceding
to the presidency of the Council. I thank you for the
invitation to speak at today’s debate.
I am speaking on behalf of the European Union and
its member States, as well as on behalf of Montenegro,
the Republic of Moldova, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Georgia, Iceland, Liechtenstein, Andorra and
San Marino.
I want to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator for his briefing this morning. What he
described is a situation that is not just of concern, it is
horrifying. It is the result of a relentless and deliberate
aggression. As lights go up and families gather in many
parts of the world, Kyiv’s Christmas tree is without
light. Russia’s onslaught of rockets is bringing nothing
but darkness. What can parents tell their children to
reassure them that they are safe as the ground shakes
and glass splinters, forcing them to constantly run to
seek refuge in bomb shelters? How can teachers tell
their students that they are safe, when they are not?
How does a doctor reassure her patient when operating
on her in darkness?
At today’s debate, I would like to highlight the
following three points: first, the need to protect
civilians and preserve humanitarian space; secondly,
the deep scars that Russia’s war of aggression against
Ukraine is leaving on its people; and lastly, the global
consequences of Russia’s war.
First, on the need to respect humanitarian law, the
ongoing deliberate and systematic missile attacks on
civilians and civilian infrastructure add to the growing
evidence that Russia is committing war crimes, as has
already been reported by the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine. Civilian casualties
are being reported from across the country. Attacks
around nuclear power plants are bringing us to the
brink of a nuclear disaster. As temperatures drop below
zero, those unlawful attacks are causing a humanitarian
catastrophe. There are also serious challenges to
delivering life-saving humanitarian assistance because
Russia is obstructing access.
The situation is most severe and acute close to
the front lines and in newly liberated areas. It is a
fact that when the contact line moves, as Ukraine
liberates its territories in the south and east and
areas become accessible for humanitarian partners to
24/25

06/12/2022

operate, the needs of the affected people are immense.
The liberation of Kherson oblast, west of the Dnipro
River, demonstrates how Russia destroys critical
infrastructure as it retreats. The indiscriminate shelling
of Kherson and other areas close to the front line further
hampers the delivery of urgently needed humanitarian
aid to civilians.
Secondly, the scars left by Russia’s brutal war
on the people in Ukraine are immense. We are very
concerned about the increasing mental health and
psychosocial well-being and needs of the war-affected
population, and in particular children’s vulnerability to
conflict-related traumas. The sad reality is that Russia’s
war of aggression severely impacts a generation of
Ukrainian children. They suffer the horrors of war
every day and are in dire need of safety, stability and
protection. We therefore need to maintain well-targeted
humanitarian support for the most vulnerable children
in Ukraine in order to ensure access to education,
shelter and health-care services, including psychosocial
support, especially for those who are displaced or have
been separated from their parents and are therefore
particularly at risk.
We commend the bravery and resilience of the
Ukrainian people, especially humanitarian workers
and social workers, including educational and medical
personnel, and call for further support from the
international community for Ukrainian institutions
so as to ensure that these essential staff can stay and
deliver. We also need to sustain support to relevant
international actors engaged in delivering help to
Ukraine and Ukrainians, such as UNICEF, the Office
of the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict and the Office of the Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Thirdly, I note the global consequences of Russia’s
aggression. In the middle of a global food crisis, Russia’s
systematic and deliberate targeting and destruction of
Ukraine’s agricultural production infrastructure, grain
looting and the obstruction of exports are unacceptable
and inexcusable. Those actions exacerbate hunger
and severe food insecurity in the world. We are doing
everything possible to alleviate hunger by getting
agricultural products and fertilizers to world markets.
Together with the Black Sea Grain Initiative, the EU’s
solidarity lanes are making a significant difference
and have enabled Ukraine to export 29 million tons of
grains and other foodstuffs to date. As we heard today,
last week’s launch of the Grain from Ukraine initiative,
22-72481

06/12/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

which has the EU’s full support, also demonstrates
Ukraine’s commitment to helping the most vulnerable.
Two ships filled with grain are already on their way
towards Ethiopia and Somalia — from a country that
is suffering an onslaught of missiles from Russia on a
daily basis.
The EU will continue to stand by Ukraine for as
long as it takes and to the extent necessary. Russia’s
invasion of Ukraine has brought death and unspeakable
suffering. Russia must be held to account for its horrific
crimes, including for its crime of aggression against
a sovereign State. It must also pay financially for the
devastation it has caused.
Let me reiterate one more time our call on Russia
to unconditionally and immediately withdraw all its
military forces from the entire territory of Ukraine,
within its internationally recognized borders.

S/PV.9208

The real healing, which will take generations, can
begin only once the war is over. Ukraine has indicated
that it is ready for a just peace, and the EU certainly
supports all genuine and meaningful efforts in that
respect. In the meanwhile, Russia is actively bombing
civilians and critical infrastructure, deliberately
blocking humanitarian access and using cold and
hunger as weapons.
We are the first to acknowledge what you said,
Madam President, about the global consequences of this
war against Ukraine and that the humanitarian situation
globally is extremely challenging and requires our full
engagement and solidarity. We are proud to be at the
forefront of all global humanitarian efforts, and we do
so hand in hand with the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

22-7248125/25
