UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1998/1096
18 November 1998
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 18 NOVEMBER 1998 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to refer to resolution 1161 (1998) of 9 April 1998, in
which the Security Council requested me to reactivate the International
Commission of Inquiry (Rwanda) and to submit an interim report to the Council on
the initial conclusions of the Commission within three months of its
reactivation, to be followed by a final report containing its recommendations
three months later.
By a letter dated 27 May 1998 (S/1998/438), I informed the President of the
Security Council that I had reactivated the International Commission of Inquiry
and reported on its composition. The Commission’s interim report was submitted
on 19 August 1998 in document S/1998/777.
The purpose of the present letter is to transmit to the Council the final
report of Commission (see annex). As requested by the Council, the report
contains the Commission’s conclusions, as well as its recommendations regarding
possible measures to curb the illegal flow of arms in the Great Lakes region.
In accordance with resolution 1161 (1998), the Commission was financed by a
Trust fund. I would like to take this opportunity to express my gratitude to
the Governments that have contributed to the Fund.
I should be grateful if you would bring this matter to the attention of the
Security Council.

(Signed)

98-35938 (E)

201198

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1998/1096
English
Page 2

Annex
Final report of the International Commission of Inquiry
(Rwanda)

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
The International Commission of Inquiry (Rwanda) was established pursuant
to Security Council resolution 1013 (1995) of 7 September 1995 and it conducted
investigations in the Great Lakes region and elsewhere between October 1995 and
October 1996. The Commission’s reports for that period can be found in
documents S/1996/67, S/1996/195, S/1997/1010 and S/1998/63.
2.
By paragraph 1 of its resolution 1161 (1998) of 9 April 1998, the Security
Council requested the Secretary-General to reactivate the International
Commission of Inquiry, with the following mandate:
"(a) To collect information and investigate reports relating to the
sale, supply and shipment of arms and related matériel to former Rwandan
government forces and militias in the Great Lakes region of central Africa,
in violation of Security Council resolutions 918 (1994), 997 (1995) and
1011 (1995);
"(b) To identify parties aiding and abetting the illegal sale to or
acquisition of arms by former Rwandan government forces and militias,
contrary to the resolutions referred to above;
"(c) To make recommendations relating to the illegal flow of arms in
the Great Lakes region".
3.
In a letter addressed to the President of the Security Council dated
27 May 1998 (S/1998/438), the Secretary-General notified the President of the
Security Council that the membership of the Commission was as follows:
Mahmoud Kassem (Egypt) (Chairman)
Brigadier General Mujahid Alam (Pakistan)
Gilbert Barthe (Switzerland)
Mel Holt (United States of America).
The Commission was assisted in the field by a political officer and a secretary.
4.
On 19 August 1998, in accordance with paragraph 7 of resolution
1161 (1998), the Secretary-General submitted an interim report to the Council on
the initial conclusions of the Commission (S/1998/777).
5.
By the same paragraph, the Council also requested the Secretary-General to
submit a final report containing the recommendations of the Commission three
months later. The present report is submitted in accordance with that request.

/...

S/1998/1096
English
Page 3

6.
During its current operations, the Commission has been financed from the
United Nations Trust Fund for Rwanda established for that purpose, and to which
a number of Governments have contributed. In addition to those Governments
listed in paragraph 60 of the Commission interim report of 19 August
(S/1998/777), the Government of Norway has also pledged $90,000 to the Trust
Fund. The Commission would like to express its appreciation to the Governments
that have contributed to the Trust Fund. Nonetheless, as noted in paragraph 61
of the Commission’s interim report, this method of financing gave rise to
numerous practical and administrative difficulties during day-to-day operations,
and at times caused delays and impaired the Commission’s effectiveness.

II.

DEVELOPMENTS IN THE SITUATION SINCE THE INTERIM REPORT

7.
Since the Commission submitted its interim report in mid-August 1998, the
situation in the central African region has been transformed by the conflict
that erupted there at about that time. The insurgency in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has since seized the cities of Goma, Bukavu
and Uvira in north and south Kivu, captured Kisangani and Kindu, and has
reportedly penetrated towards Mbuji Mayi and south into Shaba.
8.
In response to the rebellion, and to persistent reports that it was being
actively supported by the armed forces of Rwanda and Uganda, some States members
of the Southern African Development Community (SADC) also intervened. The armed
forces of Angola, Namibia and Zimbabwe have been deployed within the territory
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in support of the Government of
President Laurent-Désiré Kabila. Troops from Chad have also been deployed
around Buta and Aketi near the border with the Central African Republic in
support of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
9.
These rapid developments have greatly complicated the task of the
Commission, both by forcing sudden realignments in the alliances among
Governments and armed groups in the subregion, and in making it physically
impossible for the Commission to travel to some of the locations it had hoped to
visit. The war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has also apparently made
some Governments and other sources less willing to cooperate with the Commission
in its investigations.
10. Nevertheless, the Commission has tried to adapt its methods of work to the
new situation and has continued to seek information about illegal supplies of
weapons and ammunition to the former Rwandan government forces and militia in
violation of the arms embargo imposed by the Council. Its efforts to do so are
described below.

III.

MOVEMENTS/ACTIVITIES OF THE FORMER FORCES ARMÉES
RWANDAISES AND INTERAHAMWE

11. In July and August 1994 as the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF) took control
of the capital, Kigali, and the rest of the country, some 1.7 million Rwandan
Hutus, including the perpetrators of the genocide, sought refuge in neighbouring
countries, primarily in eastern Zaire and the western part of the United
/...

S/1998/1096
English
Page 4

Republic of Tanzania. From these areas, between mid-1994 and late 1996, tens of
thousands of the former Forces armées rwandaises (ex-FAR) and Interahamwe
trained, rearmed and plotted to retake control of their country, as documented
in the Commission’s reports (S/1996/67, S/1996/195 and S/1997/1010).
12. This situation changed dramatically in November 1996 with the advent of the
rebellion that overthrew President Mobutu Sese Seko and installed President
Kabila in May 1997. Hundreds of thousands of Rwandan refugees returned to
Rwanda, while others fled further west, either to escape the fighting or as part
of their overall strategy. Also, in December 1996 most of the Rwandan refugees
based in the United Republic of Tanzania were forcibly repatriated, though many
later apparently returned.
13. Thus, when the Commission returned to the region in May 1998, the ex-FAR
and Interahamwe were scattered over a much larger area than when the Commission
departed the region in October 1996. As a result of a six-month investigation
that included extensive travel throughout the region and hundreds of meetings
with government officials, diplomats, humanitarian aid personnel, journalists,
researchers, academics and others, the Commission has made substantial progress
in tracking the activities and movements of the ex-FAR and Interahamwe. The
Commission believes that organized groups of the ex-FAR and Interahamwe were
scattered in the following 10 countries: Angola, Burundi, the Central African
Republic, the Congo, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, the Sudan,
Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia.
14. In addition, the Commission has reason to believe that officers and senior
officials of the ex-FAR and Interahamwe are or were located in other countries
throughout Africa and outside the continent, including Belgium, Benin, Cameroon,
Kenya, South Africa and Togo (see map). However, the Commission has found it
difficult to identify and locate the leadership of the former Rwandan government
forces and militia, who appear to play a coordinating role.
15. It should be noted that the former Rwandan government forces and militia
are sometimes intermingled with other rebel groups, such as the former Forces
armées zaïroises (ex-FAZ), and that constant recruitment, casualties and
desertions make any effort to compile numbers very difficult. Figures should
therefore be treated with caution and should be regarded primarily as
indicative.
16. The Commission was not able to visit all the countries where the ex-FAR
leadership was reported to be, including those in West Africa. However, the
Commission’s inquiries in Kenya incline it to believe that the activities of the
Rwandan Hutu diaspora in Kenya are significant but less intense than they were
in October 1996. The Commission believes that a crackdown by the Government of
Kenya in July 1997 resulted in the departure of many Rwandan Hutu from the
country, and led to the decision of those who remained to assume a lower profile
than before. Nevertheless, the Commission has received credible information
that dozens of ex-FAR officers continue to conduct operations in Kenya,
including recruitment and fund-raising activities, in order to purchase arms
intended for use against the Government of Rwanda.

/...

S/1998/1096
English
Page 5

17. The Commission believes that many ex-FAR and Interahamwe also returned to
Rwanda during the latter half of 1997 and throughout 1998. Whereas they tended
initially to be concentrated in the north-western prefectures of Gisenyi and
Ruhengeri, there were numerous attacks until August 1998 in the prefectures of
Kibuye, Gitarama, Kigali and Byumba. During that period, according to the
Commission’s sources, an estimated 10,000-15,000 ex-FAR and Interahamwe were
active at that time inside Rwanda. Ex-FAR/Interahamwe units were also
reportedly training in the southern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
across the border from Angola.
18. Although it did not prove possible for the Commission to visit the Central
African Republic, the Congo or the Sudan, it has credible information that
organized groups of the ex-FAR and Interahamwe were present in sizeable numbers
in all three countries. The Commission believes that the ex-FAR have settled in
Mboki, Obo and Rafai in the southern part of the Central African Republic along
the border with the Democratic Republic of the Congo, perhaps totalling as many
as 2,000 men. On 11 November, nearly 800 Rwandan men who had been registered as
refugees were repatriated, at their insistence and against the advice of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is believed that they may have been
recruited to fight for the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
19. Largely on the basis of a recent comprehensive report prepared by the
non-governmental organization African Rights, entitled "Rwanda: The Insurgency
in the North-West" issued in September 1998, the Commission is of the opinion
that the number of the ex-FAR and Interahamwe in the Congo were more numerous
still. The Commission understands that elements of the ex-FAR fought on both
sides of the civil war in the Congo. Indeed, some sources report that from
2,000 to 3,000 ex-FAR were training in Oyo. Other credible reports found that
the ex-FAR and Interahamwe comprised a significant percentage of the 11,000
Rwandan Hutu refugees in camps in Kintele, Lukolela, Liranga and Ndjundou.
However, well-placed sources have reported that since the outbreak of the
rebellion in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in August 1998, significant
numbers of Rwandan refugees in the Congo have crossed into the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to enlist in the Forces Armées Congolaises (FAC) in
support of President Kabila. The Commission’s sources have reported that
hundreds of Rwandan Hutus have been openly recruited in Kinshasa and that most
of them originated from the Congo and were the ex-FAR.
20. The Commission has received voluminous reports that the ex-FAR and
Interahamwe are or were present in the Sudan. It has been told from different
and unrelated sources that the ex-FAR and Interahamwe have provided support to
the Sudanese armed forces and to non-State actors in the region from bases in
the Sudan, and have conducted training in that country. The Commission has been
informed from different sources that between 5,000 and 8,000 ex-FAR have been
located in the southern Sudan and training in camps in Juba, Yambio, Amadi and
Ngangala in the south as well as in the capital, Khartoum. The Commission has
also received several reports that the Government of the Sudan has transported
supplies, including arms and related matériel, to the ex-FAR and Interahamwe in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Commission notes that there are
numerous reports that the Government of the Sudan has transported the ex-FAR
among other rebel groups and perhaps some mercenaries to the Democratic Republic
/...

S/1998/1096
English
Page 6

of the Congo in support of President Kabila during the current rebellion there.
The Commission has not been able directly to verify these reports.
21. The ex-FAR are also known to have forged close ties with various Burundian
rebel groups and to have participated in military attacks with them against the
Government of Burundi such as the 31 December 1997 raid on the airport at
Bujumbura (see S/1998/777, para. 57). The Commission is in possession of an
agreement between the ex-FAR and the Forces nationales de libération (FNL)
concluded in Cibitoke prefecture of Burundi in May 1997, which it believes to be
authentic, that a battalion of the ex-FAR agreed to integrate with a formed unit
of FNL. The Commission is also in possession of another document from November
1997 that calls for other ex-FAR members to join this coalition. The numbers
involved are not known.
22. The Commission has also received reports that formed units of the ex-FAR
were present in territory held by the União Nacional para a Independência Total
de Angola (UNITA) within Angola, as well as in the western part of the United
Republic of Tanzania and north-western Zambia. The Commission understands their
numbers to have been approximately 1,500, 3,000-5,000 and up to 2,000,
respectively, although information on the activities of the ex-FAR and
Interahamwe in Angola is relatively limited.
23. The Commission received conflicting reports on the presence of the ex-FAR
inside Uganda. While it is known that the ex-FAR have conducted raids inside
Uganda along with Ugandan rebels from across the border in the north-eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, it is not clear if they are
actually based in Uganda.
24. Since the rebellion in the Democratic Republic of the Congo began in
August 1998, however, most of the ex-FAR and Interahamwe appear to have
converged on the Democratic Republic of the Congo from the various countries to
which they had been scattered. The Commission’s sources estimate that there
were already about 5,000 to 8,000 in the north-eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and 10,000 in the south, and the Commission believes these
forces have been substantially augmented in the past two months. The Commission
has received credible information that the majority of the Armée pour la
libération du Rwanda (ALIR), which comprises at least a significant part of the
ex-FAR, have also left Rwanda for the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and have
been supplemented by recruits arriving principally from the Central African
Republic, the Congo and the Sudan. The Commission believes, on the basis of the
information presented in detail below, that since the outbreak of the insurgency
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the ex-FAR and Interahamwe have been
receiving significantly enhanced support from some of the Governments of the
region.
25. According to multiple sources the Commission encountered throughout Africa,
a new factor is now present in the ex-FAR’s financial dealings. Partly in order
to help finance their arms purchases, members of the ex-FAR and Interahamwe,
like some other armed groups in the subregion, are directly involving themselves
in the narcotics trade. Information available to the Commission suggests that
Mandrax destined for South Africa is smuggled from India into Kenya and the
United Republic of Tanzania, mainly through Mombasa and Dar es Salaam. Most of
/...

S/1998/1096
English
Page 7

the drugs are then shipped to Europe. Narcotics are also said to come from
Latin America to southern Africa. Numerous reports implicate some prominent
members of the ex-FAR and Interahamwe based in Mombasa and Dar es Salaam.

IV.

ACTIVITIES OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION OF INQUIRY
A.

Activities in Belgium

26. From 22 September to 4 October 1998, two Commission members visited Belgium
to investigate reports that Belgian airports and middlemen had been involved in
the export of arms destined for the former Rwandan government forces. The
members also participated in an international conference on international
security with a separate session on the trafficking of illegal arms. On
29 September, the members met with Eric Dericke, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Belgium, who reiterated his Government’s strong support for the
Commission’s work. The Minister emphasized that the Commission’s mandate was
too narrow and that it should become more permanent in order not to waste time
and lose contacts between successive reactivations. If the mandate of the
Commission were to be extended, he would welcome the participation of the
Commission at meetings of the Belgian Government’s inter-ministerial committee
on arms trafficking. The Minister assured the Commission that the Government of
Belgium would continue to provide financial support to the United Nations Trust
Fund for Rwanda.
27. On 28 and 29 September, the two members of the Commission visited the
airports of Oostende, Zaventem and Gosselies, where Belgian airport authorities
explained in detail the efforts they were making to ensure that the airports
were not used in the trafficking of arms. At Oostende, the authorities had
banned 32 cargo aircraft by the end of 1997 from operating there because of
excessive noise pollution. Some of these aircraft had reportedly been involved
in the transportation of illegal arms shipments to central Africa.
28. The Commission members also met with sources developed in previous visits
to Belgium and who had been found to be reliable. These sources indicated that
the former Rwandan government forces had developed links with the Government of
the Sudan, and that they appeared to have established themselves in Kinshasa and
elsewhere in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, apparently with the support
of the Government of President Kabila.

B.

Activities in Burundi

29. The Commission visited Bujumbura from 12 to 18 September 1998 in order to
follow up strong indications, reported in its report of 19 August (S/1998/777),
of close links between the ex-FAR and Interahamwe and Burundian rebel groups.
30. During its visit, the Commission met with the Minister of Defence,
Colonel Alfred Nkurunziza; the Minister of the Interior and Public Security,
Colonel Ascenson Twagiramungu; the Minister of Transportation, Posts and
Telecommunications, Colonel Epitace Bayaganakandi; the Minister of Justice,

/...

S/1998/1096
English
Page 8

Thérence Sinunguruza; as well as officials in the various ministries, diplomatic
sources and others.
31. The Ministers and other government officials spoke in detail about the
activities of the Burundian insurgents, making it clear that arms were easily
available in the subregion from a number of suppliers. The Minister of Defence
confirmed information already available to the Commission that Rwandan fighters
thought to be connected to the ex-FAR had participated in the attack on the
airport at Bujumbura in January 1998, and that they were currently operating
together in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

C.

Activities in Ethiopia

32. From 8 to 11 September 1998, the Commission visited Ethiopia to discuss the
implications of the recent Organization of African Unity (OAU) resolution on
small arms; to discuss the role that might be played by the OAU Central Organ of
the Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution in limiting
arms flows; and to meet with the International Panel of Eminent Personalities to
Investigate the Genocide in Rwanda. The Commission also met with the OAU
Secretary-General, Salim Ahmed Salim, as well as with diplomats from a number of
African countries, United Nations officials in Addis Ababa and others.
33. On 10 September, the Commission met with the Troika of the Central Organ of
the OAU Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution: the
Ambassador of Burkina Faso, the Chairman of the Central Organ; the Ambassador of
Zimbabwe; and the Ambassador of Algeria. The Commission also met with several
of the Ambassadors of the 15 States members of the Central Organ. They
acknowledged that the Central Organ was still not functioning as hoped, but that
progress was being made, and that the Security Council and the international
community needed to show an enhanced commitment if the Central Organ was to be
effective. They said that OAU was going to commission a study to evaluate the
Conflict Management Centre.
34. On 8 September, the Commission met with Abdalla Bujra, Chief Executive
Officer and Head of the Secretariat of the International Panel of Eminent
Personalities to Investigate the Genocide in Rwanda. The Chairman briefed
Mr. Bujra extensively on the Commission’s mandate and work and pledged the
Commission’s full cooperation. Mr. Bujra recommended that the Commission attend
the first meeting of the Panel to share its expertise and answer questions.
However, as the first meeting of the Panel was scheduled to take place at the
time when the Commission would be departing for New York, it was not possible to
attend.
35. The Commission’s various interlocutors in Addis Ababa generally took the
view that a regional approach was required to address the problem of illegal
arms flows. Weapons from one subregion spread to other parts of Africa and
fuelled other conflicts, while conflicts in other regions resulted in the
transfer of weapons to the Great Lakes region. A holistic approach that looked
at socio-economic aspects of the conflict as well as the role of other rebel
movements and Governments was seen to be necessary in coming to grips with the
problem. The Ambassadors of the Sudan and Senegal talked at length about the
/...

S/1998/1096
English
Page 9

need to have a new mandate to cover the whole region to make further progress in
curbing the flow of illegal arms in Africa.
36. On 10 September, the Commission met with a representative of the European
Union (EU). The Chairman of the Commission suggested that the EU African
Working Group might wish to consider ways to persuade the Governments of Eastern
Europe, especially those that aspired to full EU membership, to curb illegal
activities of companies and individuals within their territory vis-à-vis the
arms trade. The Chairman further suggested that EU members might consider
taking stronger measures to control customs and excise, given the problems some
of its members have acknowledged in combating the illegal trafficking of arms.

D.

Activities in Kenya

37. In its interim report, the Commission described its efforts to secure
meetings with senior officials of the Government of Kenya. Immediately
following the issuance of the report, on 20 August 1998, the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs contacted the Commission to expedite its meetings with the officials
concerned.
38. On 26 August, the Commission met with the Attorney-General, Amos Wako. The
Attorney-General pledged his full cooperation in matters that fell within his
jurisdiction.
39. The Attorney-General said that the Government was very concerned about
reports that its territory was being used for the illegal trafficking of weapons
and other activities intended to destabilize the region, and that the Government
would do everything in its power to investigate and put an end to such
activities. Mr. Wako said that he was working closely with the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and that there were good relations between the
Government of Kenya and the Tribunal. He acknowledged the perception that
somehow the Rwandan community had learned of the plans to arrest certain
individuals prior to the police being able to apprehend the suspects. He
believed the Rwandan information network to be quite sophisticated and might
have managed to learn in advance of the intentions of the Government of Kenya.
As a result, efforts had been made to keep information concerning impending
arrests to a smaller, higher-ranking group of government officials. He said
that he was not aware that Rwandans in Kenya were recruiting young men from the
community to join the insurgency, and requested specific information to back up
the allegation so that he could investigate the matter. The Commission provided
the Attorney-General with the information requested in writing on 7 September.
40. On 11 September, a member of the Commission met with the General Manager of
Operations and the Manager for Security of the Kenya Airports Authority, who
assured the Commission of their full assistance and cooperation.
41. On 15 September, the Commissioner of Customs and Excise and his Deputy
informed the Commission that they had no knowledge of smuggling of arms or other
military matériel passing through Kenya’s ports, and expressed readiness to
arrange a visit for the Commission to Mombasa.

/...

S/1998/1096
English
Page 10

42. On 30 September, the Government assigned a senior protocol officer to
assist the Commission with its meetings. However, it did not prove possible to
arrange meetings with the Police Commissioner and the Mombasa Port Authority
officials.
43. On 19 October, the Chairman, accompanied by Brigadier Alam, met with
President Daniel arap Moi. The Attorney-General, Mr. Wako, also attended the
meeting. The President stressed that Kenyan law did not permit the illegal
importation or exportation of arms. Concerning the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the resulting fluidity in the subregion, the President
referred to the summit meeting of Heads of State on East African Cooperation
that had taken place at Nairobi the previous day, 18 October, to discuss the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. At that meeting, the Heads
of State of Kenya, Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania had, inter alia,
called for the orderly withdrawal of all foreign troops from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the deployment of a neutral international peacekeeping
force under the auspices of the United Nations and OAU. President Moi stated
his view that the peacekeeping force should be deployed on the borders with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi, Rwanda and Uganda to ensure security
for all countries, including minority ethnic groups. As for the withdrawal of
forces, President Moi stated that those forces which had not been invited by the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo should withdraw first.
44. On 27 October, three members of the Commission met with Z. K. A. Cheruiyot,
Permanent Secretary of Provincial Administration and Internal Security in the
Office of the President. Mr. Cheruiyot is also in charge of the police and
intelligence services. Since the Commission was about to leave for New York in
order to complete its report, it was not in a position to take advantage of the
Permanent Secretary’s offer of assistance in arranging meetings with other
senior government officials, but agreed, subject to any decision to be made by
the Security Council concerning the future of the Commission, to resume contacts
with him at a later date if possible.
45. Furthermore, the Commission has received information that a senior Rwandan
Anglican Church official is allegedly operating a recruitment and intelligencegathering network in Nairobi. Members of the Rwandan Hutu opposition party the
Rassemblement pour le retour des refugiés et de la démocratie au Rwanda (RDR)
are also said to be involved, and are using the communication facilities of the
senior Church official to carry out liaison with their base in Belgium. These
activities are partly financed by some of the funds allocated to help refugees
in distress. Before and since the outbreak of the rebellion in Kivu,
individuals related to this network have been trying to convince young Rwandan
male refugees to undergo military training in camps in the United Republic of
Tanzania. During October 1998, according to information available to the
Commission, the Rwandan extremists in Nairobi claimed to have 7,000 recruits
ready to attack Rwanda from its bases in the United Republic of Tanzania.

/...

S/1998/1096
English
Page 11

E.

Activities in Mozambique

46. In response to general information to the effect that arms trafficking in
Africa, including the traffic in illegal arms to the ex-FAR, is often conducted
overland, the Commission visited Maputo from 11 to 15 October.
47. During its visit, the Commission met with the Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation, Hipólito Pereira Zózimo Patrício; Paulo Muxanga,
Minister of Transportation and Communication, together with the Directors of
Maritime and Ports, Civil Aviation and Road Transportation; Colonel Henrique
Banze, the Director of National Policy in the Ministry of Defence; and
Armando Mário Correia, Secretary-General of the Ministry of Interior, as well as
the Deputy Director of Internal Operations for State Security, C. S. Mutota.
48. From its discussions with these government officials and with other
sources, including well-informed members of civil society, the Commission formed
the impression that small arms were commonly available in Mozambique and that
they circulated freely in the subregion across national boundaries despite
efforts by SADC to prevent their proliferation. The Government had no
information on the illegal supply of weapons to the ex-FAR.

F.

Activities in Rwanda

49. Since the issuance of its report of 19 August (S/1998/777), the
Commission’s continuing discussions with a wide range of sources in Rwanda,
including military and intelligence officers, have reflected the rapid and often
confusing shifts in the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
within Rwanda itself. In many cases, the information provided to the
Commission, though often detailed, was impossible to verify in the time
available, and in view of the fighting that has spread across the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
50. A well-placed military intelligence source informed the Commission in
detail of the activities of Rwandan government troops in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, including their involvement in the capture of Kindu. During that
operation, according to the source, they had taken some 400 prisoners, including
Sudanese soldiers, Ugandan rebels (including the son of Idi Amin Dada),
Burundian rebels and members of the ex-FAR. The group of soldiers sent by
Khartoum included the ex-FAR with high-ranking officers and Sudanese soldiers,
it was alleged. The Commission has not been able to verify these statements.
51. The same official told the Commission of the ex-FAR’s efforts to obtain
weapons with the help of other Governments. The information provided concerned
meetings held by the ex-FAR and others in July, August and September 1998 aimed
at establishing supply channels for arms from overseas to the ex-FAR. The first
shipment was believed to have arrived from East Asia to the port of Beira
between 6 and 10 August 1998. The arms were to have been transported to
Zimbabwe and onwards to Lake Tanganyika, but the final destination was not
known. The official also said that in mid-September 1998 a group of ex-FAR
officers, business people including the Rwandan businessman Felicien Kabuga, the
ex-FAZ and officials from another Government had gone to south-east Asia to
/...

S/1998/1096
English
Page 12

purchase arms.
later date.

The source promised to make available more information at a

52. The same source told the Commission member that at the beginning of
September the Minister of Justice of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Mwenze Kongolo, had visited Nairobi to seek the support of the Government of
Kenya. While in Nairobi the Minister had allegedly met senior officials of the
former Government and armed forces of Rwanda such as Lieutenant-Colonel
Jean-Bosco Ruhorahoza, Casimir Bizimungu and Rafiki Hyacinthe Nsengiyumva, to
ask the ex-FAR to launch attacks on Goma, which they did. The source said that
besides Felicien Kabuga, the former Director of the Rwandan Central Bank,
Denis Ntirugilimbabazi, was supporting the ex-FAR financially.
53. The Commission also received detailed but sometimes conflicting reports
from other sources concerning apparent changes in the modus operandi, the
armament and the composition of insurgent groups within Rwanda, which now
appeared to make more widespread use of women and child fighters. These changes
suggested that trained and experienced male fighters were increasingly fighting
within the Democratic Republic of the Congo, rather than inside Rwanda.
54. On the other hand, according to other sources, the insurgency was
continuing to gather strength in north-western Rwanda and now engulfed the
prefectures of Ruhengeri, Kibuye, Gitarama and Gisenyi.
55. Other sources alleged that the ex-FAR within Rwanda had received shipments
of arms across Lake Kivu before the outbreak of the rebellion in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and described the weaponry said to have been supplied to
them, as well as the supply routes. The same source said that military training
camps for Burundian and Rwandan rebels were located in Lukole (in the national
park), Bayarumulu (near Nyakanasi), Karagwe and Kibondo in the United Republic
of Tanzania. Some of the ex-FAR had received training in the northern Sudan and
were now fighting in the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
56. On 15 October, a source with whom the Commission had met previously and
whom it had found to be reliable said the insurgency in the north-west comprised
now a greater number of uniformed and armed men. The Banyamulenge rebellion in
the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo had not provoked any
increase in the fighting inside Rwanda in August, since most of the ex-FAR had
withdrawn to fight against the rebellion. Most of the experienced troops of the
Rwandan Patriotic Army (RPA) formerly stationed in western Rwanda were now in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. At the same time, said the source, the
Government of Rwanda had recently had to reinduct demobilized troops in order to
deploy them inside Rwanda.

G.

Activities in South Africa

57. The Commission returned to South Africa from 15 to 17 October 1998 to
follow up on the meetings it had held there from 22 to 29 July.
58. Senior researchers from the Institute for Security Studies, who met with
the Commission on 16 October, believed that ex-FAR and Interahamwe fighters from
/...

S/1998/1096
English
Page 13

the Congo had been recruited in Kinshasa to help defend Kindu. They also said
that it was their understanding that elements of the ex-FAR and Interahamwe had
undertaken joint operations with the Burundian insurgent group, the Front pour
la défence de la democratie (FDD), and with the Allied Democratic Front, a
Ugandan anti-government group.
59. The senior researchers also promised to provide the Commission with
documents describing a $2 million shipment of weapons from a company based in
south-eastern Europe destined for the Great Lakes region.
60. The Commission also met with the Deputy Director-General of the South
African Secret Service, who clarified and corroborated information already
available to the Commission concerning the insurrection in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the changing fortunes of the ex-FAR.

H.

Activities in the United Republic of Tanzania

Arusha
61. Following its meetings with officials of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda during June and July, the Commission requested permission
from the Registrar to interview specific detainees believed to possess
information pertinent to the Commission’s mandate. However, despite the
Tribunal’s full cooperation, it did not prove possible to interview any of the
detainees who, on the advice of their legal counsel, declined to meet with the
Commission.
62. However, during their visit to Arusha on 19 and 20 October, two members of
the Commission met with Tribunal officials, who provided useful information
pertinent to the Commission’s mandate. In particular, the Commission was told
that ex-FAR General Bizimungu and a number of his high-ranking officers were
currently part of the senior staff in the army of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
Dar es Salaam
63. The Commission was able to visit Dar es Salaam from 8 to 10 October, and
met with officials of the Government of the United Republic of Tanzania to
discuss reports that the Rwandan Hutus were receiving military training in
Lukole and Karagwe in the western part of the United Republic of Tanzania.
64. On 8 October, the Commission met with the Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Emmanuel A. Mwambulukutu. Like other officials of the Government of
the United Republic of Tanzania interviewed by the Commission, Mr. Mwambulukutu
spoke at length about the difficult and unforgiving situation that the United
Republic of Tanzania found itself in because of its policy towards refugees. He
said that the United Republic of Tanzania was a "victim" of its own hospitality
and that his Government was "very much disgusted" with the unfounded allegations
that military training was occurring in the camps. The Minister recalled that
an investigation jointly conducted by his Government and UNHCR in May 1997 had

/...

S/1998/1096
English
Page 14

found no arms in the camp or training being conducted there. However, he said
that the camps were neither fenced-in nor monitored 24 hours a day.
65. Information provided to the Commission by United Nations officials, one of
whom had had first-hand experience in Angola, appeared to confirm the
Commission’s understanding that some 2,000 to 2,500 Rwandan refugees had
unsuccessfully tried to enter Angola in June/July 1997 after fleeing Uvira in
October 1996 and instead had settled in the Maheba refugee camp in Zambia. The
majority of this group was said to be ex-FAR and Interahamwe.
66. During its visit to the United Republic of Tanzania, the Commission also
met with F. S. Busigara, Commissioner for Customs and Excise and his deputy;
D. J. Daudi, Deputy Commissioner of Police; and W. Kaihula, Acting Director of
the Refugee Department in the Ministry of Home Affairs. These officials stated
that they had no knowledge of any illegal arms shipments being detected at any
Tanzanian ports. However, they also described the difficulties involved in
policing the activities of refugees resident in the United Republic of Tanzania
with the limited resources available to the Government. They stated that there
was no evidence to support continuing allegations of military training taking
place in the forest outside the camps.

I.

Activities in Zambia

67. A member of the Commission visited Lusaka from 27 September to 2 October to
obtain information the Government of Zambia had promised to furnish during the
earlier visit paid by the Commission in July and to pursue various leads. The
Commissioner had a number of meetings with government officials, diplomats and
private individuals.
68. The Commissioner found a unanimity of views that the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo was now supporting the ex-FAR and Interahamwe
and was fomenting anti-Tutsi hatred. He also received detailed information on
trends in arms trafficking and the financing of illicit activities in the
region, as well as data concerning air traffic and cargo operations.
69. On 28 September, a reliable source, subsequently supported by another,
informed the Commissioner that the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo was training and rearming the ex-FAR and Interahamwe and that it had been
deploying them into military operations, including attacks on Goma. The source
estimated that up to 10,000 ex-FAR and Interahamwe, some of them new recruits,
were present throughout the Democratic Republic of the Congo. At the same time,
the mass media controlled by the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo was spreading hatred against the Tutsis, giving rise to fears of another
genocide.

J.

Activities in Zimbabwe

70. In order to supplement its knowledge of arms trafficking throughout
southern Africa in general and its understanding of Zimbabwe’s involvement in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the context of the ex-FAR in particular,
/...

S/1998/1096
English
Page 15

the Commission repeatedly but vainly sought an invitation from the Government of
Zimbabwe to visit the country. Eventually, a member of the Commission decided
to visit Harare from 2 to 7 October and held a series of meetings with
government officials, diplomats and others.
71. In a meeting on 5 October, the Permanent Secretary for Foreign Affairs,
Andrew Mtetwa, stressed that his Government wished to assist the Commission but
that it was currently preoccupied with events in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. He suggested the Commission meet with the SADC Inter-State Defence and
Security Committee, which possessed information on illicit arms trafficking in
the region.

K.

Contacts with Bulgaria

72. On 7 September 1998, the Chairman wrote to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Bulgaria to inquire about the alleged involvement of two airline companies
registered in Bulgaria in delivering weapons to the ex-FAR. A reply has not yet
been received.

L.

Contacts with France

73. On 13 August 1998, the Chairman wrote to the French Minister for Foreign
Affairs to inquire if the Government of France was aware of the findings of the
Attorney-General of Switzerland concerning the Banque national de Paris and the
South African arms broker, Willem Ehlers, as described in the Commission’s
report (S/1998/63, paras. 16-27). The Commission also asked if the Government
of France were investigating the matter. The Commission has not yet received a
response from the Government.

M.

Contacts with the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland

74. On 18 August 1998, the Commission wrote to Her Majesty’s Customs and Excise
and the British Minister of State for Foreign Affairs informing them of reports
it had received about the activities in 1994 of a British aviation company,
Mil-Tec Corporation, in apparent violation of the United Nations arms embargo
against the ex-FAR and Interahamwe. The Commission asked if the Government of
the United Kingdom was aware of these allegations and if so what action had been
taken. By a letter dated 9 October 1998, Tony Lloyd, Minister of State for
Foreign Affairs, explained that the Government of the United Kingdom was aware
of the allegations contained in the Commission’s correspondence and had fully
investigated the matter. The Government had concluded that there had been
delays and omissions in implementing the United Nations arms embargo on Rwanda
in the United Kingdom, its dependent Territories and crown dependencies, which
included the Isle of Man on which the Mil-Tec Corporation was registered. It
had also concluded that "because the legislation imposing the embargo in the
United Kingdom did not fully cover the supply of arms to neighbouring countries,
the Customs and Excise investigation was unable to take forward criminal
proceedings against Mil-Tec for a breach of the United Kingdom law". Mr. Lloyd
/...

S/1998/1096
English
Page 16

reiterated the Government’s continued cooperation with the work of the
Commission.

V.

UNFINISHED BUSINESS

75. For various reasons, primarily the practical difficulties and rapid shifts
in the policy of several Governments that arose from the outbreak of armed
insurrection in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in August 1998, it was
impossible for the Commission to proceed with many important aspects of its
inquiries. The Commission is also bound to note that many Governments
cooperated with it with apparent reluctance and considerable delay.
76. As indicated in its report of 19 August (S/1998/777), the Commission has
continued its attempts to visit the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Though
the initial response from the Government of President Kabila was favourable, its
attitude towards the Commission evidently shifted as the Government became
increasingly hostile towards Rwanda and Uganda. In direct correlation, the
Government’s position vis-à-vis the former Rwandan government forces, who have
remained immutably opposed to the current Government of Rwanda, has likewise
evolved. The Commission would have welcomed the opportunity to discuss with the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo repeated allegations that it
has collaborated in the rearming and training the ex-FAR but, despite repeated
requests, has never received an invitation to visit Kinshasa.
77. The Commission’s efforts to locate the ex-FAR and Interahamwe and
investigate their activities would have benefited from visits to Angola, the
Central African Republic, the Congo, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Sudan, none of which it proved possible to visit under the circumstances.
Additionally, the Commission would have liked to visit the refugee camps and
environs in the western part of the United Republic of Tanzania. However, this
was not possible owing to the belated response of the Government. Further
information might also be available in Burundi, Rwanda, South Africa and Uganda,
where all four Governments have shown themselves willing to assist the
Commission in its investigations.
78. Lack of time has prevented the Commission from following up reports it has
obtained concerning the origin of the weapons sold or supplied to the former
Rwandan armed forces and militia. The primary source for these weapons appears
to be mainly, but not exclusively, countries in Eastern Europe and East Asia.
Another avenue left unexplored for lack of time and resources concerned the
activities of air cargo companies, many of which are reported to be based in
some countries in Eastern and South-eastern Europe.
79. Lack of time has also prevented the Commission from following up adequately
on voluminous information it has received from a number of Governments and other
sources. This information includes documents received from the Government of
Burundi and data on air traffic and cargo operations collected from Zambia and
elsewhere. Nor has the Commission been able to inspect weapons captured from
the ex-FAR and to trace their serial numbers. Replies from some Governments to
requests for information are also still outstanding.

/...

S/1998/1096
English
Page 17

80. It would also be desirable to ensure continued links with Governments and
regional groups concerned with this issue. In particular, the Commission was
invited to participate in the Inter-Ministerial Committee on Small Arms of the
Government of Belgium, and would have wished to meet with the SADC Inter-State
Defence and Security Committee, as well as with the EU African Working Group.
It might also be helpful for the United Nations to maintain links with the OAU
International Panel of Eminent Personalities to Investigate the Genocide in
Rwanda. Moreover, the Commission regrets not having had the opportunity to
continue its work in Kenya and the United Republic of Tanzania in view of the
belated response of those Governments. In addition, the Commission is still
awaiting a response from the Government of Zimbabwe.
81. It is important to state here that, in view of the reasons explained above,
the present report should be considered as incomplete.

VI.

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
A.

Conclusions

82. The situation in the Great Lakes region is rapidly heading towards a
catastrophe of incalculable consequences which requires urgent, comprehensive
and decisive measures on the part of the international community. The danger of
a repetition of tragedy comparable to the Rwandan genocide of 1994, but on a
subregional scale, cannot be ruled out.
83. The Commission first began investigating reports that the former Rwandan
government forces and militia were continuing to receive arms and ammunition in
violation of the embargo imposed by the Security Council in October 1995. At
the Council’s request, the Commission has now conducted three tours of duty in
the subregion and submitted a total of six reports, including the present
document.
84. During the past three years, the former Rwandan government forces and
militia have achieved an extraordinary transformation of their position. In
late 1994 the former Rwandan government forces and militia, having been
violently expelled from Rwanda by the victorious RPF, were in serious disarray,
and stood revealed as the perpetrators of a terrible genocide against unarmed
civilians. Despite reports that began to emerge during 1995 and 1996 that they
were regrouping and rearming themselves, the ex-FAR and Interahamwe remained an
international pariah.
85. As their strength grew, the cross-border raids conducted by the ex-FAR and
Interahamwe from Zaire into Rwanda to attack the Government of Rwanda and
survivors of the genocide became increasingly well-organized and effective.
However, the insurgents suffered a major setback when the Banyamulenge, with
support from Rwanda, attacked the camps in north and south Kivu and launched the
rebellion that led to the seizure of power in Kinshasa by Mr. Kabila in
May 1997.
86. During the fighting that accompanied the violent transfer of power in
Zaire, the ex-FAR and militia were widely scattered. However, the changing
/...

S/1998/1096
English
Page 18

alliances in and around the Democratic Republic of the Congo have unexpectedly
worked to the advantage of the former Rwandan government forces.
87. Persistent reports received by the Commission from numerous sources across
southern Africa overwhelmingly attest to this transformation: that the ex-FAR
and Interahamwe, once a defeated and dispersed remnant, have now become a
significant component of the international alliance against the Congolese rebels
and their presumed sponsors, Rwanda and Uganda. The Commission is convinced
that the ex-FAR and Interahamwe have continued to receive arms and ammunition,
both through their close links with other armed groups in Angola, Burundi,
Uganda and elsewhere, and most recently, from the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Despite the imposition upon them of a Security Council
arms embargo, which has remained in force since the genocide of 1994, the ex-FAR
and Interahamwe have now become in effect the allies of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and its allies, the Governments of Angola,
Chad, Namibia and Zimbabwe. The new relationship has conferred a form of
legitimacy on the Interahamwe and the ex-FAR. This is a profoundly shocking
state of affairs.
88. The free flow of small arms into and within Africa is a major long-term
cause of insecurity and instability in the central African subregion. It is
fuelled by the presence of a multitude of rebel groups in the Great Lakes region
who enjoy a large measure of governmental support. Besides the ex-FAR, the
Interahamwe and ALIR, there may be up to 20 other rebel groups active not only
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (see appendix II), but also in Angola,
Burundi, the Sudan and Uganda. These armed groups exchange arms freely among
themselves and receive them from a variety of outside elements. This connection
has weakened the effectiveness of the two embargoes imposed by the Security
Council on the ex-FAR and Interahamwe and UNITA. Serious consideration should
therefore be given to devising a regional solution to the problem of illicit
arms trafficking in order to confront this grave challenge to international
peace and security.
89. Most of the African Governments with which the Commission has raised this
question neither monitor nor report on the sale or movement of small arms on
their territories or across their borders. Nor are there treaties or
international controls governing the proliferation of small arms, as there are
for some other weapons. Most African countries, and in particular the countries
in the Great Lakes region, do not have the expertise, training or resources to
monitor the illegal flow of arms, and some clearly lack the political will to do
so.
90. Where there are laws, they are often circumvented by arms dealers who make
use of third countries to arrange arms shipments. Governments should be
encouraged to tighten the scope and application of the relevant laws in order to
close that loophole.
91. During the past three years, but particularly during the past six months of
its present mandate, the Commission has also been struck by the damage done to
stability and security in Africa by the uncontrolled flow of small arms. These
arms, like the unemployed young men who bear them, cross borders rapidly and
without hindrance to wreak havoc on the entire subregion. This destructive
/...

S/1998/1096
English
Page 19

process has been hastened by the close links that have been established among
the armed groups, the armies of losers, which proliferate throughout central
Africa, and of which the former Rwandan government forces are the most violent,
well-armed, well-organized and dangerous. The Commission therefore also wishes
to make recommendations that would address the broader problem of small-arms
flows in Africa, which would require subsequently a broader mandate to encompass
all its aspects.
92. The Commission is disturbed at reports that some members of the ex-FAR and
Interahamwe are engaged in smuggling drugs into Africa, primarily to help
finance their arms purchases. This worrying new development, which blurs the
lines between crime and military insurgency, suggests the need to adopt a
broader approach in addressing these linked questions.
93. The Commission is aware that the former Rwandan government forces and
militias abused the humanitarian assistance provided to Rwandan refugees,
especially by UNHCR, and were accused of using the camps in eastern Zaire as
bases from which to attack Rwanda. The Commission looks forward to the outcome
of the deliberations of the Security Council’s thematic group on the security
and neutrality of refugee camps. In particular, the Commission would urge
maximum support for measures to be taken by the international community to
support the efforts of refugee host countries to ensure the security and
civilian and humanitarian character of refugee camps, including in the areas of
law enforcement, disarmament of armed elements, curtailment of the flow of arms
in refugee camps, separation of refugees from other persons who do not qualify
for the international protection accorded refugees and the demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants.

B.

Recommendations

94. In its report to the Security Council dated 14 March 1996 (S/1996/195), the
Commission made a number of recommendations to the Council. These concerned
mechanisms to monitor and ensure the implementation of Security Council
resolutions, to gather information and to preserve evidence; measures designed
to foster stability in the subregion; confidence-building measures designed to
reduce the flow of arms in the subregion; and measures to deter further
violations of the embargo. While some of these may have been overtaken by
events, many remain important and valid, and the Commission invites the Council
to reconsider them accordingly.
95. In particular, the Commission invited the Security Council to endorse the
conclusion reached at a summit meeting of African Heads of State held at Cairo
in November 1995 by which the participating Heads of State viewed with deep
concern the use of radio broadcasts to spread hate and fear, and pledged to take
all possible action to terminate illegal and inflammatory radio broadcasts from
one country into another.
96. The Commission recommends that the Security Council recall that the former
Rwandan government forces and militia were responsible for the genocide in
Rwanda in 1994, in which more than half a million people, mostly civilians, were
massacred. It must now be recognized that the ex-FAR and Interahamwe are a
/...

S/1998/1096
English
Page 20

significant player in the current conflict in central Africa, and that any
long-term solution to the conflict must find ways of dealing with them.
97. The wording of resolutions 918 (1994) of 17 May 1994, 997 (1995) of
9 June 1995 and 1011 (1995) of 16 August 1995, which set out the embargo, should
be made clearer and more explicit. The embargo was originally imposed on
"Rwanda". In June 1995 and again in August 1995, the Council adjusted the
embargo on the sale or supply of arms to apply to "persons in the States
neighbouring Rwanda if such sale or supply is for the purpose of the use of such
arms ... within Rwanda". The Commission therefore invites the Council to
reaffirm its embargo on the former Rwandan government forces and militia,
irrespective of the purpose for which the weapons or matériel are to be used.
Given the involvement of the ex-FAR and Interahamwe in the Rwandan genocide and
the ethnic dimensions of the current conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Council may also wish to call upon the Governments engaged in the
conflict to renounce and dissociate themselves from the former Rwandan
government forces and militia and from any appeal to racial hatred.
98. In its interim report (S/1998/777), the Commission submitted evidence that
the ex-FAR and Interahamwe were closely collaborating with armed groups of
insurgents from other countries. The fact that the ex-FAR and Interahamwe are
now the de facto ally of a number of African Governments fighting in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is a far more serious matter. The Commission
therefore recommends that the Security Council call upon the Governments
concerned to resolve the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
peacefully. The Council should also call upon the Governments concerned to
refrain from supplying the former Rwandan government forces and militia with
weapons, or participating with them in planning or conducting any military
operations. Ultimately, the Council may also wish to consider inviting the
Governments of the subregion to consider a moratorium on the manufacture and
trade of small arms. Such a proposal might be discussed at a peace conference
convened to address the totality of problems in the subregion. In this context,
the Commission notes with interest the declaration of a moratorium on light
weapons declared by the Authority of the Heads of State and Government of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) meeting at Abuja on
31 October 1998. The Authority adopted a moratorium on the importation,
exportation and manufacture of light weapons in ECOWAS member States and called
upon OAU and the United Nations to ensure the adoption of similar steps in other
regions of Africa.
99. Much attention has been devoted to the evils of unchecked arms flows in
Africa. At the same time, the existence of groups of armed, unemployed men, is
grievously destabilizing for the region. This is especially the case when those
groups combine together and with Governments to exacerbate any conflict in which
they are involved, and to spread conflict from one subregion to the next.
100. The Commission therefore recommends that the Security Council recognize
that the proliferation and activities of armed groups harm the interests of all
Governments, and calls upon all Governments to refrain from harbouring,
collaborating with or supplying such groups.

/...

S/1998/1096
English
Page 21

101. In the longer term, steps must be taken to disarm, demobilize and
reintegrate into their various societies the members of the armed groups,
including the former Rwandan government forces. The Commission understands that
this, if it were ever undertaken, would be an extremely expensive, difficult and
risky operation, which would require several years of effort, and for which
there seems to be very little political will. Nevertheless, the existence and
activities of these groups are so harmful to the security and stability of
African States and Governments, so threatening to human rights and so
destructive to economic growth, that such an effort ought to be contemplated.
102. The Commission therefore recommends that the Security Council, in the
context of its follow-up to the Secretary-General’s report on Africa of
13 April 1998 on the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa (A/52/871-S/1998/318), consider ways in which
the international community and donors might assist OAU and African Governments
in eliminating the threat posed by such armed groups.
103. In order to help deal with the larger issue of uncontrolled arms flows and
their harmful effects, the Commission proposes a series of related measures at
the national, regional and international levels, as set out below.
104. The Commission recognizes that without political will on the part of the
Governments of the region and of the international community, including the
donor community, as a whole, technical measures will be ineffective. But where
political will is insufficient, it can be generated and stimulated. This
process could begin with the recognition by Governments that the uncontrolled
movement through their territories of arms and armed men is inherently
destructive of their own stability and legitimacy.
105. The Commission notes with interest the recommendations of the Panel of
Governmental Experts on Small Arms (A/52/298) and aligns itself with many of the
recommendations, including those relating to the strengthening of international
and regional cooperation among police, intelligence, customs and border control
officials in combating the illicit circulation of and trafficking in small arms
and light weapons and in suppressing criminal activities related to the use of
these weapons. The establishment of mechanisms and regional networks for
information sharing for these purposes should be encouraged. Furthermore, all
such weapons which are not under legal civilian possession, and which are not
required for the purposes of national defence and internal security should be
collected and destroyed by Governments.
106. At the national level, the Council may wish to consider recommending to
Member States that they adopt legislation to enforce and strengthen controls on
the movement of illicit arms and to respect sanctions regimes. The elaboration
of practices governing import/export controls and the issuance of end-user
certificates, and the incremental strengthening of police, customs, border
control services and other institutions of the State would also serve this end.
If the necessary political will and institutions were in place, eventual
measures could include the standardization of end-user certificates to make them
harder to forge and misuse, and an effective system of marking and identifying
weapons.

/...

S/1998/1096
English
Page 22

107. In this context, the Secretary-General noted, in paragraph 27 of his
interim report (S/1998/777), that by 1998 only eight African countries had
provided information to the United Nations Register of Conventional Arms. The
Commission would like to echo the Secretary-General’s call to all African
countries to participate in the Register and to consider ways of promoting
greater transparency, including the establishment of supplementary subregional
registers.
108. OAU and the subregional groups, with the assistance of the international
community if necessary, should also play a leading role in data collection and
sharing, early-warning systems and standard-setting. Under certain
circumstances, subregional organizations might be in a position to undertake
confidence-building measures such as the stationing of observers at ports,
airports and border crossings.
109. The normative role of the international community, including the United
Nations, in establishing rules and standards is also important. While the
imposition of sanctions, including arms embargoes, can be a useful instrument,
it must be supported by specific measures to promote respect for the sanctions.
In particular, Member States should be encouraged, where they have not already
done so, to incorporate United Nations sanctions into their national legislation
and to prosecute their nationals and companies who have violated the sanctions.
Consideration might also be given to identifying arms dealers acting in
contravention of national legislation or embargoes established by the United
Nations.
110. Ensuring respect for United Nations sanctions, especially among the
countries with the weakest Governments and those most affected by conflict, will
require a sustained commitment on the part of the Organization. Security
Council leadership in this difficult but vital undertaking would rank among the
most valuable contributions the international community could make to the
maintenance of international peace and security, as well as stability and
economic development, in the Great Lakes region and in Africa as a whole.

(Signed)

Mahmoud KASSEM (Egypt), Chairman

(Signed)

Mujahid ALAM (Pakistan)

(Signed)

Gilbert BARTHE (Switzerland)

(Signed)

Mel HOLT (United States of America)

/...

S/1998/1096
English
Page 23

Appendix I
List of countries visited and representatives of Governments
and organizations interviewed

The International Commission of Inquiry wishes to express its deep
appreciation to the government officials, diplomats, non-governmental
organizations, individual relief workers, journalists and others who assisted it
in its inquiries. The following list is incomplete in deference to the wishes
of those who requested anonymity.
Belgium
Minister for Foreign Affairs and other cabinet ministers
International Peace Federation Service
Group de Recherche et d’Information sur la Paix et la Securite (GRIP)
Burundi
Minister of Defence
Minister of Commerce, Industry and Tourism
Deputy Administrator General
Director of External Affairs
Minister of Interior and Public Security
Minister of Transportation, Post and Telecommunications
Minister of Justice
Representatives of Belgium and Germany
Chief of the United Nations Office of Human Rights; Director of the United
Nations Office in Burundi; and representatives of the United Nations Development
Programme; the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees; and
the World Food Programme
Action Aid
International Federation of the Red Cross and Red Crescent
Burundian League for Human Rights (ITEKA)
Oxfam-Quebec
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ)
Ethiopia
Representatives of Algeria, Austria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Chad, Ghana, Egypt,
Senegal, South Africa, the Sudan, the United Republic of Tanzania and Zimbabwe
Organization of African Unity
The Secretary-General
The Troika of the Central Organ of the Mechanism for Conflict Prevention,
Management and Resolution
The Representative to Burundi
/...

S/1998/1096
English
Page 24

Conflict Management Division officials
Chief Executive Officer and Head of the Secretariat of the International Panel
of Eminent Personalities to Investigate the Genocide in Rwanda
Senior Liaison Officer, International Panel of Eminent Personalities to
Investigate the Genocide in Rwanda
United Nations Children’s Fund
United Nations Development Programme
World Food Programme
Head of the United Nations Liaison Office with the Organization of African Unity
International Committee of the Red Cross
Kenya
The President
Attorney-General
General Manager of Operations, Kenya Airports Authority
Manager for Security, Kenya Airports Authority
Commissioner of Customs and Excise, Kenya Revenue Authority
Deputy Commissioner of Customs and Excise, Kenya Revenue Authority
Representatives of Mozambique, Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and Zimbabwe
United Nations agencies and international humanitarian organizations
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
World Food Programme
Representative of the Secretary-General and Regional Humanitarian Adviser
for the Great Lakes Region
Operation Lifeline Sudan
Human Rights Watch
International Crisis Group
International Resource Group
Sudanese People’s Liberation Movement/Army
Mozambique
Minister of Transportation and Communication
Director of Maritime and Ports of the Ministry of Transportation and
Communication
Director of Civil Aviation of the Ministry of Transportation and Communication
Director of Road Transportation of the Ministry of Transportation and
Communication
Director of National Policy of the Ministry of Defence
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation
Director, Africa and Middle East Division of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation
/...

S/1998/1096
English
Page 25

Secretary-General of the Ministry of Interior
Deputy Director of Internal Operations of the Ministry of State Security
Representatives of Germany and the United States of America
United Nations Development Programme
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
League for Human Rights
Human Rights and Development
Director of the Department of Customs and Excise under contract by Crown Agents,
a private company
Rwanda
Official of External Intelligence, Rwandan Patriotic Army (RPA)
Representatives of Belgium and Switzerland
United Nations Development Programme
United Nations Children’s Fund
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
World Food Programme
South Africa
Deputy Director General of the Secret Service
Representatives of Angola accredited to Zambia
Institute for Security Studies
United Republic of Tanzania
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs
Commissioner for Customs and Excise
Deputy Commissioner of Police
Acting Director of the Refugee Department
Ministry of Home Affairs
Representatives of Belgium and the Russian Federation
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
United Nations Development Programme
United Nations Children’s Fund
World Food Programme
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda

/...

S/1998/1096
English
Page 26

Zambia
Representatives of the Ministry of Defence
Deputy Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Home Affairs
Deputy Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Representatives of China, France, the Russian Federation and South Africa
World Food Programme
Zimbabwe
Minister of Defence
Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Chief Executive Officer of Zimbabwe Defence Industries
Acting Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Defence
Director-General, Central Intelligence Organization
Director, External Intelligence, Central Intelligence Organization
Representatives of Angola and France
World Food Programme
Southern African Regional Institute for Policy Studies
African Defence Journal
Department of Political and Administrative Studies, University of Zimbabwe
Palestine Liberation Organization

/...

S/1998/1096
English
Page 27

Appendix II
Armed groups believed to be operating within the
Democratic Republic of the Congo

ADF

Allied Democratic Forces

ALIR

Armée pour la Libération du Rwanda

DRA

Democratic Resistance Alliance

FAC

Forces armées congolaises

ex-FAR

Former Forces armées rwandaises

ex-FAZ

Former Forces armées zaïroises

FDD

Front pour la défense de la démocratie

FNL

Forces nationales de libération

LRA

Lord’s Resistance Army

Mayi-Mayi

Rebel group in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo

PALIPEHUTU

Partie pour la libération du peuple hutu

RPA

Rwandan Patriotic Army

UNITA

União Nacional para a Independência Total de Angola

UPDF

Uganda People’s Defence Force

/...

S/1998/1096
English
Page 28

-----
