S/PV.7539

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7539th meeting

Tuesday, 20 October 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Spain)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)
Letter dated 15 October 2015 from the Permanent Representative of Spain to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2015/793)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-32258 (E)
*1532258*

S/PV.7539

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.

I wish to warmly welcome the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, His Excellency Mr. Jan Eliasson, and I now
give him the floor.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Implementation of the note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2010/507)
Letter dated 15 October 2015 from the
Permanent Representative of Spain to
the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (5/2015/793)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Algeria,
Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Cuba, the Czech Republic, Egypt, Estonia, Germany,
Guatemala, India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Liechtenstein,
Mexico, Nepal, the Netherlands, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea,
Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South
Africa, the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine and Uruguay to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr. Mogens Lykketoft, President of the General
Assembly, and His Excellency Mr. Sven Jürgenson,
Vice-President of the Economic and Social Council.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/793, which contains a letter dated
15 October 2015 from the Permanent Representative of
Spain to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral, transmitting a concept paper on the item under
consideration.

2/32

20/10/2015

The Deputy Secretary-General: When people
think about the United Nations, they often think of the
Security Council. On it rests a heavy responsibility: to
maintain international peace and security in a troubled,
complex and interconnected world. The expectations of
the Council and the United Nations as a whole are high
around the world, and that is why a debate about its
working methods is evidently of interest to many.
Let us recognize that the Council has adapted its
working methods considerably over the years, from
introducing Council missions to the field to informal
interactive dialogues and open thematic debates, to
name but a few examples.
The Secretariat has always been and will remain
a vital partner of the Council. We provide detailed
and, hopefully, actionable information on a wide range
of issues on the Council’s agenda. We translate the
mandates of the Security Council into peacekeeping
operations, special political missions, sanctionsmonitoring groups and bodies such as the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism in Syria.
The report of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (S/2015/446) and the subsequent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/682) provide
recommendations on how such operations could
be developed and improved. I want in particular to
underline the proposals related to prevention and postconflict measures, not least in the area of peacebuilding
and development. Let us also recall that “peaceful
societies” is a goal for the new 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
Since the Secretariat facilitates the day-to-day
deliberations of the Council, we must have a strong
grasp of its working methods and working practice.
While the Council, of course, decides on its own
procedures, the Secretariat stands ready to provide
institutional memory and advice to the rotating Council
presidencies and to its other members.
An important interface between the Council and
the Secretariat remains the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
The Working Group has given more transparency to

15-32258

20/10/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

the Council’s work through its crafting of notes, which
are subsequently issued by the President, documenting
trends of relevance to the wider United Nations
membership, including troop- and police-contributing
countries.
Let me mention some decisions of the Council on
its working methods and the actions that the Secretariat
has taken to implement them.
The Council has indicated that members of the
Council and the Secretariat can continue to use the “any
other business” agenda item to raise issues of concern.
The Secretariat considers that to be a valuable practice.
We have brought important matters to the Council’s
attention more than 20 times in the past two years.
In addition, the Department of Political Affairs
has instituted a monthly practice of briefing Council
members on situations that could become threats
to international peace and security. Early-warning
signals could, and in my view should, play an even
more important role in preventing situations from
deteriorating or spiralling out of control, as we have so
often seen in recent years.
The Secretariat has also actively supported
proposals to arrange briefings via secure videoteleconferences from United Nations offices around
the world. The number of such video-teleconferences
increased from one in 2009 to 41 in 2013, and to 101 in
2014. I have been part of that trend myself, and I think
that it is a great innovation.
Furthermore, in response to calls from Council
members and the wider membership, the Council
website now offers a historical record of Council
activities and information, for instance on reporting
requirements and mandate renewals. The website also
presents vital information on sanctioned individuals
and entities in formats that are deemed useful to and by
Member States.
The Council has also encouraged the early
appointment of Chairs of its subsidiary bodies. It is
important that the new Chairs be able to hit the ground
running, with solid knowledge of the work of their
Committees or Working Groups. Here, the Secretariat
assists the outgoing Chairs in preparing documentation
for the incoming Chairs. Following the election of five
new Security Council members last week, that process
will soon start again.

S/PV.7539

I should add that the Secretariat provides support
to 16 sanctions Committees and 71 experts serving on
12 sanctions-monitoring panels. Identifying experts
continues to be a time-consuming process. In response
to calls from Member States to ensure geographical and
other diversity, we have gradually expanded our roster
of experts. In addition, the Secretariat is improving
cooperation on sanctions through the Inter-agency
Working Group on United Nations Sanctions, which
brings together 24 United Nations entities.
As the Council, in the spirit of Chapter VIII of
the Charter, intensifies its cooperation with regional
organizations, the Secretariat is working in parallel
to support the Council in those endeavours, not least
vis-à-vis the African Union.
In closing, there is always room for improving any
organization’s working methods. The Secretariat looks
forward to hearing the views of the other principal
organs, Council members and the wider United
Nations membership. We appreciate the transparency
demonstrated by today’s initiative. The work of the
Security Council affects all Member States and people
everywhere in a world where peace, development, and
human rights are increasingly interrelated.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Deputy Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now call on the President of the General Assembly.
Mr. Lykketoft: It is an honour for me, as President
of the General Assembly, to brief the Security Council
during this annual debate on working methods. I do so
in full appreciation of the privilege that this opportunity
affords me as only the seventh Assembly President, I
understand, to address the Council; the last time that
took place was eight years ago. I thank the Spanish
presidency and Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi and
each of the Council members for this opportunity.
We meet today as our Organization celebrates its
seventieth anniversary. Indeed, on Friday we will mark
the entry into force of the Charter of the United Nations.
We also meet today, three weeks after the adoption of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1) by world leaders, which
is focused on addressing poverty and inequalities,
combating climate change and environmental
degradation, and strengthening institutions of justice
and peace, and which responds to the ever-clearer

15-322583/32

S/PV.7539

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

interlinkages between the Organization’s three pillars
of development, peace and security, and human rights,
as expressed in the Charter.
In that context, the annual debate on the working
methods of the Security Council is extremely timely.
Guided by the principles of transparency, inclusivity,
accountability and efficiency, such a discussion is of
great interest to the larger United Nations membership.
It can also be to the benefit of the institutional
relationship and interaction between the Security
Council and the General Assembly, particularly this
year as together we bring forward the process to select
and appoint the next Secretary-General.
The relationship between the General Assembly
and the Security Council is, or at least can be, both
mutually reinforcing and complementary. The full
United Nations membership, through the Charter
of the United Nations, has conferred on the Security
Council the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security and agreed that the
Council acts on their behalf in carrying out its duties.
In addition, there are a number of areas where
the actions of both the Council and the Assembly
are closely linked, and indeed interdependent. That
includes certain peace and security issues, the review
of the Charter of the United Nations, the appointment
of the Secretary-General, the election of judges to
international tribunals, certain recommendations from
the Assembly to the Council, the Security Council’s
annual and special reports, as well as the relations
between the Security Council and certain subsidiary
organs established by the Assembly. Only last week,
we saw an example of this when the General Assembly
elected the five new non-permanent members of the
Security Council for the period 2016-2017.
During the rest of my term in office, I will continue
to promote effective cooperation, coordination and the
exchange of information among the Presidents of the
principal organs of the United Nations and the SecretaryGeneral. I especially intend to uphold the tradition of
holding meetings with the monthly Presidents of the
Security Council and of staying in close contact with
them on issues of common interest and joint activity.
Given the Security Council’s significant
responsibilities and this mutually reinforcing
relationship, it is not surprising that the working
methods of the Council are of great interest and concern
to the wider United Nations membership. That interest

4/32

20/10/2015

is even greater during years when the next SecretaryGeneral is to be appointed. We must never lose sight
of the fact that, at any given moment, 178 Members of
the United Nations are not members of the Security
Council, and that some 35 per cent of the membership
has never even served as Council members.
For years, there have been widespread calls for
increased transparency, inclusivity and a more rigorous
process in selecting the next chief of the Organization.
Through General Assembly resolution 69/321, on the
revitalization of the General Assembly, the United
Nations membership has unanimously provided clear
guidance for the way forward. Specifically, they have
requested that the General Assembly President and the
President of the Security Council begin the process
of soliciting candidates for the position of SecretaryGeneral. I have already commenced the discussion on
this matter with the current Security Council presidency.
I will continue to interact with the presidency with
a view to jointly circulating a letter to the whole
membership inviting candidates to be presented in
a timely manner and describing the entire process. It
is also envisaged that the Presidents of the General
Assembly and Security Council would jointly circulate
to all Member States, on an ongoing basis, the names of
individuals who have been submitted for consideration
as candidates, together with accompanying documents,
including curricula vitae. In addition, Member States
have requested that the General Assembly, without
prejudice to the role of the principal organs as enshrined
in Article 97 of the Charter, conduct informal dialogues
or meetings with candidates, thus contributing to the
transparency and inclusivity of the process.
General Assembly resolution 69/321 also underlines
that whoever assumes the position of Secretary-General
should be the best possible candidate — a person
who embodies the highest standards of efficiency,
competence and integrity and demonstrates a firm
commitment to the purposes and principles of the United
Nations. Such a person should also be a candidate with
proven leadership and managerial abilities, extensive
experience in international relations and strong
diplomatic, communication and multilingual skills.
I am absolutely confident that there are a number
of potential female candidates who possess those
credentials and more. Bearing in mind that in 70 years
the United Nations has never had a female SecretaryGeneral, the inclusion and consideration of women
candidates should be an important focus for all of us as

15-32258

20/10/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

we ensure that the Organization continues to advance
gender equality on all levels.
Lastly, from the very start of this discussion, we
have heard calls for the selection process to be finalized
as early as possible, preferably three months prior to
the assumption of office by the next Secretary-General.
Speaking from my own experience in September,
providing adequate time for preparation prior to
assuming office in the Organization is fundamental
to ensuring the effective discharge of responsibilities
during the transition period.
Given the critical role that the Secretary-General
plays in ensuring that the Organization is run as
efficiently and as effectively as possible, and given
that the outside world increasingly expects the highest
possible standards from the Organization, the process
of selecting the next person at the helm must be as open
and as thorough as possible. I look forward to working
with all Member States to that end.
There are three further relevant issues regarding
the interaction between the Council and the General
Assembly that I wish to touch on briefly.
First, the General Assembly receives and considers
the annual and special reports of the Security Council,
which, according to the Charter, shall include an
account of the measures that the Security Council has
decided upon or taken to maintain international peace
and security. This exercise represents an important
aspect of the transparency and accountability that
the wider membership expects vis-à-vis the Security
Council. While there have been improvements in the
report in recent years, there have also been calls from
Member States to further improve its analytical quality.
This year, on 12 November, the General Assembly will
consider the Security Council report that the Council
adopted this morning, and I encourage all Member
States to participate and share their views.
Secondly, with regard to the election of the ten
non-permanent members of the Security Council,
the General Assembly, in its resolution 68/307, on
revitalization of the work of the General Assembly,
decided that the elections of the non-permanent members
of the Council should be conducted six months before the
elected members assume their responsibilities. During
this seventieth session, the Assembly will therefore
hold two elections of non-permanent members – one
of which, as mentioned earlier, was held just last week,
and the second is scheduled for June next year. This is

S/PV.7539

a welcome development that will allow newly elected
members to better prepare for their two-year term in
this Council.
Finally, it would be remiss of me to conclude
without addressing the issue of Security Council
reform — arguably one of the most discussed and
sensitive issues within the United Nations and beyond
over many decades. As was underlined by a large
number of world leaders during this session’s general
debate, this topic is of central importance to a large
majority of the membership. The General Assembly has
decided to immediately continue the intergovernmental
negotiations on Security Council reform in the
seventieth session, and I intend to move this process
forward, as much as possible, in the coming period.
One of my first decisions as President of the
General Assembly was to set the theme of the
seventieth session. I chose to focus on the idea that this
historic, and perhaps defining, session for the future of
the United Nations could capture a new commitment
to action on the part of the 193 Member States. The
Council’s invitation to me to brief the Council today is
an example of such action and, I hope, the beginning
of a year of excellent cooperation between the General
Assembly and the Security Council. Let me therefore
thank the Council once again for this opportunity. I
look forward to hearing Member States’ statements and
input to this very timely debate.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Mr. Jürgenson.
Mr. Jürgenson: It is a great pleasure for me
to address the Security Council in my capacity as
Vice-President of the Economic and Social Council
at this open debate devoted to the working methods
of the Security Council. I wish to thank the Spanish
presidency of the Council for convening this debate and
for inviting us. Ambassador Oh Joon, the President of
the Economic and Social Council, is unable to attend
because of prior commitments abroad and sends his
regrets.
This meeting is a welcome step in improving
cooperation among United Nations Charter bodies.
The relations between the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council are enshrined in the
Charter of the Organization. Article 65 states that the
Economic and Social Council may furnish information
to the Security Council and shall assist it upon its
request. The legal basis for cooperation could not be

15-322585/32

S/PV.7539

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

clearer. Yet the use of this provision has been very
limited. Its most constructive incarnation is probably
the establishment by the Economic and Social Council
of its Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti, following an
invitation made by the Security Council in its resolution
1212 (1998) to contribute to the elaboration of a longterm programme of support for Haiti. The Ad Hoc
Advisory Group continues to exist and contributes to
the promotion of coherent and sustained development
support to Haiti.
Following the promising example of the Haiti
Group, and responding to a request from the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council established
Ad hoc Advisory Groups on Guinea-Bissau and
Burundi, which were active from 2003 to 2006. These
Groups, which promoted a comprehensive approach
to peace and development in post-conflict settings,
prefigured the country-specific configurations of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for which they constituted
an avant garde.
Interestingly, the creation of these Groups led to
enhanced interaction between the Economic and Social
Council and the Security Council, particularly the
latter’s Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention
and Resolution in Africa. In recent years, the Economic
and Social Council has followed the development of the
situation in South Sudan since that country joined the
community of nations and has maintained interaction
with the Peacebuilding Commission under its agenda
item “African countries emerging from conflict”.
However, interaction with the Security Council has
diminished considerably.
The time has come to revitalize the relationship
among the Charter bodies of this Organization.
The changing nature of conflict — from inter-State
wars to complex civil conflicts that are intractable
and reoccurring — highlights the fundamental link
between sustainable development and lasting peace. As
the report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (see S/2015/446) rightfully stressed, the
promotion of inclusive economic and social development
and the broadening of community engagement are
key to prevent relapse into conflict, and innovative
approaches are needed to integrate conflict prevention,
governance, development and human rights.
The changing context of global cooperation for
development through the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution
70/1) further enhances this opportune moment for a
6/32

20/10/2015

revitalization of the relationship. The Agenda seeks
to strengthen universal peace in larger freedom and
recognizes the major challenge to the achievement of
durable peace and sustainable development in countries
in conflict and post-conflict situations.
The Agenda also promotes a culture of peace and
non-violence. In particular, Sustainable Development
Goal 16, on promoting peaceful and inclusive societies,
lays the ground for common work. Sustainable
Development Goal 16 highlights the need to address
violence, abuse and exploitation, as well as to strengthen
national institutions against crime and corruption,
making them more transparent, accountable and
effective. The connection between peace, stability and
development could not have been more clearly stated.
The definition of follow-up and review mechanisms
for the 2030 Agenda offers an opportunity to engage in a
joint reflection on how the Charter bodies of the United
Nations, as well as the Peacebuilding Commission,
work together to translate the Agenda into tangible and
coherent policy measures by the United Nations system
and the international community at large.
The Economic and Social Council can interact
with the Security Council on a regular basis on issues
of common concern. There are many of these issues:
the promotion of institution-building and improved
governance, the need for social inclusion as a key
component for sustained peace, the role of women and
youth in that context, the consequences of economic
and financial crises for global stability and the impact
of environmental degradation on weakened societies.
On each dimension of sustainable development,
namely, economic, social and environmental, and on
their contribution to the overall objective of peace,
the United Nations development system, under the
oversight of United Nations Economic and Social
Council, has a lot to contribute. The Economic and
Social Council can act as a counterpart of the Security
Council so as to embrace a truly holistic approach to
peace and security, an approach that world leaders have
recognized as the only one that can lead to sustainable
results. The Economic and Social Council stands
ready to work together with the Security Council on
the modalities for such interaction, be it through more
systematic interaction on issues of common interest or
through the establishment of an ad hoc working group.
The debate today should pave the way for renewed
coherence among United Nations bodies and for

15-32258

20/10/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

mobilization around the objectives of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, to which the Security
Council also has a lot to contribute. I trust that our
willingness to work together and make the best use of
our respective bodies will be stronger than the political
and institutional cleavages between us. Together, the
entire United Nations system, including its principal
bodies, the Economic and Social Council and the
Security Council, can provide strong, integrated
policy support and guidance, within their respective
mandates and competencies, to the cause of peace and
development.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now give
the floor to the members of the Security Council.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): At the outset, I
would like to commend and thank you, Mr. President,
and the Spanish presidency of the Council for convening
this very timely debate this morning. I also welcome
the very valuable contributions by our three briefers,
notably the Deputy Secretary-General, the President
of the General Assembly and the Vice-President of the
Economic and Social Council.
I am speaking today on behalf of Angola, Chile,
Jordan, Malaysia, New Zealand and Spain — six
countries from six different regions of the world. We
are six Security Council members that are committed to
collaboration and to working together on the set of issues
before us today, including my own country as Chair of
the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions of the Security Council.
We share a common wish to make the working methods
of the Council and the Council’s interactions with other
organs of the United Nations, as stated this morning,
more effective, so as to better reflect contemporary
realities.
This annual open debate is about much more than
just the working methods of the Security Council. It is
about the decision-making culture and the effectiveness
of the Council. It also goes to the heart of the Council’s
performance and accountability to the whole United
Nations membership and the Charter of the United
Nations. The current crises facing the United Nations
and the Council’s difficulty in responding effectively to
those crises suggest the need for a new approach.
Meaningful changes are driven by practice, by
taking the initiative and leading by example as much as
by rules and procedure. While there are good ideas on
working methods contained in the President’s concept

S/PV.7539

note (S/2015/793, annex) agreed to by the Council, the
dilemma is that they are couched in vague language, are
often not implemented, and some Council members even
resist implementing them. That reflects the disconnect
between the Council’s working methods, this debate
and the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions. The Council will find
solutions and improve its performance by adapting its
working methods in innovative ways to meet the needs
of specific cases, not as a result of the generic work
done in the Informal Working Group, although the
latter should base its future work on the common points
of action from the outcomes of this open debate.
The Council must throw off some of the constrictions
that have cramped even the way it discusses matters,
let alone how it makes decisions. While consensus on
procedures is a fine goal, it should not be elevated to
the point where we have a 15-member veto, not just
in the Council itself, but also in its subsidiary bodies,
including its sanctions committees. That was never the
intention of the Charter. All Council members have a
responsibility to find solutions to improve our processes
and culture and to work at all levels of our diplomacy.
For that reason, we have fostered increased dialogue
among the Permanent Representatives on the Council’s
working methods, including a monthly meeting to
discuss how we work together on the issues before us.
We also need working methods that produce
effective political focus in the Council’s work. The
Council’s members have to display more discipline
and restraint in the range of initiatives considered or
taken, many of which absorb valuable time and distract
us from real problem-solving and diplomacy and have
limited world impact. We also have some distance to go
in terms of focus and interactivity in order to ensure that
open debates are a useful forum for exchanging views
between the Council and the rest of the Organization.
They need to be more than a platform for States to
record national positions.
The veto may not be, strictly speaking,a working
method, but it has a significant negative impact — a
cascade effect — on the working methods of the Council,
where elected members are routinely excluded for
no reason other than habit. There needs to be a more
inclusive process for developing resolutions and
presidential statements. All Council members need the
opportunity to engage and contribute meaningfully. It
is a simple request, but in the current Council practice
it is the exception, not the norm.

15-322587/32

S/PV.7539

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

Arguably, the very recent introduction of the
penholdership system has improved Council efficiency.
It ensures that the first drafts of most Council
products are prepared by delegations with consistent
knowledge and a long background in the issues. But it
has also diminished the opportunity for wider Council
engagement, especially by the elected members, and
has significantly increased the risk of Council products
being crafted in a way that serves only the interests of
the permanent members. In those respects, the system
cuts across the principle of collective responsibility
that underpins the Charter. We should all feel a sense
of ownership over the Council’s work, and we should
not preclude others from offering their drafting ideas
for texts. Wherever possible, we want to encourage
changes to the penholdership system. That is an obvious
way both to ensure necessary continuity, by including
permanent and elected members, and to leverage their
relevant expertise, whether that be regional or through
their chairmanship of subsidiary bodies or some other
source.
As today’s three briefers made clear, the Council
needs to become better at cooperating with other
United Nations and regional organs, bodies and
offices. One simple way to promote better interaction
would be for Council members to respect the role of
the presidency in organizing the Council’s regular
business for the month. That should include arranging
for interactions with the Secretariat, the Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council, and also with other
bodies such as the Peacebuilding Commission whose
advisory and early warning capacity are of direct
importance to the Council’s work. We also need to get
more serious about the supporting partnerships and the
complementary roles of the United Nations, regional
organizations and counterparts, especially the African
Union, in preventing and managing conflicts. In that
effort, it is also important to improve consultations
and coordination with troop- and police-contributing
countries, especially in relation to the development and
renewal of mandates. The knowledge and challenges
that they acquire in the field is an asset that the Council
must consider when discussing its mandates.
The
process
for
the
Secretary-General’s
appointment, which includes the Council’s close
cooperation with the General Assembly, will be a key
issue for all Members of the Organization over the
next year. It is not acceptable that the Council has been
slow to take up the necessary engagement between

8/32

20/10/2015

the Presidents of the General Assembly and Security
Council on a matter of such direct importance to all
Member States. That is especially relevant given the
unequivocal call from the General Assembly, which we
have all supported, for dialogue and a more transparent
and inclusive process in the decision-making on this
specific issue.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this annual debate on
the working methods of the Security Council. I would
also like to thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson,
President of the General Assembly Likketoft and
Mr. Jürgenson for their comments and for setting the
tone for our discussion. I would like to speak briefly
about some recent working method improvements and
the important role of the Peacebuilding Commission,
before concluding with a few words about selecting the
next Secretary-General.
At a time when the Security Council is grappling
with such disparate and complex threats to international
peace and security, the Council has an obligation to
consider how to adapt and improve its functions. We
believe that the Council should continue to explore
how its working methods can be improved and
welcome suggestions on how best to do that. Council
presidencies have some discretion on innovating,
and the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions, which Ambassador
Gaspar Martins of Angola so ably leads, is another
place where we try to improve the way the Council does
business. The Informal Working Group has made a lot
of progress over the past few years by adopting a series
of notes to improve the Council’s working methods,
from clarifying the role of penholders to revamping the
handover process from one subsidiary organ chair to the
next. Very relevant to today is the fact that the Informal
Working Group has done its part to promote dialogue
with non-Council members and United Nations bodies,
including through note S/2013/515 on the subject. That
leads me to a part of that note I want to highlight, which
is the Council’s commitment to the Arria Formula and
other formats.
My delegation is a big supporter of Arria-format
meetings. At their best, such meetings provide an
important venue for us to hear views beyond those of
Member States, a way to inform ourselves informally
about the difficult issues on our agenda. After
Wednesday’s Arria-format meeting on supporting
victims of terrorism, chaired by Spain and the United

15-32258

20/10/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

States, the Council will have held 13 Arria-Formula
meetings thus far in 2015, where it has inviteda wide
range of civil society to participate in our work. Those
meetings have provided opportunities to hear directly
from individuals experiencing unimaginably difficult
circumstances, and many have been extremely powerful
in reminding us of the human toll that accompanies
conflicts. For instance, in the last year we have heard
from civil society leaders and activists from Syria and
Crimea and from threatened lesbian, gay, bisexual or
transgender individuals, to name just a few. We have
held five Arria-Formula meetings with the Human
Rights Council’s Commission of Inquiry on Syria.
We also want to highlight the importance of
peacebuilding. A bit later in this meeting, Ambassador
Skoog will discuss the topic in more detail. The
Security Council has continued to welcome the
Chairs of the various country-specific configurations
of the Peacebuilding Commission to participate in
Council meetings. In its advisory function to the
Security Council and other United Nations entities,
the Peacebuilding Commission provides valuable
information from diverse stakeholders on the ground
in post-conflict States. We deeply value its role on
the ground in building institutions to give countries a
genuine chance to stabilize and develop. We look forward
to participating in the 2015 peacekeeping architecture
review process and hope that it will outline how the
Council and the Peacebuilding Council can best work
together, playing differentiated but complementary
roles in engaging with countries recovering from and
vulnerable to conflict.
Finally, as co-equal principal organs of the United
Nations, the General Assembly and the Security
Council each has its own defined role in the selection
of the Secretary-General in accordance with Article
97 of the Charter of the United Nations. The United
States is in favour of the membership’s gaining an
understanding of the views of potential nominees for
Secretary-General and supports a selection process
for Secretary-General that is guided by the principles
of transparency and inclusiveness, building on best
practices and the participation of all Member States,
as outlined in General Assembly resolution 69/321. As
we agreed in that resolution, the United States looks
forward to a process that leads to the appointment of the
best possible candidate for the position of SecretaryGeneral — one who embodies the highest standards
of efficiency, competence and integrity and who

S/PV.7539

demonstrates a firm commitment to the purposes and
principles of the Organization. With the innovations of
the General Assembly revitalization resolution in hand,
we believe that the course has ben set for the selection
process of the next Secretary-General. We look forward
to continuing engagement during this important
moment in the Organization’s history.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank the
Spanish presidency for having organized this debate on
the Security Council’s working methods, including the
question of the appointment procedure for the future
Secretary-General. I also thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Eliasson; the President of the General
Assembly, Mr. Lykketoft; and the Vice-President of
Economic and Social Council, Mr. Jürgenson, for their
statements.
Successive Chairs of the Security Council
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions have spared no effort to improve
the Council’s working methods, promote greater
transparency in the Council’s activities and strengthen
its interaction with States that are not members of
the Council. When looking at the statistics of annual
public meetings, resolutions adopted unanimously,
presidential statements and press releases, we note
that there has been undeniable progress. For example,
of 263 formal meetings held in 2014, 241 were public
and 15 were with the troop- and police-contributing
countries. Of 63 resolutions adopted that year, 60 were
unanimous. However, the increased frequency of public
meetings, which often do not lead to the adoption of
a concrete decision, should not obscure the absolute
necessity of further qualitative reform.
The Council’s inability over several decades to
find a solution to the Palestinian issue and the absence
of any progress for nearly five years in resolving the
Syrian crisis clearly demonstrates that this organ is not
efficiently and responsibly fulfilling its mandate as it
addresses the challenges of the twenty-first century.
The effectiveness of the Security Council must be
assessed in the light of these results in terms of both
prevention and conflict resolution.
In this regard, Chad supports the proposal made
by France that the five permanent members adopt a
code of conduct to collectively refuse to exercise the
veto when the Council considers situations involving
war crimes, crimes against humanity or genocide.
However, we remain sceptical about the effectiveness

15-322589/32

S/PV.7539

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

of this too early restriction of the use of veto, given that
the holder of the right has the freedom to use it even in
those exceptional conditions if it considers that its vital
interests are threatened. Therefore, it is important that
the contours of this proposal be clarified. However, in
our humble opinion, the best way to limit the misuse of
the veto is through Charter reform.
Beyond this particular context, the principle of the
veto itself, granted to a membership category, deserves
special examination in view of the reform of the Security
Council. Africa, victim of historical injustice, home to
almost a billion people, is now the only continent in the
world that has neither a permanent representative nor
the veto power, nor, worse still, the possibility of being
heard. The legitimacy and credibility of the Security
Council and the effectiveness of its action will depend
in the future on the participation of all its members and
on equal footing. Chad reaffirms its commitment to the
African Common Position on this issue.
The elected members of the Council are doing
remarkable work in the subsidiary bodies and working
groups that they chair and whose work they direct. Given
the important role of these bodies, we are calling for a
more open and inclusive process in the designation of
their Chairs. It seems unfair that a facilitator appointed
by the permanent members choose them as he or she
wishes. Also, we think that increasing transparency
and improved interaction with other States is a function
of the latter’s access to the subsidiary bodies and their
work.
Similarly, the role of penholder, reserved for
a category of member in charge of drafting the
draft resolutions and declarations, seems like an
anachronism and a form of guardianship that should be
banished. We believe it is high time that the African
members of the Council be allowed to fulfil this
penholder function on issues concerning Africa. That
should also be the case for other regions. Moreover,
it would also be wise to encourage participation of
the Peacebuilding Commission and the Chairs of its
country configurations in the plenary meetings of the
Security Council, given their valuable contributions in
the post-conflict stabilization process.
In the same context, we underline the importance
of a greater involvement of regional organizations like
the African Union and its subregional mechanisms
in maintaining international peace and security in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations. Similarly, the Council should further
10/32

20/10/2015

promote preventive diplomacy to avoid the constant
need to turn to Chapter VII of the Charter.
At the centre of today’s debate, inter alia, is the
cooperation between the Security Council and other
United Nations bodies, in particular the General
Assembly, in relation to the selection of the future
Secretary-General. In this regard, we welcome the
adoption of resolution 69/321 of 11 September 2015,
which constitutes a major step forward. Chad strongly
supports the principle of electing the future SecretaryGeneral by the General Assembly from a list of several
candidates for a single term of office. We hope that the
Security Council and the General Assembly will show
great mutual understanding on this issue. It is high time
that, 70 years after the creation of the United Nations,
the procedure for appointing the Secretary-General
take into account the new reality of the world and meet
the expectations of the 7 billion people on the planet.
The President (spoke in Spanish): If I may
say so, we seem to be having a small problem with
certain working methods of the Council because when
speakers take the floor in a language other than English
the English interpretation is so loud that we can hear
it in the Chamber. It therefore becomes very difficult
to appreciate the beautiful French of, for example,
the Permanent Representative of Chad. The experts
tell me that someone must have an iPhone or iPad
at maximum volume, making it audible to the entire
Chamber. Therefore, while we attempt to fix this little
problem of the Council’s working methods, I would ask
all members to check their electronic and computer
devices.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I hope I can solve
that problem by speaking in English. I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate
and for all the initiatives the presidency has taken so
far, and I also thank the briefers.
As I said during the wrap-up debate in June (see
S/PV.7479), I am frequently struck by how formal our
working methods can be. Even in our allegedly informal
meetings there are too many prepared speeches and too
few genuine discussions. So in the spirit of bringing
more interactivity to this meeting, today I am just
going to pose questions, three sets of them in my three
minutes. I hope other speakers will feel free to respond
in their own statements or in person afterwards, or,
indeed, by replying to me on Twitter, where I am
@matthewrycroft1.

15-32258

20/10/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

For my first set of questions, I would like to ask
for thoughts on improving the day-to-day interactions
of the Council. How can we bring more transparency?
How can we improve participation? And for efficiency,
what more can we do to stick to schedules and keep
our statements to the agreed-on length? Doing so could
lead to more time for horizon-scanning or for hearing
from people on the ground, including through Arria
Formula meetings. If we are given ideas, we will pursue
them next month during our presidency. The Council
has been warned.
For my second set of questions, I would like to ask
what the point is of good working methods if the will
to use them effectively is not there. What is the point
when one member can bring the very best working
methods to a standstill by raising an arm in veto? I
am proud that the United Kingdom has signed up to
the code of conduct of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group. We will never vote against
credible Council action to stop mass atrocities and
crimes against humanity. If other members, permanent
or not, join us, we will send a powerful message that the
Council can really deliver when it matters most. The
same could be said about the appointment of the next
Secretary-General. I welcomed the statement made by
the President of the General Assembly this morning.
Would it not send a very welcome message if the United
Nations appointed its most powerful advocate in a fair,
transparent and structured way? Appointing a woman
to the role would be more powerful still. So what should
we do next to maximize the number of credible female
candidates?
Thirdly, what more can we do to ensure that the
Council’s work is not just about ending conflicts but
also about avoiding future ones? With Goal 16 of the
Sustainable Development Goals, we have made a good
step forward, but we can do more. That is the United
Kingdom is planning to convene the first ever meeting
of development ministers next month in the Security
Council to discuss the issue. What more can we do to
connect the various parts of the United Nations and link
the development agenda to our work in the Council on
peace and security?
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like to
remind the Council that the representative of Angola
delivered a statement that was also intended to be on
behalf of Chile, Jordan, Malaysia, New Zealand and
Spain. It is therefore understood that those Council
members will not take the floor.

S/PV.7539

Ms. Murmokaité (Lithuania): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate, and the
briefers for their useful insights.
Improving the Security Council’s working methods
is an issue of great interest to all Member States.
After all, while only 15 Council members prescribe
and set legally binding norms, all 193 United Nations
Members have to implement their decisions. Greater
accountability, transparency and openness in the
Council’s work are therefore paramount. Briefings by
the presidency at the beginning and end of the month
and by the Chairs of subsidiary bodies have become
routine, and more Council meetings are being held in
an open format.
We welcome the fact that more Sanctions
Committees are now briefing the Council in public.
In our view, such practice should become standard,
because it enables us to have a better understanding
of what those bodies do, and that is key to better
implementation, whether of sanctions regimes or
counter-terrorism measures. Particularly where the
Counter-Terrorism Committee is concerned, we believe
it is essential for it to engage with the membership of the
United Nations in order to raise awareness and provide
a platform for sharing good practices and insights on
how best to tackle the threat of terrorism and foreign
terrorist fighters. To that end, my delegation has
sought to increase the number of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee’s open briefings and special events, and
through them tackle some issues that may not be on the
Committee’s regular agenda. There is nothing regular
about the threat and spread of terrorism these days, and
the United Nations counter-terrorism machinery must
adjust to that new reality.
Late last year, the Department of Political Affairs
(DPA) took a useful step in bringing the CounterTerrorism Committee and the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force together for an informal
briefing. Such meetings should not be one-offs,
especially since the gap between assessment and
assistance, and for that matter, between bodies with
mandates from the Security Council and from the
General Assembly, remains. It is vital that we overcome
the silo mentality and make sure that we respond jointly
and promptly to countries’ concerns and needs for
assistance. There is still a lot of work to be done to that
effect.
Regarding the Sanctions Committees, we have
sought to engage actively with the countries concerned

15-3225811/32

S/PV.7539

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

20/10/2015

and their neighbours and with relevant regional actors,
both formally and informally. We did so with the aim
of improving understanding of the situation at hand and
of how the decisions we take affect developments on
the ground, including the concerns that countries may
have about the impact of sanctions and their related
capacity-building needs. We believe these are good
practices that should be continued. Visits by the Chairs
of subsidiary bodies to the countries concerned should
be further encouraged. And, of course, as the Deputy
Secretary-General mentioned, the handover from Chair
to Chair should be better managed and streamlined. We
should strengthen the Secretariat’s capacity to provide
adequate assistance to the Sanctions Committees in
their work. In that regard, we should keep in the mind
the work done last year by one Council member, and we
hope we can move it forward, with the best interests of
the countries concerned at its heart.

As the Council endeavours to tackle an
unprecedented number of crises simultaneously, better
use of the agenda item on “any other business” during
consultations would be welcome. One useful option
that can strengthen the Council’s preventive approach
is the ability to be flexible through the use of “any other
business” and informal briefings, aimed at flagging
potential crises, by the Secretary-General, the DPA
or, for that matter, the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, since human-rights violations are usually
harbingers of more serious trouble to come. With
regard to the Council’s increasingly heavy workload,
we believe there is some scope for improvement by
reviewing existing mandate cycles to make things a
little easier, especially in cases where situations remains
static for long periods of time and may not warrant the
existing frequency of deliberations, as, for example, in
the case of quarterly meetings on Kosovo.

Where appropriate, we should also consider closer
cooperation among the Council’s subsidiary bodies. We
have had a positive experience, both on their substance
and for practical reasons, with joint meetings between
the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989
(2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals
and entities, and the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2140 (2014), as well as between the
Yemen Sanctions Committee and the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict. They save time for
both experts and briefers and can help us deal better
with the ever-growing demand for meeting spaces and
interpretation services.

In our view, Council members must put the
“interactive” back in interactive debates. We should take
advantage of the rare meetings with Force Commanders,
police commanders, regional organizations and other
relevant actors to engage in genuine exchanges, not
limited to the reading of prepared statements. Similarly,
there is room for improving the Council’s dialogue
with the Peacebuilding Commission. While the Chairs
of peacebuilding country configurations do brief the
Council occasionally, their experience and insights
could be used more extensively, and in consultations
as well.

We welcome the steps that the DPA has taken to
establish consolidated sanctions lists and provide more
systematic information on the United Nations website
and social media. Press statements and other forms of
media engagement by relevant subsidiary bodies or their
Chairs — although that practice is not common — offer
additional avenues for outreach and disseminating
relevant information and should be further explored.
Speaking of websites, we call on Council members
to take a fresh look at the possibilities of adjusting the
structure of the Security Council’s annual report in line
with the realities of the information age. My delegation
has submitted a number of proposals in that regard, as
the representative of New Zealand has mentioned, to the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, and we are open to engaging
further on the matter with all Council members.

12/32

Open debates remain a highly important tool for
the work of the Council. However, more thought should
be given to structuring them better. It is frankly painful
to see ministers from countries that are not Council
members addressing the Council with only junior
experts there to listen to them — or to think of our own
colleagues speaking at 8.30 p.m. on issues of critical
importance. Such questions remain open, although a
number of useful documents have already been adopted.
Previous Council documents contain useful indications
which should be revisited and taken up again.
During the general debate of the General Assembly
last month, several events dedicated to the issue of
veto restraint drew large numbers of participants. It is
simply unacceptable that veto powers should be used to
protect the perpetrators, as has been the case with Syria
or the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17,
and not the victims. Lithuania fully supports relevant
initiatives, including the call for adopting a code of

15-32258

20/10/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

conduct to that effect. Failure to bring the perpetrators
to account encourages impunity. Repeated failure to
do so calls the Council’s credibility into question. We
believe that the Council should make better use of the
tools available to pursue justice, including cooperation
with the International Criminal Court, with respect
to both new referrals and the follow-up on existing
referrals.
Finally, let me touch upon the election of the next
Secretary-General. As the United Nations claims its
rightful place in the twenty-first century, so should the
selection of the chief officer of the United Nations meet
twenty-first century standards. He or she will take up
one of the most challenging jobs on Earth. For the first
time, as the President of the General Assembly reminded
us today, General Assembly resolution 69/321, on the
revitalization of the Assembly’s work, envisages a joint
activity on the subject.
While we are realistic about expecting change to be
of limited scope in the short term, we remain convinced
that greater transparency, inclusiveness, interactivity
and diversity of candidates, including in terms of
gender, are definitely in order in the process of selecting
and appointing the individual who will lead the United
Nations at a time of unprecedented challenges and tasks
ahead.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Spain for its initiative in holding today’s open
debate. We have listened carefully to the statements of
Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson, the President of
the General Assembly Mr. Lykketoft and Ambassador
Jürgenson, Vice-President of the Economic and Social
Council.
Thanks to the joint efforts of its members in recent
years, the Security Council has made good progress in
improving its working methods. With more emphasis on
greater transparency, the Security Council has markedly
increased the number of open meetings convened and
paid more attention to briefing non-Council members
on its work. The work of the Council has become more
more efficient and targeted, thanks to an improvement
in its working procedures. The Council has also used
various modalities to strengthen communication and
exchanges with relevant Member States, regional
organizations, the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council, among others.
The holding of today’s open debate on working
methods fully reflects the positive attitude and

S/PV.7539

willingness of the Council to draw on the opinions of
wider membership to further improve its work. While
China supports the Council’s continuing efforts to
improve its working methods, it would also like to
emphasize the following several points.
First, in accordance with its mandate under the
Charter of the United Nations, the Security Council
should focus its energy and resources on addressing the
most urgent issues that threaten international peace and
security. With regard to thematic issues, it should act
strictly within its mandate and enhance communication
with the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council, the Peacebuilding Commission and others.
With such coordination and division of labour, it
should be possible to avoid the duplication or overlap of
functions by the different organs.
Secondly, the Security Council should attach more
importance to preventive diplomacy and mediation. It
should promote the culture of peace and increase the
use of such peaceful means as mediation and good
offices for dispute resolution. It should push for the
diplomatic settlement of disputes and handling of crises
and, wherever possible, should avoid simply resorting
to the threat or use of such methods as sanctions.
The Council should act in accordance with Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations to enhance
cooperation with regional organizations.
Thirdly, the Security Council should engage in
more adequate consultations to reach a broad consensus.
Before any action is taken, every effort should be made
to reach consensus through patient consultations and
negotiations among Council members. Efforts should
be made to avoid forcing a text through if it is still
the object of major differences, so as to preserve the
credibility and authoritativeness of the resolution.
Fourthly, the Council should give more weight to
the opinions of the countries concerned and enhance
dialogue and interaction with non-Council members.
Listening to the opinions of the countries concerned will
help the Council to make more rational decisions. Such
mechanisms as the meeting with the troop-contribution
countries and police-contributing countries, and the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations should be
fully utilized. Communications with troop contributors
and the Secretariat should be enhanced before deploying
in peacekeeping missions or adjusting their mandates.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful

15-3225813/32

S/PV.7539

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

to you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate on such an important topic. We welcome the
participation of the President of the General Assembly,
Mr. Mogens Lykketoft; the Deputy Secretary-General,
Mr. Jan Eliasson; and Ambassador Jürgenson, who is
representing the President of the Economic and Social
Council.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela also supports
the statement to be made by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
Faced with complex challenges in the area of
international peace and security, which call for effective
and timely responses by the Security Council to promote
the peaceful settlement of disputes, our country values
the holding of this debate on its working methods.
This exchange makes it possible to reaffirm the need
to strengthen the Council’s working relationship with
the rest of the membership and the principal organs of
this multilateral Organization, within the framework of
their respective mandates. That process must involve
the entire Organization and its subsidiary organs. A
comprehensive reform of the Organization is necessary
and cannot be put off.
While some decisions and working methods have
been agreed and some documents approved with the
aim of improving the working methods of the Security
Council, including presidential note S/2010/507, we
believe that they are still far from what is required to face
up to the the existing challenges. Moreover, we need to
find effective formulas to promote greater transparency
and inclusivity, if we are to meet the expectations and
reflect the collective interests of the Members of this
Organization. We must also do something about the
status of the rules of the Security Council, which have
been in provisional form for 70 years. We need to adopt
a definitive text to regulate the work of that body and
put an end to the excessively discretional nature of its
actions.
Despite those calls, there are still some major
obstacles, such as lack of transparency, that adversely
affect the working dynamics of the Security Council,
and ultimately undermine the results of their execution.
At times, the process of negotiating a draft resolution has
lacked the necessary inclusivity, the discussions having
been confined to a group of actors without taking into
account the opinions of the non-permanent members of
the Security Council. Since the unity of the Council

14/32

20/10/2015

is an important element for maintaining international
peace and security, achieving that objective requires
the full participation of all the Council members. In that
regard, we stress the need to put an end to those types
of exclusionary practices that undermine transparency
and inclusivity.
We must focus attention on the sanctions
Committees. The primary purpose of those subsidiary
bodies of the Council, given the exceptional situations
in which they are established, should be to assist in the
political resolution of disputes. Ten of the 16 sanctions
Committees now in existence affect African countries.
The sanctions Committees should operate alongside
an ongoing political process. In other words, their
objectives should be clearly circumscribed and they
should have a clear end date.
However, that is not what happens under the
current practice of the Council. Once established,
sanctions Committees, for whatever reason, will exist
for decades if some of the permanent members so
desire. The remaining members, the elected members,
can do little to prevent it. Although they may chair the
Committees, they have little, if any, power to change
things. The non-permanent members of the Council can
do little to change such imbalances, given the opposing
factions that impede the possibility of carrying out
needed improvements.
Sanctions should not be used as a political tool
against countries and peoples. They should not be seen
as an end unto themselves, but rather as an instrument
bound to the solution of a given conflict. The sanctions
committees must not be seen as merely punitive.
Another issue that we must review is the power
wielded by penholders, the few permanent members
that decide what, how and when mandates are created
and considered, sometimes with little regard for the
opinions of other members. The Council’s practice is
based on a consensus reached through negotiations;
that is why we believe that a thorough democratization
of the Council’s working methods is urgently needed,
especially regarding sanctions.
Bearing in mind that international peace and
security affect all Members of the Organization,
according to the principle of the sovereign equality
of States, it is important for the Security Council to
convene open or public meetings more frequently, in
order that countries, particularly those whose cases
are under consideration, may contribute to discussing

15-32258

20/10/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

the issue with a view to reaching a peaceful resolution
of the conflict. That is even more important in cases
involving regional organizations. It is therefore
paradoxical, given that the African Union is a strategic
partner of the United Nations, that its representative,
former President Joaquim Chissano, was unable to
participate in the briefing on Western Sahara held in
April (S/PV.7435). We hope that Mr. Chissano will be
able to participate in the next meeting on that issue and
that such a situation will not be repeated.
Moreover, Venezuela believes that troop-contributing
countries should, in accordance with Article 44 of
the Charter of the United Nations, participate in the
decisions of the Council on the employment of their
contingents in peacekeeping operations. In that vein,
we support the calls of those countries for a genuine
implementation of the provisions of Article 44, which
would result in better functioning of the Security
Council and its instruments for promoting peace.
The relationship among the Security Council,
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council must be based on respect for their respective
competencies. That is why the Council should deal
strictly with issues relating to threats to international
peace and security, in accordance with Article 39 of
the Charter of the United Nations. We are concerned
about the tendency of this organ to address issues
outside its jurisdiction, issues that are properly handled
by the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council, which can consider them from a security
perspective as well. Such was the case of resolution
2240 (2015) on migrants, adopted recently by the
Council, with Venezuela abstaining. Our country sees
the interaction between the Security Council and the
other main bodies in terms of balance and respect for
their respective functions under the Charter.
In the context of a close and harmonious relationship
between the Council and the General Assembly, we
would like to highlight the important role that the
latter should play in the election of the next SecretaryGeneral. Consultations on that topic should be guided
by the principles of transparency and inclusiveness
and should start as quickly as possible, by sending a
joint communication by the Presidents of both bodies,
including a description of the process as a whole and
inviting candidates to be presented in a timely manner.
We are therefore convinced that the General
Assembly should play a more active role in that matter

S/PV.7539

so that it will not find itself simply endorsing the
recommendation made by the Security Council. The
General Assembly should be able to choose among
several candidates, taking into account geographical
balance. We also strongly support the nomination of
female candidates to fill the position mentioned and the
mainstreaming women’s equality in the Organization.
Venezuela also believes that the review of the
Council’s decision-making mechanism, in particular
the veto power, could have a positive influence on
the interaction between the Council and the General
Assembly in terms of its working methods, primarily
the competency of the General Assembly’s jurisdiction.
In that regard, we wish to again highlight that the threat
of using the veto has thwarted the legitimate aspiration
of the Palestinian State to be admitted as a full Member
of the United Nations, despite the overwhelming
support on the part of Organization’s membership.
To conclude, Venezuela calls for a body with a
more balanced focus that will avoid applying double
standards in the examination of the issues under
its consideration. In that regard, as non-permanent
members, we look forward to working together towards
a Security Council that takes into account the views of
all of its members, and the diverse geographic, political
and cultural realities of the world.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): Nigeria is very grateful to
Spain for organizing this debate on the working methods
of the Security Council and for providing a concept note
(S/2015/793, annex) to guide our deliberations. We also
welcome the convening of the debate in an open format.
It allows the Council to hear from the wider United
Nations membership on matters of concern to all of us.
Indeed, the large number of delegations that I see today
participating in the debate is a clear indication of the
interest of Member States in the working methods of
the Security Council.
We want to thank the Deputy Secretary-General,
the President of the General Assembly and the
Vice-President of the Economic and Social Council for
their briefings.
The topic of working methods, I believe, is the
subject of a continuing discourse. We strongly believe
that the change that we all seek will be achieved
incrementally — not through a revolution. As the
principal organ of the United Nations charged with
the maintenance of international peace and security,

15-3225815/32

S/PV.7539

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

the Security Council plays a unique role in the global
security architecture.
However, in carrying out that role, Article 24 of the
Charter of the United Nations makes it clear that the
Council acts on behalf of the Members of the United
Nations. That being the case, there is a need for the
Council to conduct its affairs in a manner that is not
only transparent, but accountable. We acknowledge the
positive changes in the Council’s practices in recent
times. Much has been achieved in making the Council
more open. However, we believe that a great deal more
can be done and, indeed, should be done.
In recent years, the Council has embraced greater
transparency and inclusiveness by making more
frequent use of public meetings, such as this debate,
where interested Member States are free to participate.
We have also witnessed instances where Member
States participating in the Council’s open debates have
been granted the right of reply to respond on issues
of concern to them. We welcome that as a sign of the
Council’s readiness to accommodate the interests of
other Member States.
The convening of meetings in open format in the
Council Chamber is a remarkable way by which the
Council has engaged with Member States. We believe
that giving Member States the opportunity to hear the
briefers speak and present their own perspectives on
matters concerning them adds value to the work of the
Council and underscores the effectiveness of rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
Engagement with regional organizations is also
significant in facilitating the work of the Council. In
recent times, the Security Council has made vigorous
efforts to deepen its engagement with regional
organizations, within the framework of partnerships
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
In that context, we want to take special note of the
Council’s relationship with the African Union. I believe
that is a valid point of departure. It has not been smooth
sailing — the beginning was a bit stormy — but that
is a partnership that we would like to see strengthened
in the interest of peace and security on the African
continent, as most of the items on the Council’s agenda,
as members know, are African issues.
On the relationship between the Council and the
General Assembly, the adoption of Assembly resolution
69/321, on the revitalization of the work of the Assembly,
especially the aspects pertaining to the appointment of

16/32

20/10/2015

the Secretary-General, is a significant step in lending
greater transparency and inclusiveness to the selection
and appointment process. It is our hope that the requisite
political will is manifest in implementing the resolution
in a manner that will yield concrete results.
On the Peacebuilding Commission, we recognize
the critical role it plays in supporting the work of
the Security Council. As a vital component of the
United Nations peace and security architecture, the
Peacebuilding Commission has worked assiduously
to fulfil its mandate of post-conflict peacebuilding,
preventing the recurrence of conflicts, improving
coordination within and outside the United Nations
for continued engagement in post-conflict countries
and marshalling resources to support peace. Nigeria
encourages periodic stocktaking briefings and
interactive exchanges with the Commission. We believe
that enhanced coordination and cooperation between
the Council and the Commission is indeed essential to
promoting peace in post-conflict situations. The Council
can draw on the Commission’s advice, in particular
in the areas of revisiting mandates, establishing
benchmarks and reviewing peace operations.
With regard to the Economic and Social Council,
Article 65 of the Charter of the United Nations states
that “it may furnish information to the Security
Council and shall assist the Security Council upon its
request.” While we have seen significant engagement
between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission, interaction between the Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council has been almost
negligible. It is significant to note that, of the three
pillars of the United Nations — peace and security,
development and human rights — two of them, namely,
development and human rights, fall under the purview
of the Economic and Social Council. We would
therefore like to see closer interaction between both
Councils, considering the importance of the mandate
of the Economic and Social Council and how it has
a bearing on peace and security. That is particularly
crucial in the framework of the 2030 Agenda and the
Sustainable Development Goals.
As the international scene evolves and the dynamics
of global peace and security change, the Security
Council must become more receptive to the notion
of closer engagement and coordination with various
actors on the world stage, within and outside the United
Nations system. They have an important role to play
in the maintenance of international peace and security.

15-32258

20/10/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

That cooperation, symmetry and symbiotic relationship
must be established.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, allow me to commend you,
Mr. President, on convening today’s debate. We have
seen a genuine revolution in the working methods of
the Council, with Angola speaking on behalf of six
members. Such initiatives should be supported — for
example, it could be emulated by the new members
joining the Council from the European Union.
The Security Council has been discussing in an
open format the issue of improving its working methods
for several years. We believe that external audits and
periodic stocktaking of the working methods helps
Council members to define areas where there is room
for improvement. However, we think it is necessary
once again to state clearly that the working methods
themselves and decisions on their possible modification
are the preserve of the Security Council. We firmly
believe that the sole goal of reforming the Security
Council’s working methods should be to improve the
Council’s effectiveness and efficiency in carrying out
tasks to maintain international peace and security,
which is the primary responsibility of the Council in
line with the Charter of the United Nations. Allowing
ourselves to be swept away by populism will only harm
our action.
We have heard criticism of the Council that at times
it treads on the prerogatives of other United Nations
bodies. We fully share those concerns. Our colleagues
in the Council are well aware that we are cautious when
it comes to the consideration of thematic subjects in
the Security Council, in particular when it comes to
those that rightly should fall within the remit of the
General Assembly. Today we heard about plans to
discuss in the Council the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development — and specifically Goal 16. This is not a
matter for the Security Council. This kind of discussion
was planned months before the Agenda was officially
launched, even before the specialized bodies — the
General Assembly and the High-Level Political Forum
on Sustainable Development, which is under the
Economic and Social Council — have the possibility
of beginning to work on a mechanism for conducting a
review of the implementation of the Goals. We cannot
support such initiatives in the Security Council, as
they gravely undermine the Charter prerogatives of
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council. This issue must be treated extremely seriously.

S/PV.7539

We must also recognize that many Security
Council meetings devoted to thematic subjects receive
a great response from Member States. The number of
speakers in open debates can exceed 100. On such days
the General Assembly appears to move into the Council
Chamber. Would it not be better to hold such debates in
the General Assembly Hall, where all can speak on an
equal footing?
There is another negative trend with regard to the
revitalization of the General Assembly. Dragging the
General Assembly agenda into the Security Council
draws the Council and its members away from
fulfilling their main task: focusing on country subjects
and issues on which it can and must take urgent and
tangible decisions. Perhaps due to a lack of time and the
possibility of an in-depth, patient investment of effort
into mechanisms for the peaceful settlement of each
conflict situation, on the initiative of several countries,
the Council is increasingly pushed into adopting rushed
decisions and sanctions mechanisms based on invoking
Chapter VII of the Charter. The effectiveness of such
decisions leaves a lot to be desired. They often lead to
merely worsening a crisis.
There has been a lot of commotion in recent months
in connection with the selection of the next SecretaryGeneral. Moreover, at times the discussion has not
been on substantive or technical issues. The SecretaryGeneral still has over a year left in his mandate.
However, some delegations seem intent on launching
the selection process right now. We do not think there
is any practical value in that, other than point-scoring
for those promoting the initiative. Furthermore, we
should not be putting further pressure on the current
Secretary-General, much less bringing into the United
Nations the “lame duck” concept — as the saying goes
in certain countries whose political systems are hardly
paragons of effectiveness.
What we really should be focusing in the context
of choosing the next Secretary-General is the need for
further democratization of the work of the Secretariat. It
cannot be considered normal when you have a situation
whereby three key positions — the Under-SecretariesGeneral for peacekeeping, political and humanitarian
affairs — are effectively usurped by three countries.
We believe that, in order to maintain the effectiveness
and legitimacy of the work of the Secretariat, we need
to rotate those and certain other senior posts among all
States Members of the United Nations. It is important

15-3225817/32

S/PV.7539

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

20/10/2015

to make the process for their appointment more
transparent.

majority of the population of Crimea in the United
Nations work.

We are satisfied overall with the relations between
the Security Council and the Secretariat. The leadership
of the Organization is always available to us and has
an opportunity to approach the Council on any issue.
We welcome the work of the Security Council Affairs
Division. However, we would like to draw attention to
another aspect of the work of the United Nations.

Many delegations have noted the difference in the
Security Council’s approach to countries on its agenda.
Unfortunately, that approach is selective. When drafting
a Security Council position, some of our partners, for
example, have objected to duly reflecting the opinions
of African States hosting peacekeeping operations, such
as the Sudan, South Sudan, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and others. At times even the opinion of
the African Union is ignored. On the other hand, the
positions of third countries on other issues, conveyed
via members of the Council, acquire exaggerated
significance and become an obstacle to the adoption of
necessary decisions. We call on our colleagues in the
Council to act consistently and in a principled manner
on such issues and to be guided exclusively by the need
to strengthen international peace and security.

The Secretariat is a gracious host, offering its
premises at Headquarters for events on a broad range
of issues organized by Member States. However, we
need to understand that, when holding such events,
all Members of the Organization — bar none — must
respect the rules of the house. In that regard, we think it
is unacceptable that, at the event on combating violent
extremism organized by the delegation of the United
States on 29 September, notwithstanding protests by the
leadership of the Secretariat and certain delegations,
that delegation invited representatives of the selfdeclared “Kosovo”, which is not a State Member of
the United Nations. Kosovo Albanian representatives
cannot be allowed to enter United Nations territory
except when accompanied by Secretariat officials.
Such action on the part of the United States is an abuse
of its position as host country of the United Nations
and demonstrates blatant disrespect for the Secretariat
leadership. We call for an end to such high-handedness.
On the other hands, when there is a real need to
hear the opinions of newly independent States that are
not United Nations Members, the United States tends to
erect visa barriers. Every year, Georgia introduces to
the General Assembly a draft resolution on refugees that
cannot be considered without inviting representatives
of Abkhazia and South Ossetia to New York. Those
representatives must be given the opportunity to have
their say, even if only at special, informal events at
Headquarters.
The same applies to the participation of
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in the work
of the United Nations. Situations arise in which
countries that one would imagine to be the strongest
proponents of the participation of civil society actually
block appearances by representatives of NGOs that
hold different views to their own. Those who would be
seen to be objective should endorse the participation,
for instance, of representatives of the overwhelming

18/32

We have consistently advocated improved
coordination of the activities of the Security Council
with the broadest possible circle of Member States,
as well as with representatives who are competent to
provide information that is important to the adoption
of decisions. To that end, the Security Council is
endowed with appropriate mechanisms, including
unofficial meetings under the so-called Arria Formula.
Unfortunately, however, in recent years there has been a
growing trend to use such meetings to stage propaganda
spectacles in which, for the reference of the Security
Council, certain delegations seek to promote their own
unilateral positions.
Moreover, the cost of using United Nations premises
and conference services — including interpretation
in some cases — is met through the regular budget.
In other words, all we taxpayers would appear to be
subsidizing the political activities of certain States.
That is unacceptable, and we call on our colleagues to
use the Arria Formula format exclusively for its original
end of providing greater clarity to the Security Council
with respect to situations on its agenda.
We are convinced that the Council would benefit
from a democratization of its work, facilitated by a
more balanced distribution of obligations informally
linked to the so-called penholdership of some dossiers.
Certain Council members should not consider countries
or even regions to be their exclusive purview or act as
mentors on issues concerning those countries. Such

15-32258

20/10/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

conduct is a remnant of days gone by that we need to
abandon.
In conclusion, with respect to the issue of the veto,
which has been raised today, although we do not believe
that it is relevant to the matter of working methods, the
veto is one of the key provisions of the Charter that
prompts Council members to reach consensus. I would
simply say that it is clear why undermining the right of
veto is the goal of those who would seek a mathematical
majority on the Council, yet it is unclear why the veto
is sometimes criticized by representatives of countries
or regions that, in the absence of the veto, would find
themselves under massive pressure from a particular
group of States. I would suggest that they consider their
own national interests.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Spanish presidency for having organized this
debate. In the spirit of your concept note (S/2015/793,
annex), Germany and France have decided to issue
a joint intervention. I shall deliver the first part, and
my German colleague the second. This unprecedented
initiative reflects the depth of the Franco-German
friendship and our shared willingness to change both
expand the Security Council and to change its working
methods. The excellent Spanish concept note stresses
that the Security Council has demonstrated creative
thinking with respect to evolving circumstances by
establishing a practice and procedures that enjoy
legitimate confidence and demonstrate efficiency in its
work.
I thank the Deputy Secretary-General, the President
of the General Assembly and the Vice-President of the
Economic and Social Council for their introductory
remarks. France and Germany strongly favour
strengthening relations between the various United
Nations bodies, in full respect for the powers set out
in the Charter. Much has been said about the Economic
and Social Council, but we feel it important to mention
two important partners of the Security Council: the
Human Rights Council and the International Criminal
Court (ICC).
Respect for human rights and harmonious
development are inextricably linked to peace and
security. Germany and France encourage more frequent
briefings to the Council by the High Commissioner for
Human Rights or his deputy, the Special Advisers of
the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide
and the Responsibility to Protect, as well as other

S/PV.7539

human rights mechanisms. The protection issues are at
the heart of the Council’s activities and its mandated
peacekeeping missions; this is the heart of a more
preventive approach to crises. It is therefore natural
that the Council should interact directly and frequently
with those who are primarily responsible for these
issues, as well as in post-conflict situations with the
Peacebuilding Commission, as has already been noted.
There is no lasting peace without justice and the
fight against impunity. France and Germany are in
favour of more extensive contacts between the Council
and the International Criminal Court, either through
visits here by the Prosecutor or of the Council to The
Hague, and of the improved sharing of information
across peace missions in cases where the ICC is
investigating, given that the Court’s activities are in
fact intrinsically linked with the justice provisions of
the mandates of these operations. We can only regret
that some Council resolutions are not implemented as
they deserve. Consistency requires that the Council
itself drew the consequences of the resolutions it has
adopted with regard to ICC referrals.
The responsibility to protect depends on the
Council’s ability to avoid obstacles when it must act to
prevent or stop mass atrocities situations. As Council
members know, France and Mexico have proposed an
initiative to regulate the use of the veto in the case
of the most serious crimes, as defined by the Rome
Statute. Our German friends, like 80 other States on
all continents, have given us their support. This is a
pragmatic initiative aimed at achieving a collective and
voluntary commitment on the part of the permanent
members. Aware of this challenge, and seeking
the broadest possible effort, Germany and France
have decided to support the code of conduct of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group,
whose objectives are complementary to the French
initiative.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like to
make only a brief comment in my national capacity,
since Spain’s position was clearly reflected in the
statement made by the representative of Angola. At the
end of this meeting, I shall, in my national capacity,
deliver a brief summary of today’s debate, to be
circulated to all delegations.
Resuming my functions as President of the Security
Council, I thank representatives for keeping their
statements brief. The concept note before the Council

15-3225819/32

S/PV.7539

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

(S/2015/793, annex) up to ten minutes are alloted to
joint statements by groups, three minutes to national
statements, and only two minutes to national statements
complementing joint statements. Some delegations
have told me that two minutes is very little time, but if a
delegation has already been represented in a statement
delivered on behalf of a group, then two minutes should
be sufficient. I believe that in that respect our working
methods should evolve, because when the Organization
was created it had 51 Member States, and now we are
193. We will have to organize ourselves in a different,
more innovative way in order to become more effective.
I should like to ask that representatives speak at
a normal speed so that the interpreters can properly
translate their statements. I would also like to encourage
delegations to continue to deliver summarized versions
of their statements and circulate their full statements
in writing or post them on their respective web pages.
I now give the floor to the representative of Sweden.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I very much welcome the
opportunity to participate in this open debate of the
Council on behalf of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC). I would first like to say a few words on behalf
of the Commission. I wanted initially to express
appreciation for the recognition of the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission that has been expressed by
so many here around the table this morning.
I believe that today’s debate is very timely in the
light of the three reviews on the United Nations related
to its peace and security agenda that have been presented
to Member States over the last couple of months.
The reviews make a strong case for changing the
way we do business in order to ensure a more effective
response and support to sustaining peace. More
integrated, coherent and holistic action is called for in
order for our common goal of building and sustaining
peace not to be relegated to a near afterthought, but
rather to put it at the centre of what we do. That will
require concerted efforts from all of us, within our
respective roles, as well as a real shift towards working
better together.
With only 10 years in the making, the Peacebuilding
Commission is still one of the youngsters in the United
Nations family. I would like to highlight three features
that make the PBC a fairly unique intergovernmental
advisory platform to the Security Council, upon its
request, and that have made useful contributions in

20/32

20/10/2015

support of the countries with which it has engaged over
the years.
First, the countries with which the PBC engages are
always at the centre of our deliberations. Durable peace
can be achieved only at the national level and requires
strong national leadership, building, inter alia, on broad,
inclusive processes. Without their perspective, our
understanding will fall short of addressing the specific
challenges they face. Therefore, it is imperative that we
focus our support on strengthening the capacities of
post-conflict countries in order for them to take the lead
and exercise full national ownership. It is also therefore
a critical aspect of the PBC’s advisory function to help
integrate the national perspectives of the countries on
its agenda.
Secondly, the PBC is a staunch advocate for
improved cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations such as the
African Union (AU). During the just-concluded Africa
Week, the impressive depth and breadth of the activities
undertaken by both the AU and the regional economic
communities in responding to conflict became clear.
Closer cooperation means first of all that we
listen. By virtue of being neighbours in the region,
these actors have a more intimate understanding of the
issues at hand; they are often more invested; and they
often have a lot of credibility at the national level. By
drawing on these actors’ knowledge and experience,
we gain a deeper understanding of country-specific
realities, which in turn is a prerequisite for effective
United Nations support.
The Peacebuilding Commission forged stronger
partnership with regional and subregional actors as a
matter of priority, and we encourage others to do the
same.
Thirdly, the unique composition structure of the
PBC membership ensures that peacebuilding strategies
receive the broad support of key stakeholders, which
contribute to and engage in the process of the design
and implementation of these strategies, both in
New York and in the field. For example, through the
membership of the top troop- and police-contributing
countries, the PBC can help ensure a more holistic
approach when considering decisions on transitions
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding. We engage
with those that are implementing the often far-reaching
peacekeeping mandates. Our membership also includes
key donors, including the international financial

15-32258

20/10/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

institutions. Consultations with, and contributions
from, these stakeholders can help to ensure greater
coherence and continuity of international engagement
and support throughout the so-called conflict cycle.
Turning to the relationship between the Security
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission — a
relationship that is of fundamental importance to our
ability to fulfil our mandate and to deliver on our
advisory function — I should like to highlight three
points where our respective bodies might work even
better together.
First, through its convening role of a wide array
of critical regional and international actors, we can
help bring a peacebuilding perspective to the Council’s
decision-making. Our input contributes to breaking
the silos between United Nations principal organs and
actors and addressing fragmentation and duplication of
effort by bringing together security and development
actors.
Secondly, the PBC can help formulate the postconflict strategies of the countries requesting our
advice and bring priority peacebuilding issues to the
attention of the Security Council upon its request.
Lastly, in support of the drawdown phase of
peacekeeping operations, the PBC’s partnerships with
regional organizations and international and regional
financial institutions will help sustain attention and
commitment from the international community to
national peacebuilding priorities, focusing in particular
on addressing the root causes of conflict and supporting
post-conflict peacebuilding objectives.
In conclusion, the report of the Advisory Group
of Experts entitled “The Challenge of Sustaining
Peace” will be under consideration by Member States.
It provides important recommendations on how to
strengthen the relationship between the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Council. The Group recommends
that the Security Council regularly request and draw
upon the advice of the PBC. We can certainly do
more from our side as well in terms of providing
more timely, relevant and strategic advice on postconflict peacebuilding to the Council. A number of
recommendations in the report aim at ensuring that we
remain an effective instrument that can help the Council
meet its longer-term objective, and it is certainly our
ambition to try to live up to that.
I should now like to say a few words in my national
capacity under rule 37 and on behalf of the Nordic

S/PV.7539

countries, namely, Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway
and my own country, Sweden.
A few weeks ago, world leaders gathered here in
New York to adopt an agenda of historic significance.
The 2030 Agenda sets the world on a path towards
sustainable development. A month before that, leaders
met in Addis Ababa to agree on means of financing
for development, and we are now optimistically
looking ahead to Paris, where we are, hopefully, set to
embrace a universal and ambitious climate agreement.
These achievements are signs of political will. They
demonstrate our ability to unite and find collective
solutions to face the most serious challenges of our
time. Vigorous strides are being made with respect to
the development leg of the United Nations.
At the same time, the peace and security leg is
hobbled. The number of conflicts in the world is at its
highest since the 1960s. The number of people fleeing
from war, persecution and poverty is the highest since
the end of the Second World War. We have failed in
prevention, and we have failed in our response. The
Security Council is clearly falling short of its mandate
of maintaining international peace and security. The
determination that the international community has
demonstrated in the areas of sustainable development
financing and climate must be matched by Council
resolve to redouble its efforts in support of diplomacy,
good offices and political solutions. The world has
a right to expect that the Security Council and its
members will be guided first and foremost by the ideals
set out in the United Nations Charter.
We believe that we need a more effective,
representative and transparent Security Council that
can adequately respond to today’s challenges.
First, limiting the use of the veto would be a key step
in enhancing the Council’s ability to respond to global
crises. Therefore, we the Nordic countries strongly
support the code of conduct regarding Security Council
action against genocide, crimes against humanity or war
crimes elaborated by the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency Group, as well as the Franco-Mexican
initiative to restrain the use of the veto. We encourage
those Member States that have not done so to come
forward and support those initiatives.
Secondly, we need a reformed Council that is truly
representative and that reflects the geopolitical realities
of today, and in which Africa, Asia and Latin America
are adequately represented. The Nordic countries

15-3225821/32

S/PV.7539

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

support the intergovernmental process on Security
Council reform and efforts to move this process
forward.
Thirdly, we need more transparency. Open debates
and public briefings serve to make the Council more
open to the wider membership, thereby contributing
to strengthening the buy-in and the legitimacy of its
decisions. The use of new technology offers new
opportunities.
A topical matter is the selection and appointment
of the Secretary-General. We expect the Council to
do its part in ensuring that the landmark resolution
adopted in September (General Assembly resolution
69/321) is fully and promptly acted upon. As a first
step, the next President of the Council should, together
with the President of the General Assembly, kick-start
the nomination process with a joint letter calling for
qualified candidates, especially women.
Fourthly, we need a more holistic approach,
as highlighted in all the recent reports on peace
operations, peacebuilding and resolution 1325 (2000).
Active consultation and dialogue with troop- and
police-contributing countries and regional and
subregional organizations, as well as with countries on
the Council’s agenda, leads to a richer understanding
of the challenges and potential solutions. The use
of other instruments, such as the horizon-scanning
briefings, Arria Formula meetings and informal
interactive dialogues, can help bring potential crises
and deteriorating situations to the early attention of
Council members. Such interaction helps the Council
to devise preventive measures.
Finally, we need more efficiency. New non-permanent
members need to be prepared when they join the
Council. We welcome last year’s decision to hold
Council elections six months before the start of the new
members’ term. We note the annual Finnish workshop
called “Hitting the ground running”, which aims at
providing new members with an in-depth orientation
to Council practice, procedures and working methods.
The expectations regarding the Security Council
are high. The challenges in coming to grips with the
new threats are indeed very daunting, but we believe
that the Council can move to become more effective.
Above all, that requires political will and that members
of the Council take their roles and responsibilities with
the utmost sincerity and with the full realization that

22/32

20/10/2015

their task is to put the Charter of the United Nations
above their narrow national interests.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Lauber (Switzerland): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today’s open debate.
I am pleased to take the floor in my capacity as the
coordinator of ACT, which stands for Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency. Launched in 2013,
ACT is a cross-regional group of 25 countries aimed
at improving the working methods of the Security
Council. ACT’s efforts focus on the Security Council in
its present composition and have remained independent
from the comprehensive Security Council reform
process.
How the Security Council can prevent or stop mass
atrocities has garnered considerable attention. There is
widespread and growing concern about the veto when
employed in such cases to block Council action. In
that context, ACT welcomes the political declaration
presented this morning by France, addressed to the five
permanent members, on the suspension of the veto in
cases of mass-atrocity crimes.
However, ACT believes that all Security Council
members, and indeed all States, have a role to play in
improving the Council’s response to atrocity crimes.
Under the leadership of Liechtenstein, we have
therefore prepared a code of conduct, a voluntary
political commitment, which contains a pledge to
support timely and decisive Security Council action in
situations involving atrocity crimes, as well as a pledge
not to vote against credible draft Security Council
resolutions aimed at preventing or ending these crimes.
Since effective Council action to prevent and end
atrocity crimes is a matter for all Council members,
the code is open for support by any current or potential
future Security Council member — that is, all Member
States. As of today, a total of 82 States have committed
themselves to it. The code will be officially launched
on 23 October, on the occasion of the seventieth
anniversary of the United Nations. We encourage all
Member States to commit themselves to the code before
then.
Under the stewardship of Estonia and Costa Rica,
ACT also played an active role in the negotiation of
General Assembly resolution 69/321, on the revitalization
of the work of the General Assembly, in particular
with regard to the appointment of the next Secretary-

15-32258

20/10/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

General. The resolution was adopted by consensus,
and ACT looks forward to its full implementation. In
line with that resolution, and in order for the selection
process to be open and inclusive, our group encourages
the President of the General Assembly and the President
of the Security Council to write a joint letter addressed
to all Member States calling for nominations. To be
completed on time, this process should start without
delay. Following this essential first step, our group
looks forward to the publication of a regularly updated
list of candidates, as well as the scheduling of meetings
and hearings with declared candidates.
Since the publication of presidential note
S/2010/507, the Council has agreed on 10 subsequent
notes, but their implementation has often proved to
be unsatisfactory or inconsistent. In order to facilitate
such follow-up, ACT suggests that the Council prepare
a note that would consolidate and streamline all
decisions taken regarding working methods.
Presidential note S/2013/515, issued in 2013,
touches upon many aspects related to interaction and
dialogue with non-Council members and bodies. Our
group has welcomed the commitment reiterated therein
to continue the practice of providing wrap-up meetings
and informal briefing sessions to non-members.
Seeking information and understanding regarding the
Council’s activities remains a crucial and legitimate
request. We regret that so far this year only four wrapup sessions have taken place.
The format of Council meetings remains another
a key element of access and transparency. ACT
therefore welcomes the efforts of the Council to hold
open meetings. So far this year, just about half of the
meetings have been public, a figure similar to last year.
ACT welcomes the 12 Arria Formula meetings
organized during 2015. We want to underline that
that format permits interaction with non-traditional
briefers, including representatives from civil society,
thereby allowing the Council to be more thoroughly
informed about a given situation.
ACT notes that 19 open debates have taken place in
2015. Such debates are of crucial importance in order
to hear the views of the wider membership, including
troop- and police-contributing countries. However,
the response of the Council to open debates remains
in most cases rather limited. The outcome documents
are usually adopted before the views of the wider
membership are even heard. ACT therefore hopes that

S/PV.7539

today’s open debate on working methods can contribute
to shifting this practice, and it welcomes the intention
of Spain to ensure follow-up. As it did last year, ACT
will produce a document that could serve as a guide
for follow-up work by the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Question.
Presidential note S/2013/515 also recalls the
intention of the Council to remain committed
to maintaining regular communication with the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). That advisory body
to the Council has a strong role to play in preventing the
recurrence of conflicts. A coordinated and committed
approach to post-conflict peacebuilding is key to
preventing countries from falling back into conflict.
ACT is convinced that the PBC can assume the role of
a forum where critical situations are discussed early, in
an inclusive manner and with relevant stakeholders. We
also encourage the Council to invite the Chairs of the
various country-specific configurations to participate
regularly in Council meetings.
More generally, ACT welcomes the Council’s
renewed focus on prevention. We regret that
horizon-scanning meetings have all but discontinued
since 2013, and we would welcome enhanced engagement
by the Secretary-General to inform the Council about
matters that, in his opinion, may threaten international
peace and security. The report of the Secretary-General
on conflict prevention (S/2015/730), as well as the 2015
reviews on peace operations, women and peace and
security, and the peacebuilding architecture all contain
useful ideas and proposals in that regard.
The Council acts on all our behalf, on behalf of
the full membership of the United Nations. This is
why accountability, coherence and transparency in its
work and in the implementation of its own decisions are
crucial. Last week, five new members of the Security
Council were elected. ACT encourages all elected
members to seize the opportunities that are presented to
them. Our group calls for the implementation without
delay of presidential note S/2014/268, on enhancing
wider participation by Council members in the work
of the Council, and presidential note S/2014/393,
on ensuring continuity in the work of the subsidiary
bodies.
ACT notes with satisfaction the way the Council
visiting missions have been recently arranged, with two
countries on the Council co-leading the mission. That
practice can serve as an example for the drafting of the

15-3225823/32

S/PV.7539

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

products of the Council. In that regard, ACT welcomes
the involvement of the United Kingdom and Spain in
the elaboration of resolution 2242 (2015), on women
and peace and security, adopted in the past week.
Today’s debate is the sixth in what has become an
annual practice since 2010. Our discussion is about
much more than presidential note S/2010/507 or simply
working methods. It is about making the Council
more effective, accountable and inclusive. It is about
how to ensure that the Council carries out its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security in a more transparent and effective
way in order to contribute to positive developments on
the ground. To that end, ACT will remain committed to
working constructively with the Security Council and
the wider membership.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Braun (Germany) (spoke in French): I speak on
behalf of France and Germany, following the statement
made by my French colleague.
Germany and France have consistently supported a
reform of the Security Council with a view to making
it more efficient and more in tune with the current
global political realities. A revision of its working
methods is a significant way to achieve that end. We
thank those who contribute daily to the implementation
of its procedures and who assist delegations, namely,
the Security Council Affairs Division, under the very
competent leadership of Director Movses Abelian.
We also underscore the importance of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions on the topic and its efforts towards
codification, as was illustrated in the annex of concept
note S/2010/507, adopted under the efficient leadership
of the Permanent Mission of Japan to the United
Nations. We pay tribute to the Japanese delegation
and congratulate them on their recent election to the
Council.
The President’s concept note emphasizes the need
for transparency and inclusiveness as well as the crucial
role of the Secretary-General. Germany and France
support a more transparent and inclusive process for
selecting the Secretary-General. Our work needs to
be guided by the consensus achieved through General
Assembly resolution 69/321, adopted of 11 September,
on revitalizing the General Assembly. It is now crucial

24/32

20/10/2015

to implement the clear provisions of the text on which
all Member States have agreed. That is particularly
important for the joint letter by the President of the
General Assembly and the President of the Security
Council on the issue of nominations for the post of
Secretary-General. The resolution invites Member
States to consider women candidates for the position,
given the fact that to date all the Secretaries-General
have been men. We firmly support that call.
We also support all efforts that will enable us to
improve the transparency of the Security Council, by
including non-member States through Arria Formula
meetings and monthly wrap-up sessions. We will
also support the efforts to promote more interactive
discussions, and we would like to encourage future
members of the Security Council, whom we congratulate
on their recent election, to follow that path.
Finally, it is crucial to improve the working methods
of the Council, but that cannot replace the urgent need
for structural reforms. Germany and France would
like to recall their support for the consensus decision
by the General Assembly of 14 September 2015 on the
issue of equitable representation and expansion of the
Security Council. It is now important to enter into a
phase of negotiations on the text during the next stage
of intergovernmental negotiations.
If the Charter of the United Nations has withstood
changing times, that is because it enshrines the most
fundamental rules to help us navigate the fog of peace,
to quote the title of a recent book by our friend JeanMarie Guéhenno. I would like to conclude by saying
that the text of the Charter has contributed to forging
a friendship and lasting partnership between France
and Germany within the European Union. It is that
phenomenon that we would like to illustrate for the
Council today by making this joint statement.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Mahtar (India): I thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this open debate. Given the paucity of time,
I will come to the substance directly.
First, we think that the openness of this debate is
constricted by imposing a time limit of three minutes
on non-members and no time limit for members.
Secondly, one of the more important issues before
the United Nations in the coming year will be the
selection of the next Secretary-General. There is a great

15-32258

20/10/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

S/PV.7539

deal of debate on the prerogatives of the Security Council
and the General Assembly in that matter. At the heart,
however, is the question of the prerogatives of the five
permanent member and the rest of the membership of
the United Nations. To a large extent, that is determined
by something as seemingly innocuous as the working
methods of the Council.

Fifthly, there should be transparency in determining
the list of speakers in open debates. In our view,
priority should be given to Member States rather than
organizations with consultative status. With regard to
non-members, there would be merit in beginning with
Ministers followed by plenipotentiary envoys and then
others.

My delegation has pressed for the Council to
recommend two or more names to the General
Assembly. While the pronouncements of the General
Assembly do not specifically provide for it, there is, in
our view, no legal impediment for the Council to do so.
An important step would also be to do away with secret
straw polls using different coloured slips that allow the
five permanent members to exercise the veto without
even taking ownership of it. Discussions should be held
in official meetings of the Council, preferably open
ones but not necessarily so. The Secretary-General
should issue reports, as is usual, summarizing the
proceedings. Except for April, June and October, it will
be elected members who will preside over the Council
in every month of 2016. It will be for them to decide
whether or not the selection of the Secretary-General
will remain the sole preserve of the five permanent
members.

We appreciate that the outcome of this debate will
be adopted after all speakers have spoken. We would
request that on the next occasion of an open debate
an informal discussion should also be arranged with
non-members of the Council on the content of the
outcome. That would go a long way towards enhancing
its acceptability.

Thirdly, in the debate about transparency, we need to
mention that the most non-transparent of the subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council is the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) — the
Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee. No information is
shared on the criteria for listing or delisting individuals
and organizations on whom sanctions are applied. It is
our apprehension that there may in fact be no criteria
at all and that any of the 15 members may be allowed
to exercise a veto without assigning any reason and
without the wider membership being informed of
their having done so. In April, the new Chair of the
1267 Committee organized a briefing for the wider
membership of the United Nations and said that he
would do so periodically. However, no meeting has
since been held. His predecessor had also kept the work
of the Committee cloaked in secrecy.
Fourthly, Article 44 of the Charter requires that
consultations be held with troop-contributing countries
before the mandates of peacekeeping operations are
finalized. Regrettably, that has never happened. Again,
we look towards the elected members of the Council to
make a new beginning.

In conclusion, I must say that the problems
afflicting the Security Council go deeper than its
working methods. While a focus on working methods
is useful, it can in no way be a substitute for reforming
the Council in a manner that would give its decisions
legitimacy and acceptability.
The President (spoke in Spanish): It is true that
time is short, because there are many delegations that
want to take the floor, but I would like to point out that
six member delegations have limited their speaking
time and that one member spoke on behalf of six.
Therefore, we are applying the same rules to Council
members.
I now give the floor to the representative of Saudi
Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): Allow me, at the outset, to congratulate you,
Sir, on your wise leadership of the work of the Security
Council this month, and I wish you every success. I
also wish to thank you for convening this meeting on
the working methods of the Council. We agree with the
concept note (S/2015/793) that you have so carefully
prepared.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has, on several
occasions, called for the reform of the Security Council
and the improvement of its working methods. We live
in a world torn apart by war, violence and serious
extremism, so we look to the Council to defend
international security and maintain peace. The process
of Security Council reform began in 1993. A number
of reports and statements have been published since
that date in documents calling for improvements in
the Council’s working methods and stressing the

15-3225825/32

S/PV.7539

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

complementary relationship among the General
Assembly, the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council. Although positive results have been
achieved in such areas as transparency and broader
participation, it has, unfortunately, not yet been
possible to find a comprehensive solution that allows
the Security Council to address its fundamental tasks
as we would have wished.
We have now reached a point in which a majority
of States Members agree that there is a fundamental
problem with the working methods of the Council,
which affects its credibility and weakens its ability
to resolve conflicts, as we can see from the Council’s
deadlock with respect to several issues, including
the Palestinian question and the crisis in Syria. My
delegation therefore appreciates all the efforts underway
to improve the Council’s working methods, including
the initiative of French President François Hollande
with respect to restrictions on the use of the veto in
situations involving serious crimes and the initiatives
that would support that proposal.
My delegation calls for the positive consideration
of all of the ideas for reforming the Security Council,
in particular those proposed by the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency Group, to which my
country, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, belongs, with a
view to improving the working methods of the Security
Council and in favour of voluntary restrictions on the
use of the veto. We also support the idea of a collective
agreement to remove the obstacles to accountability
for war crimes and genocide, to increase transparency,
including in the selection of the Secretary-General
and in relations with regional organizations, and to
enable the Council to accomplish its most basic and
most important function, namely, the maintenance
of international peace and security with a view to
preventing conflicts and resolving the issues afflicting
countries in post-conflict situations.
The reform of the Security Council is one of the
major tasks that the international community should
take up as it celebrates the seventieth anniversary of
the founding of the United Nations. My country stands
ready to cooperate fully with other Member States in
order to attain that important objective.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Alday González (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Spanish delegation for convening today’s

26/32

20/10/2015

open debate and for its introduction of the concept note
(S/2015/793) to guide our discussion, and we grateful
for the briefings presented by the President of the
General Assembly, the Vice-President of the Economic
and Social Council and Deputy Secretary-General
Eliasson.
The growing participation of Member States in
open debates such as today’s demonstrates clearly
that there has been gradual improvement in the
working methods of the Council and provides a clear
signal of the interest of the majority in advancing
the goal of providing the entire membership with
more transparency, accountability, inclusiveness and
efficiency. We particularly acknowledge the boost
that the elected members of the Security Council have
given to the process in recent years, and we hope that
the countries elected by the General Assembly last
week to sit on the Council from January next year will
strengthen that dynamic.
My delegation wishes to acknowledge the
meticulous work carried out by the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group through
various working groups to improve the ways in which the
Council and other United Nations organs can improve
the interaction among them, and between each of them
and the other Member States. We therefore welcome the
support of ACT members for the political proposal to
restrict the use of the veto in cases of genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity, as put forward by
the Foreign Ministers of France and Mexico last month
here at Headquarters. We hope that the complementary
initiative on the part of ACT members will also enjoy
the wide support of Member States when it is formally
presented on Friday at the commemoration of the
seventieth anniversary of our Organization.
Mexico sees the veto as a responsibility, not
a privilege. When a permanent member uses it to
block action against mass atrocities, it does so in
contravention of the Charter. Limiting the use of
the veto in such situations is a moral imperative
and a principle underlying the accountability of the
permanent members of the Council to the international
community.
We also call on the Security Council, in the
discharge of its role as guarantor of international
peace and security, to do a better job in its advisory
role to the Peacebuilding Commission, and to enhance
its interaction with countries contributing troops

15-32258

20/10/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

S/PV.7539

and police to peacekeeping operations, with timely
consultations on the definition, amendment or renewal
of mandates.

successors can build on the lessons learned in the past
twelve months so that they can facilitate progress with
absolute transparency and objectivity.

In recent years, we have found that the flow of
information to non-Council members on what is
discussed in this Chamber has improved. The desire
of some countries on the Council to inform their
counterparts, coupled with the work of analysis and
dissemination undertaken by non-governmental
organizations and academia, has also contributed to that
improvement. In that context, I thank the delegation of
Venezuela, which, in its capacity as representative of
the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States, has
on a daily and consistent basis shared information on
the work and agenda of the Council with the rest of the
regional Group.

Mexico believes that reforming the structure of the
Security Council is possible if all parties place political
will and commitment before any other consideration in
the negotiations. We need a more effective, transparent
and representative Security Council that is able to
adequately respond to the challenges that arise in the
international agenda.

We also believe that the issue of whether or not
to hold monthly wrap-up sessions at the end of each
presidency reflects the sharp division of views prevalent
within the Council on its working methods. There are
those who have resolved to strengthen the transparency
that must prevail in the Security Council, and those
who resist, reinforcing the stereotype of secrecy that
has often characterized this Chamber, which inhibits
a more transparent relationship between those who sit
around this table for two years or on a permanent basis
and those who are spectators.
We welcome the result of the process on revitalizing
the work of the General Assembly regarding the election
of the next Secretary-General. The active involvement
of the membership and civil society enables us to move
forward. We commend the Presidents of the General
Assembly and the Security Council for working in a
coordinated manner to implement the provisions of
the resolution. We believe that a clear timetable for the
selection process and the holding of forums in which
we can meet and exchange views with the candidates,
perhaps using the Arria Formula format, would be
very useful to the entire membership and would meet
the objective of promoting greater transparency in the
election of the next Secretary-General.
Similarly, we hope that the spirit of cooperation
we saw in the revitalization of the work of the General
Assembly will be transferred to the intergovernmental
negotiations on Security Council reform. We appreciate
the work done by Ambassador Rattray as facilitator of the
intergovernmental negotiations during the Assembly’s
sixty-ninth session and hope that his successor or

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank Spain for convening today’s open
debate, which we realize is the result of great efforts by
our Organization at this time when we are celebrating
its seventieth anniversary.
As the President’s concept note (S/2015/793, annex)
rightly states, although very significant progress has
been made in the working methods of the Security
Council, there is room for more improvement and for
better implementation, which will help to boost the
effectiveness of the Council’s decisions and to provide
greater coordination with other organs of the United
Nations. As the representative of Angola noted earlier,
the Council’s work lies at the heart of the work of the
Organization.
I would like to discuss two points that Colombia
considers worthy of highlighting.
First, one of the issues that has a direct impact
on the work of the Security Council is naturally
related to the enormous challenge of bringing about
lasting peace in conflict areas or places that have just
emerged from conflict, and although the Peacebuilding
Commission — we have just heard from its Chairperson,
the Permanent Representative of Sweden — the
Peacebuilding Fund, the Peacebuilding Support Office
and other operational peacebuilding entities play a key
role, the issue remains part of the Security Council’s
responsibilities. As the report of the Secretary-General’s
Advisory Group of Experts on the 2015 Review of the
United Nations Peacebuilding Architecture states, it is
necessary to have a more comprehensive approach to
peace consolidation, one that avoids fragmentation and
a silo mentality in the roles of the General Assembly
and the Security Council and that takes into account
the fact that not only are military and field operations

15-3225827/32

S/PV.7539

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

part of the Council’s responsibilities, but so are conflict
prevention, recovery and rebuilding operations in postconflict situations.
Secondly, with respect to the resolution on the
revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
(General Assembly resolution 69/321), my country,
along with many others, played a very active role in the
negotiations on the draft. We believe its adoption stands
as great recognition of our work and an important step
towards greater transparency and more inclusiveness
in the selection and appointment of the SecretaryGeneral. Clear guidelines like the joint letter from the
Presidents of the General Assembly and the Security
Council outlining and explaining the procedure,
continual sharing of information on the candidates,
and informal dialogues or meetings with candidates
are of enormous importance. All this will support
greater involvement of the membership, which I think
has begun. The resolution is a fundamental part of our
vision of working methods reform. Colombia calls for
its implementation without hesitation.
Another initiative that is very dear to my country,
which 48 Member States have joined, is the search for
suitable women candidates for the position of SecretaryGeneral. The historic role that a woman could play at
this new stage would be the beginning of great progress
in reform. Like these 48 nations, I am sure that we can
work together on this proposal, which hopefully can be
a great historic opportunity — as many here have said,
beginning with the President and many other members
of the Council, for whose support I am grateful — to
initiate those changes and bring together the visions that
civil society, academia and of course the Organization
itself have as we approach the important election of the
next Secretary- General of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Poland.
Mr. Winid (Poland): I would like to thank the
President for organizing today’s meeting and for
Spain’s devotion to discussing the working methods of
the Security Council.
Guided by the President’s excellent concept note
(S/2015/793, annex), I would like to focus on just
two issues, especially on the relationship between
the Security Council and the General Assembly, with
special emphasis on the selection and the appointment
of the Secretary-General.

28/32

20/10/2015

More transparency, inclusiveness and greater
interaction with the candidates should guide the
process of electing the next Secretary-General. We
were pleased to include these aspects in the recent
General Assembly resolution, 69/321, on revitalization
of the Assembly’s work, negotiated under the very
able leadership of Ambassadors Vladimir Drobnjak of
Croatia and Wilfried Emvula of Namibia. I would like
to take this opportunity to congratulate them on their
reappointment to their positions.
Like Colombia, Poland is in favour of presenting
women candidates for the position of SecretaryGeneral and therefore welcomes the relevant provisions
in resolution 69/321. In our opinion, choosing a female
Secretary-General would constitute a significant step
towards achieving gender balance throughout the entire
United Nations system.
Yet another fundamental principle serving as a
cornerstone of our work within the United Nations is
geographical distribution. On this occasion, I would like
to recall that in the 70-year history of our Organization,
the Secretary-General has never been appointed from
among candidates from the Eastern European Group. We
therefore believe that the Council should take regional
rotation duly into account in its recommendation of a
candidate to the General Assembly.
We are looking forward to an official start of the
process of selecting the next Secretary-General by the
Presidents of the General Assembly and the Security
Council, as envisaged in the Assembly resolution. We
also hope that the cooperation between the Council and
the Assembly during the upcoming election will set a
good example and standards for the future.
I would also take this opportunity to emphasize
that comprehensive Security Council reform is not
limited only to the Council’s working methods. This
is a matter of great importance to my country. We
are looking forward to a swift resumption of the
intergovernmental negotiations, which were skilfully
conducted by the Permanent Representative of Jamaica,
Ambassador Courtenay Rattray, during the Assembly’s
last session. While welcoming the progress reached
so far in improving the Council’s working methods,
Poland believes that further increasing transparency in
the Council’s activities would serve not only the wider
membership, but also the Council itself.
In my final 10 seconds, I would like to say that
it is remarkable how much more an organization can

15-32258

20/10/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

achieve by making very simple adjustments to its
working methods. Small steps can be taken that will
hopefully lead us to more comprehensive reform of the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the United
Nations as a whole.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Ms. Rodríguez Pineda (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): We welcome this timely debate, held as
we mark the seventieth anniversary of the United
Nations and aimed at promoting efforts to achieve an
accountable, more transparent and effective Security
Council, adapted to the world of today. We would also
like to thank the briefers for their presentations, all
of which help to give us an up-to-date picture of their
work and of the interaction between the various organs
of the United Nations.
Today I would like to discuss three issues of
particular relevance to the working methods of the
Security Council.
First, the use of the veto by those who have that right
has frequently prevented this body from complying
fully with its responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations. It does not foster unity or encourage
us to seek a common understanding, and far from
helping to defend the collective interest, it obstructs
and undermines it.
We also believe firmly that we must take specific
action if we are to enable the Security Council to
prevent and stop mass atrocities. As a first step, we
could limit the use of the veto in cases of atrocities,
and we therefore support France and Mexico’s proposal
for restraint in its use, and for a code of conduct for
Security Council actions against genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes. However, we must
not stop there. We should keep in mind that the area in
which the Security Council has had the greatest failure
has been in implementing and genuinely following up
on its own decisions. It is in everyone’s interest to ensure
that those decisions are complied with effectively.
Secondly, Guatemala is concerned about the
increase in the number of letters sent to the presidency
of the Council with the aim of justifying military action
taken in accordance with Article 51 of the Charter of the
United Nations. In our view, while we are aware of the
underlying problems related to the Article, when we are
discussing the Council’s working methods we should

S/PV.7539

question whether such communications genuinely
comply with the obligation under the Charter to report
immediately any action taken under that provision. It
is clear that most of the time such letters are sent ex
post facto simply in order to justify actions that have
already been taken. Also questionable is the legality
of their open format, which assumes the argument
that once a communication has been sent any future
military action can be justified. From our point of
view, such communications do not exempt the Council
from its responsibility to maintain international peace
and security in each of these situations individually,
and it is one of the reasons it is vital to ensure proper
compliance and control of the use of this format.
Thirdly, I would like to briefly discuss the
selection and election process for the next SecretaryGeneral. The adoption of General Assembly resolution
69/321 showed that it is possible to achieve changes in
anachronistic processes in the Organization that do not
respond to the times we live in. Despite the fact that
some progress has been made, Guatemala regrets the
fact that no agreement was reached on issues such as
requiring the Security Council to recommend several
candidates to the General Assembly and the SecretaryGeneral’s term of office and re-election. The Council
will be discussing them, but we should recall that the
Secretary-General is appointed by the entire membership
and the decision must therefore be made jointly. At this
time, when we are conducting serious reviews of many
key points of the United Nations system, a critical
analysis of the selection and appointment process of the
Secretary-General should be a priority. It is time that
we began to act and revitalize the process in a judicious
manner, acknowledging the realities of the present and
anticipating future challenges.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I would like
to thank the Spanish presidency for convening today’s
open debate on reforming the working methods of the
Security Council, for which my delegation would like
to make the following proposals.
First, an analysis of current conflicts and geopolitical
tensions demands that we not only conduct a review
but institute an immediate, appropriate, strategic and
transparent implementation of the necessary reforms.
Second, the Security Council should accord the
Assembly greater importance and be ready to learn

15-3225829/32

S/PV.7539

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

20/10/2015

from its Member States’ collective wisdom. That can
be achieved through closer cooperation on the part of
the Council with the Presidents of the Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council. The latter could be
transformed into a global development council, to be
developed collectively, working towards the centenary
of the United Nations, under a new plan for a 2045
global strategic initiative, a vision proposed by the
President of the Republic of Kazakhstan, Mr. Nursultan
Nazarbayev, last month in his address to the General
Assembly during the general debate (see A/70/PV.13).

Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan) (spoke in Spanish): I would
first like to thank all the Members of the United Nations
for the great support they have given us in enabling us
to serve on the Security Council. I am also grateful for
the congratulations we have received today. It will be a
great honour and pleasure to work with everyone on the
Security Council beginning in January 2016.

Third, holding more open meetings will improve
synergy, transparency and cooperation. There should
be genuine, meaningful interaction among Member
States rather than prepared statements that are read out.

Improving the Security Council’s working methods
has always been one of Japan’s priorities. We therefore
welcome Spain’s initiative in holding today’s open
debate and are very grateful for its concept note
(S/2015/793, annex), which makes very valid points. I
am also grateful for the work of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions, chaired by the Permanent Representative of
Angola. On that issue, I would like to mention that after
the presidential note S/2010/507 was issued in 2010 by
the Working Group under the Japanese chairship, the
Working Group issued a total of 10 more notes.

Fourth, for new non-permanent members to
perform effectively from the start, we propose that
during the interim period after their election but before
they take their seats, they be allowed to attend meetings
of the Council and its subsidiary bodies, as well as
informal consultations of the whole, in order to become
acquainted with their new roles.
Fifth, regarding the election of the next SecretaryGeneral, my delegation believes that the slate of
candidates should be shared with the General Assembly
so that it can have a greater say in the selection of the
Organization’s highest position.
Sixth, the rule of law should govern not only
internal relations within countries but should also be
used to ensure more agreement among Members of the
Council, who should abide by it, transcending their
national interests. In that regard, my President has
also proposed that in 2016 the United Nations convene
a high-level international conference designed to
reaffirm the basic principles of international law.
Seventh, the use of the veto should be exercised
with the greatest caution, particularly in certain
circumstances that call for clearly defined guidelines.
Eighth, any sanctions should be imposed by the
Security Council, with a proper assessment of their
impact, and should not be imposed unilaterally.
And finally, what we need most is not just reform but
a change in attitude. The national interests of Member
States must be balanced with greater objectivity and a
global perspective.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
30/32

(spoke in English)
In order to save time, I will make only salient points
here and circulate my full text afterwards.

And yet what we have done to date is not enough.
Let me refer to a couple of concrete proposals.
There is a proposal on the participation of the Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and the chairs
of the Commission’s country-specific configurations.
There are also proposals and a General Assembly
resolution concerning the process for selecting and
appointing the Secretary-General (General Assembly
resolution 69/321). Many previous speakers addressed
this subject.
Concerning the issue of the veto, initiatives
put forward — most notably by France and by
the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group — on restraining its use in situations of mass
atrocities have received growing support. Japan
supports both these initiatives.
This is the twenty-second open debate that I have
had the honour to address since assuming the post of
Permanent Representative of Japan two years ago.
Open debates are in general a useful means for the
Council to learn more about the views of non-Council
members. However, most of the 22 open debates I have
attended were just statement after statement, with
little follow-up. Although non-Council members bring
valuable input, very rarely do they receive feedback

15-32258

20/10/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

S/PV.7539

from the Council. The only exceptions that I remember
are France and New Zealand this year, when summaries
produced by the President were shared with us. Thus
I am afraid that open debates have not served their
intended purpose. I therefore welcome and support
your concept note (S/2015/793, annex), Mr. President,
which addresses this particular issue, and especially
your intention to adopt an outcome at a later stage. This
is indeed what note S/2012/922 recommends.

letter addressed to all Member States. In this regard,
let me acknowledge the individual efforts made by both
permanent and non-permanent members of the Security
Council. We encourage the Council to contribute further
to the transparency of the selection process through
the implementation of resolution 69/321, as well as by
organizing meetings open to the wider membership
and civil society, such as Arria Formula meetings, with
candidates for the position of Secretary-General.

Japan has had the pleasure of serving as Chair of
the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions twice in the past. Once on
the Council, my delegation is determined to contribute
actively to the Working Group, in cooperation with
other members of the Council and also with the wider
United Nations membership.

With regard to inclusiveness, we would welcome
increased cooperation between members and
non-members of the Council, in order to widen
support for the Council’s decisions among the
general membership and beyond. This is of particular
importance when the Council discusses situations that
affect the interests of a country that is not a member
of the Council. In a similar vein, greater involvement
of troop-contributing countries and police-contributing
countries when discussing specific peace operations
would contribute to greater support for the mandates
of such operations and, therefore, to a more effective
fulfilment of those mandates.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I am honoured
to deliver this statement on behalf of Belgium,
Luxembourg and the Netherlands. Let me first express
appreciation to Spain for organizing this important
open debate.
As the United Nations marks its seventieth
anniversary, we are faced with a conflict-ridden
world, numbers of displaced persons and refugees
unheard of since the Second World War, and a global
terrorist threat emanating from an increasing number
of non-State armed groups. Today’s crises, more than
ever, call for a Security Council with its doors wide
open to the outside world and its concerns. Against that
backdrop, the Council’s working methods should be
adapted with the need for an effective, inclusive and
transparent Security Council in mind. Improvements
have been made in the past, but there is still much to be
done. Let me share our views regarding three aspects
of working methods: transparency, inclusiveness and
effectiveness.
With respect to transparency, and with regard to
strengthening the relationship between the Security
Council and the General Assembly, the process of
the selection and appointment of the next SecretaryGeneral is of eminent importance. Significant steps
were made with the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 69/321, such as the decision to request the
Presidents of the General Assembly and the Security
Council to start the process of soliciting candidates
for the position of Secretary-General through a joint

Other options include regular public briefings
by special envoys and special representatives of
the Secretary-General and public horizon-scanning
briefings by the Secretary-General. The latter option
would also increase the Council’s ability to operate in a
proactive and preventive manner. In addition, both the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations and
the Advisory Group of Experts for the 2015 Review of
the Peacebuilding Architecture underline that, in order
to achieve sustainable peace, all United Nations actors
must come together in a much more coherent way.
Building sustainable peace is a long-term endeavour
that requires attention throughout the whole conflict
cycle and beyond the immediate aftermath of a crisis.
From this point of view, we could benefit from
closer cooperation between the Security Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission. The Council
could draw upon the Commission’s advice regarding
peacebuilding dimensions of mandates. This would
help ensure that the mandates, benchmarks and reviews
of peace operations reflect the longer view required
for sustaining peace. The Peacebuilding Commission
might also play a useful role for countries transitioning
off the agenda of the Security Council.
With respect to effectiveness, let me recall the
pressing need for the Security Council to take action

15-3225831/32

S/PV.7539

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

in the case of mass atrocities. Increasingly, we see
civilian populations at risk of mass atrocities. The
Council has a duty to use its powers to prevent and halt
these atrocities. However, on several occasions this
Council failed to exercise its responsibility due to the
use of the veto. In the case of risk of mass atrocities, the
use of the veto is irreconcilable with the fundamental
purposes and principles of the United Nations. It
delegitimizes both the Council and the United Nations
as a whole. What remains is an image of the United
Nations as an organization incapable of fulfilling its
core responsibilities.
We therefore recommend that all current and future
Council members — indeed, all States Members of the
United Nations — support and implement the proposals
of France and Mexico, as well as the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group, to support timely
and decisive action by the Security Council aimed
at preventing or ending the commission of genocide,
crimes against humanity or war crimes.
We need a Security Council that is transparent in
its working methods and inclusive towards non-Council

32/32

20/10/2015

members and other United Nations organs and that
acts effectively and decisively for the maintenance of
international peace and security, in particular when
faced with mass atrocities. The seventieth anniversary
of the United Nations provides an excellent opportunity
to reform the working methods of the Security Council
and to ensure that it can operate truly in the spirit of
the Charter.
It is up to all of us, members and non-members alike,
to seize this moment. In that spirit, and speaking in my
national capacity as the representative of an aspiring
member of the Security Council for the 2017-2018 term,
I would like to pledge the commitment of the Kingdom
of the Netherlands to the principles of transparency,
inclusiveness and effectiveness, on and off the Council,
as a partner for peace, justice and development.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are a
number of speakers remaining on my list for this
meeting. With the consent of the members of the
Council, I shall suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1 p.m.

15-32258
