UNITED

NATIONS

TWENTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

17’

rd

PANAMA

CITY

MEETING: 2 1 MARCH 1973

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1703) , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . , . . , . , . . . . . .
Statements on the occasion of the International Day for the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination . . . . . . . . . I . . . . , , . , , , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.,.......,..,....,.,.. ,.... .. .,..I.. ..

9

Consideration of measures for the maintenance and strengthening of international
peace and security in Latin America in conformity with the provisions and
principles of the Charter . , . , , . , . , , , . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

Tribute to Mr. Leonid Kutakov, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Security Council Affairs , , . . . , , . . . . . . . . +. . , . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . .

9

Adoptionoftheagenda

S/PV. I703 and Corr.2

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN HUNDRED AND THIRD MEETING
Held in the Legislative Palace, Panama City, on Wednesday,21 March 1973, at 11 am.
President: Mr. Aquilino E. BOYD (Panama).

fired on peaceful African demonstrators against the humiliathg “pass hWS”, killing 69 men, women and children and
wounding more than 200. Sharpeville is a warning to the
world of the grave menace of apartheid and racial ,&scfimination, a warning that we cannot afford to forget until we
succeedin eradicating this evil,

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.

4. It will be recalled that a few days after the SharpeWe
massacre, the Security Council first considered the grave
situation created by apartheid in South Africa. In resolution 134 (1960), adopted on 1 April 1960, the Council
recognized that the situation in South Africa “has led to
international friction and if continued might endanger
international peace and security”. It called upon the South
African Government “to initiate measuresaimed at bringing
about racial harmony based on equality in order to ensure
that the present situation does not continue or recur, and
to abandon its policies of apartheid and racial discrimination”.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l703)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Consideration of measures for the maintenance and
strengthening of international peace and security in
Latin America in conformity with the provisions and
principles of the Charter.
The meeting was called to order at 11.40 a.m.
Statements on the okasion of the International Day
for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination

5. Since then, the Security Council, the General Assembly
and other organs of the United Nations have adopted
numerous resolutions calling upon the South African
r&me to abandon the inhuman policy ofapartheid and to
seek a solution based on the principles of the Charter and
the Universal Declaration of &man Rights. That rkgime,
however, has remained intransigent and has resorted to
brutal repression in order to enforce apartheid in defiance
of the United Nations. The situation in South Africa has
been characterized by a constant escalation of repression
and resistance.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish): As
representatives will recall, we are today celebrating the
International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. In the light of that fact the Chairman of the
Special Committee on Apartheid, the representative of
Nigeria, Mr. Ogbu, has asked to be allowed to make a’
statemer,t. The Council at its 1699th meeting decided to
extend an invitation to the Chairman of the Special
Committee on Apartheid. Accordingly under rule 39 of
the provisional rules of procedure I invite Mr. Ogbu to take
a place at the Council table and to address the CounciI.

6. Moreover, the South African regime has continued in
illegal occupation of the Territory of Namibia, which is
under the direct responsibility of the United Nations, It has
sent its forces to Zimbabwe, in defiance of the United
Nations, to prop up the illegal racist minority regime of Ian
Smith and to wagewar against the people engaged in the
legitimate struggle for freedom. It has supported the
Portuguese colonial authoritie’s in Mozambique and Angola,
which are carrying on colonial warfare against the peoples
of these Territories. It has repeatedly threatened the
security and territorial integrity of the independent African
States in southern Africa.

2. Mr. OGBU (Chairman of the Special Committee on
Mr. President, I wish to thank you, and
through you, the members of the Security Council, for
giving me the opportunity to make a sfatement on behalf of
the Special Committee on Apartheid on this the lnternational Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
and the culminating day of the Council meetings in
Panama. The warmth, charm and hospitality of the people
and Government of Panama have become proverbial and I
wish to associate myself with the gratitude so ably
expressed by previous speakers.
Apartheid):

7, The South African regime has thus become the bastion
of colonialism in the area and the leader of the “unholy
alliance” directed against the United Nations efforts to
secure the elimination of colonialism, racial discrimination
and ap&h.i
It is essentially at war against the great
majori@ of the people of southern Africa, and against the
purposes and principles of the United Nations.

3. In resolution 2142 (XXI) of 26 October 1966, the
General Assembly proclaimed 21 March as the International
Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. It chose
21 March because it is the date of the Sharpeville massacre
in South Africa in 1960, when the South African Police
I

8. The Special Committee on Apartheid, which was
established by the General Assembly 10 years ago to follow
the developments concerning apartheid and report to the
General Assembly and to the Security Council, has always
emphasized the grave threat to the maintenance of international peace and security created by the policies and
actions of the South African regime. It has recommended
effective measures to solve this situation and avert the grave
danger of racial conflict which is bound to have repercussions far beyond the boundaries of South Africa.

13. In this connexion the attention of the Security
Council has already been drawn to the request by the
General Assembly, in resolution 2923 E (XXVII) adopted
on 15 November 1972, that the Security Council consider
urgently the situation in South Africa with a view to
adopting effective measures under Chapter VII of the
Charter. The Assembly has reaffirmed, by an overwhelming
majority, its conviction that
“economic and other sanctions, instituted under Chapter
VII of the Charter and universally applied, constitute one
of the essential means of achieving a peaceful solution of
the grave situation in South Africa”.

9. The South African regime, by resorting to brutal
repressive measures against the African people and their
movements, and all those opposed to apartheid, has tried to
persuade the world that the country is peaceful. It has been
assisted in this propaganda by some foreign interests which
benefit from the system of apartheid in South Africa. The
recent events in South Africa, particularly the recent strikes
by the black workers against the inhuman exploitation and
the denial of elementary trade union rights, belie this
propaganda. Behind the apparent peace, enforced by
vicious repression, the situation has become even more
explosive.

/

14. The United Nations and Member States have repeatedly called for a peaceful solution to the situation in South
Africa on the basis of the principles of the Charter. It may
be recalled that in resolution 134 (1960) the Security
Council requested the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the South African Government, to make such arrange
ments as would adequately help in upholding the purposes
and principles of the Charter. The discussion which were
subsequently held by the late Secretary-General, Mr. Dag
Hammarskjold, with the Verwoerd regime in South Africa
were fruitless because of the intransigence of that @me.

10. In its resolution 311 (1972), adopted in Addis Ababa
on 4 February 1972, the Security Council expressed grave
concern that “the situation in South Africa seriously
disturbs international peace and security in southern
Africa”, It condemned the South African Government for
continuing its policies of apartheid in violation of its
obligations under the Charter and reiterated “its total
opposition to the policies of apartheid of the Government
of South Africa”. It recognized the legitimacy of the
strugale of the oppressed people of South Africa in
pursuance of their human and politica rights, as set forth in
the Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human Bights.
It urgently called upon the South African Government to
release all persons imprisoned, interned or subjected to
other restrictions as a result of the policies of apartheid.
Finally, it decided “as a matter of urgency, to examine
methods of resolving the present situation arising out of the
policies of apartheid of the Government of South Africa”.

15. In resolution 191 (1964) of 18 June 1964, the
Security Council invited the South African Government to
accept the main conclusion of the Group of Experts on
South Africa that “all the people of South Africa should be
brought into consultation and should thus be enabled to
decide the future of their country at the national level”. It
requested the Secretary-General to consider what assistance
the United Nations may offer to facilitate such consultations among representatives of all elements of the population in South Africa and invited the South African
Government to co-operate with the Secretary-General, The
South African regime, however, spurned this invitation of
the Council.
16. More recently, in 1969, the General Assembly endorsed by an almost unanimous vote [resolution
2505 (XXW)] the Manifesto on Southern Africa of the
Organization of African Unity. But, sad to say, again the
South African regime has rejected the offer of a peaceful
solution.

il. The South African regime has again defied that
resolution of the Security Council and has shown utter
contempt for the authority of the Council. Instead of
releasing pers,qns imprisoned or restricted for their opposition to apartheid, it has imprisoned or banned a large
number of persons in the past year, including several
churchmen and students. Members of the Council are no
doubt aware that only a few days ago it served banning and
house arrest orders on the leaders of the National Union of
South African Students, an organization which has adopted
the Universal Declaration of Human Bights as its objective,
and the leaders of the South African Students Organization,
a black student organization.

’

17. The United Nations has always been prepared to assist
in a peaceful solution based on the principles of the
Charter, but it cannot entertain any compromise of its
principles. It cannot afford to be inactive when the policies
and actions of the South African @ime constantly
aggravate the grave situation in South Africa and southern
Africa as a whole.
18. On behalf of the Special Committee on Apartheid, and
on the occasion of the International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, I appeal to the members of
the Security Council to consider and apply all appropriate
measures necessaryto deal with the gravesituation in South
Africa and to secure the eradication of apartheid, It is
imperative that the Council discharge its responsibilities
under the Charter for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

12. The Security Council should therefore urgently consider more effective measures to resolve the grave situation
in South Africa. It must consider appropriate action against
the South African regime in the light of that r&me’s
constant violation of its obligations as a Member of the
United Nations.
2

27. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
By proclaiming 21
March as the International Day for the Elimination of
Racial Discrimination, the General Assembly, in 1966,
underscored the unshakable determination of all Member
States and their irrevocable commitment to achieve the
promotion of fundamental freedoms and unqualified respect for the inherent dignity of all human beings. On this
day, as we commemorate the victims of Sharpeville and
those countless others in different parts of the world who
have fallen victim to racial injustice, we solemnly rededicate
ourselves to the full and speedy implementation of that
enduring source of inspiration, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, with a view to securing the effective and
universal recognition and observance of the basic principles
of freedom and dignity for all men, women and children
everywhere, without distinction as to race, sex, language
and religion.

19. The racist r&me of South Africa will soon be
observing the twenty-fifth anniversary of its accession to
power and the adoption of apartheid, which is a negation of
the principles of the United Nations, as a State policy. It is
almost a decade since the Summit Conference of Independent African States appealed, on behalf of the African
Governments ,and peoples, for action by the Security
Council.. It is time that this Council responded effectively
to the appeals of Africa and of the great majority of
Member States and, above all, to the imperatives of the
grave situation in South Africa and in southern Africa as a
whole.
20. I should like to make a special appeal, on behalf of the
Special Committee on Apartheid, to the main trading
partners of South Africa, particularly the United Kingdom,
the United States of America and France, to reconsider
their attitudes and to facilitate effective action by the
Security Council.

28. In memory of those who have sacrificed their lives in
the fight for racial equality and the elimination of racial
discrimination, the United Nations has endeavoured to
intensify its own role in that struggle. In particular, we have
worked tirelessly in the development of concrete programmes designed to assist governments, organizations and
individuals in their efforts to eliminate racial discrimination
and to promote racial harmony and equality. We have
striven to develop the most effective ways and means to
remove from the minds of men the prejudices and
erroneous beliefs which give rise to racial conflicts and
discrimination.

21. The Special Committee on Apartheid pledges to do all
it can, in the discharge of its mandate, to assist the Council
in its consideration of this matter.
22. Finally, as these meetings are being held in Latin
America, I should like to express appreciation to the
Governments and the peoples of Latin America for their
opposition to apartheid and racial discrimination. One
vacancy for the Latin American Group still exists on the
Committee since the withdrawal of Guatemala, and I hope
it will soon be filled.

29. Notwithstanding the substantial gains made in this
regard, however, we are profoundly conscious of how much
remains to be accomplished before the complete achievement of the humanitarian aims and purposes enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations and before the full
translation into reality of the principles and goals set forth
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, The remaining vestiges of racialism, the policies of apartheid and
other manifestations of racial intolerance in all their forms
continue to constitute a serious source of international
tension, in particular in southern Africa.

23, The South African rkgime, I understand, has been
making frantic efforts to forge and develop economic,
political and military links with Latin American nations in
order to “build a southern hemisphere”. I have every
confidence, however, that the Governments and peoples of
Latin America will not fall prey to the manoeuvres of the
racist r&$me and betray their loyalty to the principles of
the United Nations and to human dignity, lest those 69
men, women and children shot in cold blood in Sharpeville
would have died in vain and the innocent victims of
apartheid in detention camps and gaols would continue to
languish helplessly, without a ray of hope.

30. It is perhaps symbolic that on this International Day
for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination the Security
Council is holding its meetings in this region of the world
for the first time. The historic struggle of the people of
Latin America towards the achievement of human equality,
justice and freedom is all too well known. Inspired anew
and guided afresh by the principles upheld by those
champions of justice and freedom in Latin America, we in
the international community must redouble our efforts to
put an end to the practice of racial discrimination and the
policies of apartheid Each one of us should do his utmost
to contribute his share to the United Nations objectives of
peace, justice and progress, for these objectives hold the
promise that all human beings may ultimately enjoy all the
rights solemnly proclaimed in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights.

24. In the Declaration on the Occasion of the Twentyfifth Anniversary of the United Nations, the States Members of the United Nations have solemnly declared:
‘&We strongly condemn the evil policy of apartheid,
which is a crime against the conscience and dignity of
mankind and, like nazisni, is contrary to the principles of
the Charter. We reaffirm our determination to spare no
effort, including support to those who struggle against it,
in accordance with the letter and spirit of the Charter, to
secure the elimination of apartheid in South Africa.”
/General Assembly resolution 2627 (XXV).]

25. Let us recall and reaffirm today, on this International
Day, this solemn pledge and intensify the international
efforts to secure the elimination of apartheid.

31. As I have stated on previous occasions, I shall, for my
part, endeavour, within the framework of my responsibilities, to bring about the full and speedly implementation
of the relevant decisions of the United Nations with regard

26. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
next name on the list of speakers is that of the SecretaryGeneral. I now call on him.
3

to racial discrimination. At the same time, I wish to repeat
my earnest appeal to all governments, organizations and
individuals to assist in the efforts of the United Nations in
this regard.

gladly offer our co-operation in finding a solution to the
problems of colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination, scourgeswhich continue to represent a threat to peace
and security as well as to the stability of the African
continent and other areas.

32. The PRESIDENT [interpretation from Spanish): The
Secretary-General and Ambassador Ogbu, the Chairman of
the Special Committee on Apartheid, have just made
moving statements to the Council on the occasion of the
celebration of the International Day for the Elimination of
Racial Discrimination. They deserve our whole-hearted
gratitude.

40. If in these historic meetings in Panama we have not
taken up so important a problem and are not going to
consider a draft resolution which would embody the
feelings of our African brothers, that is simply becausetime
does not allow.
41. The political philosophy expressed by the Chairman of
the Special Committee on Apartheid today is the one that
has to be followed because this, beyond doubt, is the most
effective code to reflect what has to be done in order to put
an end to abuse, raise the dignity of man and lay down
ethical standards for social coexistence.

33. The fact that the celebration of the International Day
for the Himination
of Racial Discrimination this year
coincides with the series of meetings of the Security
Council on Latin American soil constitutes, in my view, a
happy coincidence, since Latin America pays tribute to
human brotherhood. Racial equality was an ideal of those
who liberated America and has become a complete reality
in the course of Latin American history,

. .

42. Panama wishes to announce that it will support any
action that would bring to those who are today subjected
to colonialism a system of government that is in accord
with their aspirations and their capacity for self-government. Any voice of protest or of humanity will. find a
response among us, and Panama will always pronounce
itself against the degrading political system based on racial
discrimination, know11 as apartheid. My country will
pronounce itself emphatically against white minorities
which try to impose the policy of apartheid to the
detriment of the vast national majorities of the African
peoples.

34. Through the broad pathways of Latin America all
races move. Millions of Europeans, Asians and Africans
reached our shores to mingle with our blood, to add
breadth to our culture, to enrich our music, to share our
joys, and to suffer our sorrows with us-in brief, to become
a part of us.
35. Latin America is legitimately proud of its tradition in
regard to the treatment of races, and it is therefore
repugnant to its conscience and to its sensitivity that there
exist practices, such asapartheid, whose ignominious design
is to establish shameful differences based on the colour of
the human skin, Consistent with this tradition, the Latin
American delegations have from the outset lent their
support to the struggle against racial discrimination which
the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity
have been waging in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter.

43. I wish to speak now about specific cases.
44. The explosive situation prevailing in the African
Territories which are still subject to colonial domination
and to foreign occupation should be eradicated since it
represents a threat to world peace and to the security of the
African countries. It is obvious that most of Southern
Rhodesia has no confidence in the Government of the
Prime Minister, Ian Smith, because it is a spurious government, and therefore that Government must disappear and
must be replaced by a regime of the majority, which would
come about as the result of a political process based on
majority rule.

36. We must deplore the fact that all the efforts made
have not so far yielded the desired results, and the world
looks on with horror at the malignant extension of these
practices to other regions of southern Africa and other
parts of the world, and we Panamanians are affected by
that, too. The perfidious resistance of the Government of
South Africa to the resolutions of the General Assembly
and of the Security Council is an affront to mankind which
cannot be tolerated any longer.

45. The policy of Portugal regarding the colonial Territories it controls is not one my country can agree with. My
country believes in the self-determination and freedom of
peoples. Panama sympathizes with the patriots who are
fighting for the independence of the Portuguese colonies of
Angola, Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau). Panama shared
the sorrow caused throughout the world by the cruel
assassination of the great leader, Amflcar Cabral.

37. What is needed is the political will to take firm action
to remove this cancer which burns the body of Africa and
other parts of the world. Once this decision is taken, our
African brothers and those who suffer from these problems
will, as in the past, have the most firm support of our
nations.

46. Panama wishes to announce that it supports the
initiatives of the Chairman of the Special Committee On
Apartheid expressed this morning. We know the colonialist
argument that the Territory that seeks to be liberated is not
yet ready for independence. We agree with the remark
made by the representative of Argentina, Mr. Ortiz de
Rozas, on an occasion when he said: “countries must be
more alert than ever in preserving their sovereignty”

38. I speak now as the representative of PANAMA.
39. I would say that we are convinced that the detennination of the Organization of African Unity will lead it to
success in its struggle. There should be co-operation
between Latin America and the African continent, and we

[1630th meeting,para. 1511.

4

tion within the Canal Zone is practised in many forms. It is
worth while to emphasize those which we consider most
damaging to human dignity and which are precisely the
forms of discrimination that are typical of colonialist
situations.

47. We honestly feel that South Africa errs in trying to
maintain the status quo and that it would be very wise of it
to hand over to the international community without delay
so-called responsibility for preparing the Namibians for
their independence. We endorse the work of the United
Nations Council for Namibia, which labours ceaselesslyto
enable the people of that Territory to attain its independence by a democratic process. We believe that it has been
very useful for the Security Council to have the report
presented last year by the President of the Council for
Namibia. We saw much merit in the statement made in
Addis Ababa by the representative of Trinidad and Tobago
/162&h meeting], who is among us today, Mr. Seignoret,
who wasthen Chairman of the Committee on Apartheid.

53. These forms of discrimination relate particularly to
the following aspects: first, discrimination in employment
and wages; second, racial segregation in the Canal Zone;
third, discrimination in education; fourth, discrimination in
housing.
54. I shall now analyse discrimination in employment and
wages. During 1972 the labour force in the so-called
Panama Canal Zone was made up of 15,035 workers, of
whom 14,017 were employed full time and 1,018 part
time. Despite this, the number of workers decreased by 207
as compared with 1971. As for employment opportunities,
it is worth while to point out that approximately 75 per
cent of all the workers are not North Americans, and within
this percentage the majorit) are of Panamanian nationality.
Yet discrimination is made patent by the application of two
formulas: security posts and higher-echelon posts reserved
for North American employees.

48, To be clearer, more specific and more decisive, we
wish to state that we are in favour of all the liberation
movements in the Portuguese colonies in Africa, as was
stated by our Foreign Minister, Mr. Juan Antonio Tack, at
the twenty-sixth session of the General Assembly.1 We
agree that every vestige of colonialism in the world must
disappear and we identify ourselves with the third world
becauseof the similarity of our problems in our struggle for
the political and economic independence of our peoples.

55. We shall examine the first. For many years in the

49. The Latin American Group in the United Nations has
played a very active role in the process of decolonization of
the African continent. As recognition of its outstanding
participation in the matters that are today the subject of
our concern, we wish to recall, inter alia, the statements of
great historical value of the erudite representative of
Ecuador, Mr. Leopoldo Benites, who is expected to be the
President of the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth
se& on.

Canal Zone a series of so-called “security” posts have been
created. These are held exclusively by United States
citizens. These posts are arbitrarily determined and are not
based on any analytical or scientific study of post classification. The intent is none other than to favour the North
Americans over the non-North Americans. We observe that
the posts of secretaries, filing clerks, office helpers, who
actually do not deal with secret or confidential information
that would justify the classification of security posts, are
always held by North Americans, who receive better salaries
and employment conditions. The creation of security posts,
as I have said, does not follow any kind of prior analysis; a
post which today is not a security post becomes 0x8
tomorrow when it is held by a North American citizen,

50. Panama suffers with its brothers in Africa, with every
threat to the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of its nations. My delegation condemns every kind
of colonialism in Africa, in Latin America and in Panama.
In the Security Council the voices of the five African and
Latin American representatives must in unison condemn
everytype of colonialism.

56. I pass to the second formula, Higher-echelon posts are
also reserved for United States citizens. There are two
major classifications: manual and non-manual. The first
refers to tradesmen and those who do physical work, such
as carpenters, labourers, plumbers, electricians, and so
forth, and there are 16 grades in this classification. Among
the first six grades the Panamanian and other non-North
American workers constitute the majority. Basically it can
be stated that the posts in the seventh to the sixteenth
grades in this classification are normally held by North
Americans. The second classification is non-manual posts
and relates to work done by professionals, office staff and
so forth, There are 15 grades in that classification. NonNorth Americans usually occupy only posts in the first
three grades, and all those in the remaining grades are
occupied by North Americans.

51. Since I am a fervent believer in the need for our
peoples to seek public international support for the
solution of their colonial problems, I shall in a few words
refer to the main problem which afflicts my country in
regard to colonialism. Panama feels that it is really
authorized to speak about colonialism, since in a very small
area of our territory the wealthiest nation of the world,
with a facsimile of its own Government dividing our
country in two, has concentrated the greatest resources
known in the world.
52. This is the present status of discrimination in the
Canal Zone today, 21 March 1973. As you know, mY
territory subjected to colonialism or to a colonial situation
in any of its manifestations always suffers from a characteristic evil which goes with it: discrimination. Discrimination
is the handmaiden too of the colonial enclave in the heart
of Panama known as the Panama Canal Zone. Discritnina-

57. This is how discrimination works; the higher-echelon
posts are reserved for North Americans, excluding Panamanian and other non-North American nationals. Thus, as far
as employment opportunities are concerned, we have these
two outstanding discriminatory situations which are typical
of colonialist enclaves or colonialist situations like the
so-called Panama Canal Zone.

1 See Official
Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth
Session, PIenary Meetings, 1955th meeting.

5

58. But the most obvious proof of discrimination is in the
wagespaid to North Americans as compared to those paid
to non-North Americans. Thus, 3,581 North Americans
received during 1972 wages of $57.8 million, whereas
10,436 non-North American workers-Panamanian, West
Indians, Central Americans and other Indo-American nationals-received $62.5 million. However, it should be
noted that, in 1968, 4,010 North American employees
received $46 million in wages, whereas 11,314 non-North
Americans received $44 million. This means that, in 1968,
one fourth of the total of the Canal Zone employees were
receiving jointly more than the remaining three fourths,
solely because of their nationality, that is to say, their race.

63. There is yet another type of racial discriminatiou,
which, since it is current in the United States of America,
will, I think, be striking to my listeners: discrimination in
education. Within this whole Panamanian territory which
has the characteristics of a colonialist enclave there is
discrimination in education. That is to say, for the nationals
of the colonizing State, the best educational systems and
physical facilities are offered. This type of discrimination is
patent in the so-called Canal Zone, where there are two
systems of education based on nationality: the North
American system and the Latin American system. The
latter has a curriculum very much inferior to the North
American system. The proof of this is that the training of
Latin American students does not prepare them for
attending university, either in Panama or in the United
States, or any other institute of higher learning. The main
purpose is simply to train low-level English-speaking office
help to serve the administration or operation of the Canal.
In contrast, students in the North American system are
prepared for university study, be it in the United States or
elsewhere in the world. Finally, the mere fact of maintaining two educational systems based on nationality, and
particularly the fact that those systems are of far greater
benefit to the North Americans than to the non-North
Americans, is patent proof of discrimination in education in
the Panama Canal Zone.

59. While it is true that there has been some improvement
in the situation, it is no less true that wage discrimination
persists in the Panama Canal Zone, which is part of our
territory, and that that discrimination is a painful and
irrefutable reality. Wage discrimination in the so-called
Canal Zone is unjustifiably based on what is called a cut-off
line, arbitrarily drawn through every group of posts,
whether manual or non-manual.
60. Those who are above that cut-off line-the North
Americans-receive wages equal to those paid for similar
employment in the United States; whereas workers in the
grades below the cut-off line-manual
or non-manual
workers, who are precisely the Panamanians and other
non-North Americans-receive wages based on an arbitrary
proportion related to the minimum salaries established in
the Republic of Panama. Basically, it can be stated that this
discriminatory practice is nothing less than the perpetup
tion of the “gold roll” and the “silver roll”, later called the
“U.S. rate” and the “local rate”, and today called “security
posts” and “non-security posts”. That is tantamount to
saying that it is the same job with a different name, which
is expressly contrary to current agreements, which call for
non-discrimination in employment and salaries.

64. As for teaching and school administration staff in the
Canal Zone, here again there is clear discrimination. In fact,
the non-North American teaching staff are not allowed to
teach courses in the North American school system, even
though they may hold degrees from the United States and
be qualified to teach there. On the other hand, the North
American teaching staff may teach courses both in the
North American school system and in the schools where the
Latin American educational system is applied.
65. Lastly, as for the physical and material advantages and
conveniences of the installations, we can show members of
the Security Council, by means of photographs or a tour of
the Canal Zone, some of the school buildings for the North
Americans and, as a contrast, the schools serving the Latin
Americans.

61. The next picture I shall draw for you wiI1 give you an
idea of the exact number of employees of the Panama
Canal Company, which runs the Canal Zone, broken down
into North Americans and non-North Americans, and the
salaries they received in 1972 which were equal to those of
the United States, and the salaries at the local rate. The
number of North Americans paid at the United States rate
was 3,490; non-North Americans numbered 1,856. The
number of North Americans paid at the Canal Zone rate
was 91, and the number of non-North Americans was
8,580.

66. Another mortifying manifestation of racial discrimination which might be of interest to you relates to housing,
One of the most typical characteristics of any colony or
colonial enclave is that of housing. It can easily be seen that
by means of this type of racial discrimination, which is
widely practised in the Canal Zone, the agents of the State
which organizes and maintains this colonialist enclave
derive the greatest benefits and conveniences in housing, as
compared with the natives of the sovereign State and of
other States. Discrimination in housing in the Canal Zone is
based primarily on nationality and race: the best housing is
built for the North Americans, particularly if they are
white. On the other hand, the non-North Americans and
the blacks live in either the old wooden three-storey houses
or in the very small low-cost houses that are being built.
The most obvious form of this type of discrimination in the
Canal Zone can be seen by members of the Security
Council in photographs which we can make available to
them, and of course they can also observe it directly by
taking a tour which we can offer them through the Zone.

62. But that is not all: there are other characteristics of
the racial segregation in tile Canal Zone that is typical of
every colonialist enclave where segregation is applied. This
has been the case in the Canal Zone, as it is called, ever
since the construction of the inter-oceanic Canal began, and
subsists to date in many aspects. The North American
authorities who govern the colonialist enclave kr.own as the
Canal Zone have for years been segregating the blacks into
several communities, outstanding among which are the
following: Pedro Miguel, with a population of 1,408;
Paraiso, with a population of 1,659; Gamboa, also known
as Santa Cruz, with a population of 2,102; and Rainbow
City, with a population of 2,375.
6

67. I hope that this has been the most moving tribute I
could pay, to our brothers in Africa on this solemn day
when we are commemorating the bloodshed which occurred because of the existence of apartheid on the African
continent.
68. As PRESIDENT
the United States.

its forms and manifestations have repeatedly been condemned in United Nations decisions.
75. The Soviet delegations to all organs of the United
Nations have taken a most active part in consideration of
this question. This day is always widely celebrated in our
country.

I call now on the representative of

76. The great October Socialist Revolution of 1917 freed
the peoples of Tsarist Russia from national oppression and
racial discrimination. The family of Soviet peoples, made
up of more than 100 nationalities and national groups, has
been transformed into a single, friendly, fraternal family of
peoples. Tsarist Russia was known as the “prison of
peoples”. The October Revolution freed the peoples of the
Soviet Union from national and social oppression and gave
them completely equal rights and opportunities in all
aspects of life and in all activities, in education, health,
access to training for trades and professions and to the
diplomatic service.

69. Mr. SCALI (United States of America): I should like
to request clarification on two points of order. Are we on
the record? In other words, am I correct in understanding
that, without our having adopted an agenda, this morning’s
proceedings at this point constitute part of a meeting of the
Security Council? We feel that if the remarks just made by
Ambassador Boyd are to appear in the verbatim record they
should be clearly represented as the views of the representative of Panama, becausein our view they are not befitting
the high office of the President of the Council.
70. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): In
reply to the representative of the United States I would say,
first, that it is true that we have not yet taken up
consideration of the agenda, but are at the moment paying
a tribute that was planned and organized in agreement with
the Secretary-General and the Chairman of the Special
Committee on Apartheid. With regard to the United States
representative’s second point, I trust that in the verbatim
record the distinction will be clear between the statement
that I made on behalf of the Security Council, which was
contained in the paper that I read out at the beginning, and
the statement that I made when I spoke as representative of
Panama. I felt in duty bound to inform our brothers in
Africa, in Latin America and all over the world that we here
in Panama know that colonialism exists, and that there is
racism, and that racial discrimination is practised in the
Canal Zone, even though it be “American style”.

77. I can recall a specific example from my personal
experience. When I headed the Soviet Embassy in Japan, 17
nationalities were represented on my staff. I remember
Lord Caradon’s joke when he was representative of the
United Kingdom to the Security Council; he told his
colleagues to look at the “Russian” Soviet delegation in the
Security Council: the head of the delegation wasUkrainian,
the first deputy, Armenian, and the second deputy, a Jew.
That, he said, was the Russian Soviet delegation in the
Security Council. For him it was a joke; for US, the Soviet
peoples, it is a political reality.
78. That is a practical example of the complete equality of
all nationalities in our country. Thus the Soviet peoples,
our Government and our Party are impassioned supporters
and advocates of the elimination of all forms of racial
discrimination, apartheid and national inequality. It is the
Leninist nationality policy which has ensured for us the
complete equality and full development of all our nations
and national groups under the same conditions of social and
national life.

71. Mr. SCALI (United States of America): I thank the
representative of Panama for his clarification. I waspuzzled
because the tenor of his remarks, in my view, did not seem
to be in keeping with the moving addresses that we have
heard on an occasion which, as I had understood it, wasto
mark an International Day for the Elimination of Discrimination.

79. The Leninist nationality policy was ‘reaffpmed in
decisions of the Twenty-fourth Congress of the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union-a fact which was reflected
specifically in a special, separate provision of the programme of peace, co-operation and friendship among’
peoples which was adopted by the Congress. This provision
restated that all manifestations of racism and racial discrimination must be decisively condemned, that a boycott
must be instituted and that all United Nations decisions on
this question must be carried out.

72. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
thank the Ambassador of the United States for his remarks.
73. As representative of PANAMA, I feel that I have paid
a tribute to our brothers in Africa with the statement that I
made,
74. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
80. At the twenty-seventh session of the General Assembly the delegation of the USSR took an active part in
consideration of the questions of apartheid and racism and
in the adoption by the Assembly of a special resolution
on the convening this year at Oslo of a
[29I 0 (XXW)]
conference on the struggle against apartheid and racism.

(translation from Russian): The delegation of the USSR

would like to express its appreciation to our colleague and
respected friend Ambassador Ogbu, the representative of
Nigeria, for his initiative in raising at today’s meeting of the
Security Council the question of the Council’s taking note
of this important day established by the United Nationsthe International Day for the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination. The United Nations has long been concerned with this acute, pressing and important international
problem. Racism, apartheid and racial discrimination in all

81. Ambassador Ogbu in his statement just made here
referred to the death of one of Africa’s outstanding sons,
Amilcar Cabral, an impassioned fighter for the freedom and
7

named a place in Africa the Slave Coast; when gold became
the main commodity of international commerce, they
named the place the Gold Coast, and so on.

independence of the African peoples, the enemy of
oolonialism, racial oppression and apartheid in all forms.
His death is a reminder to all who are fighting against
racism and apartheid to achieve national independence that
they must be on their guard. The enemies of the freedom
fighters will stop at nothing, even terrorism. This reminds
us of the experience of our own revolution, when in the
days and years following the revolution our enemies
resorted to all possible measures: subversion, sabotage,
terrorism and the murder of statesmen and party workers.
Accordingly, those who, in our own time, are carrying on
the struggle for the liberation of their peoples and are
fighting against racial discrimination, national oppression
and apartheid must always remember the slogan “Be
vigilant, for the enemy never sleeps”. Any attempts by the
enemy to harm the national liberation movements and use
terrorist tactics against those who are fighting for the
liberation of peoples must be given the rebuff which such a
struggle demands.

85. It took the international community more than 300
years to understand the truth behind the slave trade. It
took more than 300 years before nations in Europe were
aroused to the truth that the slave trade was an evil, But no
sooner had a number of nations of Europe asserted
themselves for the abolition of the slave trade-and we are
very grateful to them for that-than apartheid raised its
ugly head in southern Africa. What the representative of
Nigeria hag to say is cruel testimony to the ordeal and
suffering our brothers and sisters in southern Africa are
going through. That reminds me of a verse in another
Christian song sung everywhere by Christians, whether
Protestants or Catholics. It goes something like this:
Once to every man and nation
Comes the moment to decide
In the strife of truth with falsehood
For the good or evil side.

82. Mr. ODERO-JOWI (Kenya): I had not intended to
speak .at this stage, but because there is a risk of this
occasion being marred by procedural exchanges I wish to
make a few remarks and to put it on record that my people,
my Government and my delegation here today regard this
as a solemn occasion, a day dedicated to the international
fight against racialism and racial discrimination.

86. The question we should like to ask is this: For how
long will countries like the United States, the United
Kingdom, France, West Germany and Italy continue lo
connive in and aid the practice. of apartheid? What has
gone wrong with the conscience of the people who run
those Governments? What has gone wrong with their
Christian conscience that makes them connive in and even
aid and abet the practice of apartheid?

83. The statements made on this occasion by the Secretary-General, by the Chairman of the Special Committee on
Apartheid and by you, Mr. President, indicate very clearly
the need to strengthen the forces fighting against racialism
and racial discrimination.

87. We Africans are most grateful to those nations, big and
small, which have joined us in a common solidarity and a
common front against apartheid and racialism, particularly
in southern Africa. We Africans are determined-and I havu:
said this many times-to resist racialism in southern Africa.
We want to have it on record that we fully support all that
you said, Mr, President, and all that the representative of
Nigeria and the Secretary-General said on this occasion.
This is a solemn occasion when the world must re-examine
its conscience and decide whether or not racialism and
particularly apartheid shall be tolerated any longer.

84. In his statement the representative of Nigeria appealed
to the friends of South Africa to put pressure on the South
African Government so that it will eliminate racial discrimination and apclrtheid in that country. The appeal of my
good friend the representative of Nigeria reminded me of a
verse incorporated in a Christian song, one sung throughout
the world wherever there are Christians, be they Catholics
or Protestants, a song sung every Sunday throughout
Europe and North America by Christians:
Men whose boast it is
That ye come of fathers brave and free,
If there breathe on earth a slave,
Are ye truly braye and free?
If ye do not feet the chain
When it works a brother’s pain,
Are ye not base slaves indeed,
Slaves unworthy to be free?

88. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): To
conclude this tribute to the peoples of Africa, who are
suffering more than any other peoples in the world from
the rigours of apartheid, colonialism and racial dlscrimination, I shall read out for the record of today’s meeting a
document that has been handed to me by Ambassadors
kbdulla of the Sudan, Jeanne Martin Ciss6 of Guinea,
Odero-Jowi of Kenya and Sen of India:

The verse concludes by saying that true freedom consistsin
sharing the chains your brother wears. To the best of my
information, that verse, which is now included in a
Christian song, was written by none other than the
notorious English slave trader, John Hawkins, I am informed that that verse was composed by him when he was
somewhere on the coast of West Africa capturing slaves. I 0
take it that it was composed on the coast which came to be
known by slave traders as the Slave Coast. You see,Africa
has gone through the indignity of being defiled, dehumanized. When slaves were the main commodity they
8

“The African and Asian members of the Security
Council express their thanks to the Latin American
members of the Council for their initiative in introducing
a draft resolution on colonialism during the Council’s
meetings in Panama City.
“The African and Asian members fully agree with the
Latin American members that the elimination of CO~Onialism in Africa, Latin America and Asia is a vital
prerequisite to the maintenance and strengthening of
international peace and security.

have been informed that Mr. Leonid Kutakov, Under-Secretary-General for Political and Security Council Affairs, will
be leaving his post in the near future. Since this may well be
one of the last meetings of the Council at which we shall be
able to count upon his assistance,I should like to address a
few words of farewell to him on behalf of the members of
the Council.

“The African and Asian members express their full
satisfaction at the solidarity and support demonstrated by
many speakers from Latin America in the statements in
the Council.
“In view of this and of the limited time at the disposal
of the Council in Panama, the African and Asian members
would prefer that the meetings of the Council should be
fully devoted to Latin American problems, in the full
confidence that the mutual solidarity and co-operation
between the three regions will continue to be consolidated and expressed by them over the question of
decolonization at the United Nations and in other
forums.“2

93. I would begin by thanking Mr. Kutakov for his total
dedication and devotion to the tasks that he has so
brilliantly carried out, his wise counsel and the outstanding
way in which he has led his Department. He and his staff
have made it possible for the Security Council to function
smoothly. I personally am pilrticularly grateful to him for
the efforts he has made in connexion with the holding of
these meetings of the Council in my country.

Adoption of the agenda

94. Throughout his years of service Mr. Kutakov has
proved to us that he is indefatigable. In moments of grave
international crises, the Council has always been able to
count on him to be alert and ready to offer his help and his
wisdom.

The agenda was adopted.
Consideration of measures for the maintenance and
strengthening of international peace and security in Latin
America in conformity with the provisions and principles
of the Charter

95. His devotion to work and his courtesy in dealing with
all of us have been proverbial, and we can say exactly the
same of his awareness of the problems and his ability to
find solutions to them, when solutions can be found, or to
create an atmosphere conducive to understanding. In other
words, Mr. Kutakov possessesthe tact that is expected from
high international civil servants so that they can, effectively
and with dignity, carry out the delicate tasks entrusted to
them.

89. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): In
accordance with decisions previously taken by thy Security
Council [1696th-1699th meetings] and with its consent, I
invite the representatives of Algeria, Argentina, Bolivia,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, the Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Jamaica, Mauritania, Mexico, Trinidad and Tobago, Uruguay, Venezuela, Zaire and Zambia to take the
places reserved for them in the Council chamber.

96. Those of us who have had the privilege of dealing with
Mr. Kutakov personally and directly have been immediately
won over by his courtesy, his human warmth and his fine
senseof humour.

90. I wish to inform members of the Council that the
delegations of India and Indonesia have now added their
names as sponsors of draft resolution S/10931/Rev.l,
dealing with the question of the Panama Canal. This draft
resolution now has eight sponsors: Guinea, India, Indonesia, Kenya, Panama, Peru, the Sudan and Yugoslavia.

97. I am sure that Mr. Kutakov will carry out the new
tasks entrusted to him with the same wisdom and efficiency
with which he carried out those entrusted to him as
Under-Secretary-General at the United Nations.

91. As no one wishes to speak, I believe we should now
allow some time for the consultations in bprogress to
continue,

98. Finally, I wish him and his family good health,
happiness and prosperity.

Tribute to Mr. Leonid Kutakov, Under-Secretary-General
for Political and Security Council Affairs

99. Mr. SEN (India): Mr. President, I formally move that
the statement you have just made regarding Mr. Kutakov be
considered as reflecting the unanimous opinion of the
Council.

92. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Before adjourning the meeting, I wish to make a statement. I

The meetingroseat 1.1,sp.m

2 Quoted in English by the speaker.

9

BOW

TO OBTAIN

UNlTED

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world. Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
your bookstore
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du mondo entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
A : Nations
Unies. Section des ventes. New York ou GenAve.
KAR

IlOJIY’fMTh

&f3AAHSM

OPrAHH3AI&HH

OD’IiE~WHEHHMX

HAUHH

MJRaHKR
OptYLtlHDa~HH
Ob-b,?AKHeHHbIX
HauaR Mo)KHo KYnHTb
a KHHXHbIX
Maraannax
H arenrcraax
a0 acex panonax
xnpa. HaBOAMTe
cnpasltrr
06 ns~~amuix
a
aameu xmnxrfo~
hfarasmfe
n~ln namnre
no *flpecy : Opranuoaqns
Ob-begnwennbrx
HanwR, Cenuua no npoaa~te us~aaaR, Ham-YIoprc
HJIH Xexeaa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Nacionea
Unidas e&an en venta en librerfas
y casas distri.
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte
a su librero o dirfjase
a: Naciones
Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litbo

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: $U.S

1.00 (or equivslsnt

in other

currencies)

73~82096-April

19761,925
