V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Conscious that better knowledge of long-term trends
in economic and social development can form a sound
scientific basis for policies and decision-making processes
in relation to development strategies and economic cooperation on a national, regional and global scale,
thereby usefully supplementing other efforts towards
this end within the United Nations system,
Considering that the prevailing economic and social
conditions in the regions of the world and on a global
scale call for international economic co-operation to
be given a long-term dimension,
Aware of the need for the continuation of efforts to
expand international economic co-operation as a development factor of ever-growing importance and an indispensable instrument in the process of establishing ~he
new international economic order as well as for the mternational development strategy for the 1980s,
Mindful of existin$ interrelationships and the importance of an interdisciplinary approach to issues of development and international economic co-operation,
Taking into account the views on long-term trends in
world economic development submitted to the Economic
and Social Council in 1978, 26
I. Takes note of the activities carried out heretofore within the United Nations system relating to longterm economic ·trends in the regions of the world and of
the Secretary-General's progress report on the subject; 21
2. Requests the Secretary-General and the United
Nations organs, organizations and bodies concerned to
continue their analytical work devoted to the examination of long-term economic and social trends and to
make it available in the process of formulation of economic policies and decision making, in particular with
regard to the development of international co-operation;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Committee for Development Planning
and taking into account the international development
strategy for the third United Nations development decade, to submit to the General Assembly at its thirtyfifth session his views on the possible outline and method
of preparation of an over-all socio-economic perspective of the development of the world economy up to the
year 2000, with special emphasis on the period up to
1990 and, in particular, on the problems of the developing countries;
4. Emphasizes the necessity of conducting the
above-mentioned work in close relationship with other
similar work carried out by various organs of the United
Nations system, in particular by the regional commissions and those working on the development strategy;
5. Invites all States, as well as the United Nations
organizations, organs and bodies concerned, to contribute in their respective areas of competence to the implementation of the recommendations contained in
paragraphs 2 and 3 above;
6. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
consider at its resumed second regular sessions of 1980
and 1981, respectively, an outline and a preliminary
draft of the over-all socio-economic perspective ensuing
from the analysis stipulated in paragraphs 2 and 3 above;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-sixth session an item entitled "Long-term
trends in economic development" to review the progress
made in the implementation of the present resolution.
82nd plenary meeting
29 November 1979
2a See E/1978/138.
21

A/34/450.

34/58.

95

Health as an integral part of development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12
December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16
September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation,
Recalling also the United Nations conferences held
in recent years on major issues relating to economic and
social development and the establishment of the new
international economic order, particularly the International Conference on Primary Health Care, jointly sponsored by the World Health Organization and the United
Nations Children's Fund, held at Alma Ata, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, from 6 to 12 September
1978,
Noting that a substantial portion of the population in
many countries, developing as well as developed, la~ks
access to basic health services, and that people lackmg
adequate health cannot fully participate in or contribute
to the economic and social development of their nation,
Welcoming the important efforts of the World Health
Organization, the United Nations Children's Fund and
the other agencies of the United Nations system associated with the effort to attain the goal of health for all
by the year 2000, as expressed in World Health Assembly resolutions WHA 30.43 of I 9 May I 977 and WHA
32.30 of 25 May 1979,
Considering that peace and security are important for
the preservation and improvement of the health of all
people and that co-operation among nations on vital
health issues can contribute importantly to peace,
Cognizant of the vital role that health and health care
play in the development of countries, particularly developing countries,
l. Endorses the Declaration of Alma Ata, 28 in particular the view that primary health care, aimed at the
solution of the major world health problems through a
combination of promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative measures, constitutes the key to the ultimate achievement of a healthful society, especially when
primary health care is incorporated into the development process, particularly that of developing countries;
2. Notes with approval the decision of the World
Health Assembly, contained in resolution WHA 32.30,
that the development of the programmes of the World
Health Organization and the allocation of its resources
at the global, regional and country levels should reflect
the commitment of that organization to the priority of
the achievement of health for all by the year 2000; 29
3. Calls upon the relevant bodies of the United Nations system to co-ordinate with and support the efforts
of the World Health Organization by appropriate actions
within their respective spheres of competence;
4. Appeals to Member States to carry out the actions called for in the Declaration of Alma Ata;
5. Reiterates the appeal contained in paragraph 10
of World Health Assembly resolution WHA 32.30 to
the international community to give full support to the
formulation and implementation of national, regional
E/ICEF/L.1387, annex, sect. V.
Thirty-second World Health Assembly, Geneva, 7-25 May
1979, Resolutions and Decisions, pp. 27-29.
28
29

General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session

96

and global strategies for achieving an acceptable level
of health for al1; 29
6. welcomes the decision of the World Health
Assembly to ensure that the global strategy shall be refleeted in the contribution of the World Health Organization to the preparation of the international development
strategy for the third United Nations development deeade and calls upon the Preparatory Committee for the
New International Development Strategy to give full and
careful attention to the contribution of the World Health
Organization;
7. Calls upon Member States, both developed countries and developing, to co-operate with each other and
with the World Health Organization in the exchange of
technological information and expertise in order to
facilitate the achievement of the primary health care
goals;
8. Requests the Director-General of the World
Health Organization, after the sixty-seventh session of
the Executive Board of the World Heal th Organization
and the thirty-fourth World Health Assembly, to submit
a report to the Economic and Social Council, at th e
appropriate session of 1981, on th e progress achieved
in the formulation of the global health st rategy and calls
upon the Council, in tum, to submit recommendations
for further action by the General Assembly at its thirtysixth session.

82nd plenary meeting
29 November 1979

34/96.

Transitional arrangements relating to the establishment of the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization as a specialized
agency

The General Assembly,
Recalling its endorsement30 of the recommendation of
the Second General Conference of the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization to convert that
organization into a specialized agency,3 1
Taking note with approval of the Constitution of the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization,
adopted on 8 April 1979 at the second session of the
United Nations Conference on the Establishment of the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
as a Specialized Agency, 32
Desiring to provide for a smooth transition between
the existing United Nations Industrial Development Organization, established by General Assembly resolution
2152 (XXI) of 17 November 1966, and the proposed
specialized agency of the same name, and to assist the
new agency in commencing its operations as soon as
possible after its Constitution enters into force,
1. Strongly recommends that States should sign and
ratify, accept or approve the Constitution of the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization and agree
to its entry into force rapidly so that the new agency may
come into existence at an early date;
2. Decides that the Industrial Development Board
established by resolution 2152 (XXI) shall cease to exist
as soon as the members of the Industrial Development
Board of the new agency have been elected, and authorizes the new Board to carry out, from that date and
until the date provided for in paragraph 6 below, the
80
31
82

Resolution 3362 (S-VII), sect. IV, para. 9.
See A/10112, chap. IV, para. 69.
A/CONF.90/19.

functions specified for the Industrial Development Board
of the existing United Nations Industrial Development
Organization in relation to that organization;
3. Decides that the term of office of the Executive
Director of the existing United Nations Industrial Development Organization shall terminate on the date on
which the Director-General of the new agency assumes
office in accordance with the Constitution of the agency,
and authorizes the Director-General to carry out, from
that date and until the date provided for in paragraph 6
below, the functions specified for the Executive Director
of the existing United Nations Industrial Development
Organization in relation to that organization;
4. Urges that all members of the staff of the United
Nations assigned to the existing United Nations Industrial Development Organization should be offered appointments by the new agency that preserve their
acquired rights and contractual status;
5. Requests the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Board to arrange for the admission of the new agency to
the Joint Staff Pension Fund, in accordance with article
3 of the Regulations of the Fund, on a date to be agreed
upon between the Fund and the new agency, so as to
enable persons appointed to its staff to participate in the
F nd
f h
•
u from th e date O t eir appomtment;
6. Decides to terminate the existing United Nations
Industrial Development Organization at the end of the
last day of the calendar year in which the General Conference of the new agency is first convened and to reduce
accordingly the budget sections from which financing is
provided for the United Nations Industrial Development Organization;
7. Authorizes the Secretary-General to include in
the budget estimates of the necessary provisions to cover
the expenses in respect of the new agency for the period
extending from the entry into force of its Constitution
until the end of the calendar year in which the General
Conference of that agency is first convened;
8. Authorizes the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions, to loan to the new agency, until it
receives sufficient contributions or advances from its
members, an amount not exceeding one half of the appropriations for the existing United Nations Industrial
Development Organization for the last calendar year of
its existence, to meet the expenses of the initial operations of the new agency for the calendar year following
that in which its General Conference is first convened,
and to take the necessary budgetary measures;
9. Also authorizes the Secretary-General to transfer
to the new agency the assets of the United Nations used
by the existing United Nations Industrial Development
Organization, in accordance with arrangements to be
entered into between the Secretary-General, acting in
consultation with the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, and the DirectorGeneral of the new agency;
10. Further authorizes the Secretary-General to
transfer to the new agency the assets of the United Nations Industrial Development Fund, provided that the
agency agrees to use such assets in accordance with any
undertakings by the United Nations towards the donors
of those assets;
11. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
arrange for the negotiation with the new agency of an
agreement to constitute it as a specialized agency in accordance with Articles 57 and 63 of the Charter of the
United Nations, to enter into such agreement subject to
