S/PV.7795

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7795th meeting

Wednesday, 26 October 2016, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gimolieca
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014) and 2258 (2015) (S/2016/873)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-34324 (E)
*1634324*

S/PV.7795

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

Bombings take place in plain sight, night and day, day
in and day out. Hospitals are destroyed, doctors killed,
schools destroyed and children denied education, water
stations destroyed, families cowering in basements.
Peoples’ lives are destroyed and Syria itself is destroyed.
And it is under our collective watch.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014) and 2258
(2015) (S/2016/873)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Stephen
O’Brien, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2016/873, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191
(2014) and 2258 (2015).
I now give the floor to Mr. O’Brien.
Mr. O’Brien: Let me take Council members to East
Aleppo this afternoon. In a deep basement, huddled
with our children and elderly parents, the stench of
urine and the vomit caused by unrelieved fear never
leaving our nostrils, waiting for the bunker-busting
bomb we know may kill us in this, the only sanctuary
left to us, just like the one that took out our neighbours
and their house last night; or scrabbling with our bare
hands in the street above to reach under concrete
rubble, lethal steel reinforcing bars jutting out at us as
we hysterically try to reach our young child screaming
unseen in the dust and dirt below our feet, choking to
catch our breath in the toxic dust and the smell of gas
ever ready to ignite and explode over us.
These are people just like us — not sitting around
a table in New York but forced into desperate, pitiless
suffering, their future wiped out. These are constant,
harrowing reports and images of people detained,
tortured, forcibly displaced, maimed and executed.
2/23

26/10/2016

And it need not be like this; this is not inevitable. It
is not an accident; it is the deliberate actions of one set
of powerful human beings on another set of impotent,
innocent human beings. Never has the phrase of poet
Robert Burns, “man’s inhumanity to man”, been as
apt. It can be stopped, but the Security Council has
to choose to make it stop. And I would ask members
to remember that the world is not going to think the
worse of them for loss of face or power politics. Global
leadership is about doing the right thing to stop the
draining of the blood of Syrians. Syria is now a country
that will soon no longer resemble even the most basic
definition of a country. We should all remember that
Syria was one of the first signatories of the Charter of
the United Nations — “We the peoples”.
As the Secretary-General pointed out last week,
the Aleppo offensive by Syrian and Russian military
forces has been the most sustained and intensive aerial
bombardment campaign witnessed since the beginning
of the conflict more than half a decade ago. The results in
human terms have been horrific. Aleppo has essentially
become a kill zone. Since my last briefing to the Council
less than a month ago (see S/PV.7780), 400 more people
have been killed and nearly 2,000 injured in eastern
Aleppo. So many of them — too many of them — were
children. Last week, the High Commissioner for Human
Rights stated that indiscriminate air strikes across
the eastern parts of the city by Syrian and Russian
forces caused the overwhelming majority of civilian
casualties. He stressed that
“these violations constitute war crimes [and]
if knowingly committed as part of a widespread or
systematic attack directed against civilians, they
constitute crimes against humanity”.
In amongst this apocalyptic horror in eastern
Aleppo, there have been cruel glimmers of hope, but
they are too quickly extinguished. Throughout last
week, following the welcome announcement of a halt of
all Russian and Syrian air strikes on Aleppo, the United
Nations, together With the Syrian Arab Red Crescent,
the International Committee of the Red Cross and
Syrian non-governmental organizations, immediately
16-34324

26/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East

set up plans to urgently evacuate critically injured and
sick people, as well as their family members, from
eastern Aleppo to places of their choosing. Our brave,
tireless humanitarian teams, led by the United Nations
Resident Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator
in Aleppo itself, engaged in long and complex
negotiations involving multiple rounds of clarifications
on conditions and guarantees.
It is with intense frustration that I note that the
evacuations were obstructed by various factors,
including delays in receiving the list of patients to be
medically evacuated from the very representatives and
interlocutors of the people in eastern Aleppo, as well
as the Government of Syria’s objection to allowing
medical and other relief supplies into the eastern side
of the city.
Despite these delays, the United Nations was
ready to launch our operations on Sunday, 23 October.
However, objections by two non-State armed
opposition — Ahrar al-Sham and Harakat Nour al-Din
al-Zenki — scuppered these plans. The United Nations
made every effort to get assurances from all parties,
only for the parties to then fail to agree on each other’s
conditions about how evacuations should proceed. And
then we could not prevail upon the Syrian and Russian
authorities to extend their pause. Our teams stayed for
another 24 hours and the bombs were dropping within
500 yards of the fighting line before, disappointed and
frustrated, they managed to leave Aleppo, with two
staff members of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and one from the World Health
Organization bravely staying in Aleppo, where they
remain today, to try salvage the talks.
And the result? Once again, humanitarian hopes
have been smashed by parties who consistently fail
to put civilian lives above political and military
interests. For example, two children aged 9 and
14 — suffering from heart problems and intestinal
disease, respectively — were to be evacuated for urgent
medical treatment, but now remain trapped in eastern
Aleppo city. These are neither soldiers nor sympathizers
nor militants; they are children in urgent need of medical
care, and we, the international community, have just
failed to reach them. Goodness knows we have tried,
but selfish, inhuman interests have trumped the moral
and humanitarian imperative.
There will be complaints and accusations about
who caused the failure of the medical evacuations, but

S/PV.7795

it was those very complainers and those very accusers
who put their own interests above that of the injured
and sick, who refused to make reasonable compromises,
and who refused to allow anything to be done unless it
was their way. And their way was not possible. Yes,
they will fingerpoint at the United Nations — the one
party in all this that is not to blame— to attempt to
divert the blame from the perpetrators and refusers and
their hideous calumnies.
Humanitarian needs — the lives of children not
even in their teens — cannot be used as political or
military bargaining chips, and yet once again parties to
this terrible conflict have sought to do exactly that. It
is wrong for armed groups to hold to ransom the sick,
injured and children of those they cynically claim to
fight for. It was wrong for the air strikes to start again
when the bombers knew we still had a chance to get the
evacuees out.
Not only have the parties to the conflict not had
the moral fortitude to allow medical evacuations; the
Syrian and Russian forces from air and land could not
even demonstrate a willingness to protect what meagre
medical facilities still function inside eastern Aleppo.
Relentless attacks on health workers and hospitals have
left the handful of doctors still alive in eastern Aleppo
unable to cope. In fact, fewer than 30 doctors remain
in the east of the city, and only six partially functional
hospitals are still in service. Only 11 ambulances
are currently operative, rendering the collection of
injured people from the scenes of attack ever more
challenging. For many, it is impossible, so their fate is
left unattended. Hospital beds are too few, and essential
medicines — including anesthetics, intravenous fluids,
vaccines and trauma supplies — are running out.
Blankets are in such short supply that body bags are
being used for warmth instead:
Let me be clear — eastern Aleppo is besieged by
the Syrian Government. No United Nations assistance
has entered in nearly four months. Food is so scarce that
many people survive on one meal of rice a day, and what
is available in local markets is sold at vastly inflated
prices. At the same time, civilians are being bombed
by Syrian and Russian forces, and if they survive that
they will starve tomorrow. The tactics are as obvious
as they are intolerable — make life intolerable; make
death likely; push people from starvation to despair to
surrender; push people to leave on green buses.

16-343243/23

S/PV.7795

The situation in the Middle East

The leaflets that have been dropped on eastern
Aleppo by Syrian and Russian aircraft operating in
that area make the intention chillingly clear. They read:
“This is your last hope... Save yourselves. If you do
not leave these areas urgently you will be annihilated”
And they end by saying: “You know that everyone has
given up on you. They left you alone to face your doom
and nobody will give you any help”. And it is clear that
the aircraft that drop the bombs, the generals who give
the orders and the politicians who have designed the
strategy intend to make good on that horrific promise.
We have seen this happen numerous times
already — in Homs, Darayya, Moadamiya, Al-Waer
and now in eastern Aleppo. It will be the fate of those
hundreds of thousands of people still trapped in besieged
locations all across the country. That is not a world we
can accept. All parties and their sponsors must put an end
to these medieval tactics. All parties and their sponsors
must grant us safe humanitarian access — sustained and
non-politicized humanitarian and medical access — to
all in need throughout the country, to those in Aleppo
and the hundreds of thousands of people trapped in the
other 17 besieged locations around the country. Despite
what those abhorrent leaflets say, we must demonstrate
to the Syrian people that we have not given up on them,
that they are not left alone to their doom and that they
will not be annihilated.
In addition to the air offensive against eastern
Aleppo, and despite a brief lull in fighting last week
by Russian and Syrian air forces, non-State armed
opposition groups continued to fire mortars and other
projectiles into civilian neighbourhoods of western
Aleppo. In the past few days alone, scores of mortars
were fired into Hamdaniya, Zahra’a, Midan and
Sulaymaniya. Some landed right next to the Shahba
Hotel, forcing occupants, including United Nations
staff, to take shelter in bunkered rooms. Five people
were reported killed and 41 injured, including three
representatives of the Russian Centre for Reconciliation
in Aleppo, during the four days of the unilateral
pause. All in all throughout October, non-State armed
opposition groups fired more than 184 mortars and
other projectiles into western Aleppo, reportedly
killing at least 100 people, including 17 women and 22
children, and injuring 533 persons.
While the destruction of Aleppo — both east and
west — is perhaps the most distressing front in the
conflict at present, it is not the only place in which
humanitarian needs continue to rise, driven ever
4/23

26/10/2016

higher by the relentless fighting. Hospitals and schools,
critical to both the survival and growth of communities
already trapped in conflict, continue to be targeted and
attacked, thus increasing the humanitarian crisis in
those areas. The precise details of what is happening
in other parts of Syria have been documented in the
Secretary-General’s monthly report.
Government facilities have also come under
attack. In Hama non-State armed opposition groups
reportedly continued to push towards the city, now just
mere kilometres away from the city limits. Two suicide
bombings targeting a Government checkpoint and the
Baath party building in Hama city were reported on
2 October, with multiple casualties.
Each month I have come before the Security Council
and presented an ever-worsening record of destruction
and atrocity, grimly cataloguing the systematic
destruction of a country and its people. While my job
is to relay the facts to the Council, I cannot help but
be incandescent with rage. Month after month it is
worse and worse, and nothing is actually happening to
stop the war and the suffering. The Council has been
charged with the responsibility for ending this horror.
The buck stops with it. This litany of horror must surely
shake the Council’s moral conscience, as it does around
the world. Surely the international community must
question the value they genuinely place in humankind,
when entire neighbourhoods in one of the world’s oldest
cities risk annihilation, their residents treated with
gross contempt as nothing more than bricks and mortar
pounded into dust; when the destruction of hospitals
has become the new normal; when more than 100,000
children are trapped in basements with nowhere else
to hide.
This is the legacy that parties to the conflict and
their supporters leave as of today. We cannot turn back
the clock on what has happened, but surely the Council
and its members can take some action to prevent the
endless repetition of the events that will surely occur
if the status quo is maintained. At the very minimum,
I call upon all Council members that have operational
military assets in Syria to take concrete steps to halt
the aerial bombardment of civilian areas in order to
deliver on their existing international obligations and,
above all, to protect civilians and allow us to deliver
humanitarian assistance to those in heed.
As already announced on 30 September, the
Secretary-General established an internal and
16-34324

26/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East

independent United Nations board of inquiry into the
horrific incident involving a United Nations-Syrian
Arab Red Crescent relief operation in Orem Al-Kubra
on 19 September. The board will by Lieutenant General
Abhijit Guha. He and his team have experience with
similar bodies and have expertise in areas relevant to
this investigation, including international humanitarian
law, humanitarian operations, munitions and explosives.
The board started its work earlier this week, and it is
expected to deliver its findings in early December.
The board’s report will be an internal document of
the United Nations. However, the Secretary-General
intends to make available a summary of the board’s
findings. I urge all parties concerned to extend their
full cooperation to the board.
As I have stated previously, deliberate interference
and restrictions by the parties to the conflict, most
notably the Syrian Government, continue to prevent
the effective delivery of aid. On 19 September, the
United Nations submitted its inter-agency convoy plan
for the month of October, which included requests to
reach some 962,000 people across 29 besieged, hardto-reach and priority cross-line locations. Based on
current procedures, a response was expected around
30 September. The Syrian authorities responded on
7 October, granting full and partial approvals for
25 locations and 63 per cent of the beneficiaries
requested by the United Nations, while denying access
to four locations. Denied locations included, once
again, eastern Aleppo, as well as three areas in rural
Damascus. Last week, on 18 October, the November
monthly inter-agency convoy plan was submitted to
the Syrian authorities. The plan includes 18 requests to
reach 904,500 people in need in 25 besieged and hardto-reach areas. A response is expected tomorrow.
To put things into perspective, last month only six
of the 33 requested locations were reached. In August
only four inter-agency convoys were deployed as a
result of late approvals of the monthly plan, delays in
the issuance of facilitation letters, requirements for
additional approvals above and beyond the two steps
agreed with the Government in April, lack of adherence
to agreed protocols at checkpoints and insecurity. For
same reasons, this month only five aid convoys have
been able to proceed so far: Duma on 19 October, Dar
Kabira on 20 October, Moadimiya this past Sunday,
Al-Houla on Monday and Al-Waer today.
All in all in the past three months, the United
Nations has been unable to deploy the first convoy

S/PV.7795

until the third week of the month. The first cross-line
convoy in August deployed only 23 August. The one in
September deployed on 19 September. And the one in
October deployed on 19 October. That means that no
aid reached many of those most in need in besieged and
hard-to-reach locations for the first three weeks of each
of the past three months. And while airlifts to Qamishly
continued these past few weeks, air drops to deir ezZor needed to be suspended, as one Syrian Arab Red
Crescent volunteer was hit by shrapnel from shelling
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant while at the
collection site.
Moreover, the removal of lifesaving medicines
and medical supplies by the Syrian authorities, such
as surgical kits, midwifery kits and emergency kits,
has continued unabated. So far this year, between
January and September 220 tons of medical supplies
were delivered to besieged and hard-to-reach areas as
part of inter-agency convoys. But 65 tons of medicines
and medical supplies were not. These last few weeks
alone the Syrian authorities removed or prevented the
loading of nearly six tons of medical supplies, mostly
surgical materials, diarrhoeal and midwifery kits,
intravenous fluids, anesthetics and various medicines,
from inter-agency convoys: to Duma on 19 October,
Dar Kabira on 20 October, Moadamiya on 23 October,
Al-Waer on 24 September, Zabadani and Madayya on
25 September, and Al-Rastan and Duma — aborted — on
27 and 28 September. Those restrictions are not only
violations of international law and Security Council
resolutions, they are actions deliberately and cynically
designed to inflict more unnecessary suffering on
civilians living in besieged and hard-to-reach locations.
Throughout the country nearly 8 million children
have lost their parents, their homes and their schools.
They have suffered immense emotional and physical
trauma. Children in besieged eastern Aleppo were due to
resume school in late September. They did not. Instead,
shell-shocked children are retrieved from rubble and
left writhing in bloody clothes on dirty hospital floors.
They are stuck in hideouts. They cannot play, they
cannot sleep. That has become the reality for 100,000
children in eastern Aleppo. Across the country, as
many know, one in four schools has ceased to function.
More than 52,000 teachers have left their jobs. Over
2 million children remain out of school, and another
400,000 are at risk of dropping out as the horrors of this
brutal and savage war continue unabated. Hundreds of
thousands of Syrian children have become stateless. It

16-343245/23

S/PV.7795

The situation in the Middle East

does not matter that many of us are trying to reach them
and would reach them if we could; those children who
are somehow just surviving, feeling abandoned by the
world, abandoned to face their future alone.
What future do these children have — illiterate,
orphaned, starved and maimed? What future does
a country have when its next generation is a lost
generation? These children do not have the luxury
of waiting for another Geneva, Vienna or Lausanne
agreement to succeed. They need our protection now.
What happened to “never again”? What happened to our
commitment to protect the most vulnerable, those who
face mass atrocities? What happened to the Council’s
responsibility to act in a timely and decisive manner?
There is surely nothing timely nor decisive about the
world’s approach to Syria thus far. The international
community cannot fail the children of Aleppo, as it did
in Srebrenica, Cambodia and Rwanda.
There is no question today as to whether the
members of the Council know what is going on — we
clearly and tragically do. The question today is: What
will we do? What steps will we take to ensure that
people in dire need get assistance? Humanitarians
stand ready to continue to deliver to any and all in need,
but that is not enough. Action must be taken, and safe
access must be made possible. For that to happen, the
violence must be stopped, and it is within our power to
stop it. If we do not take action, there will be no Syrian
people or Syria to save — that will be the Council’s
legacy, our generation’s shame. It is in our hands today
to take the right path and avert the looming irreversible
tragedy of our time.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2016/873) and Under-Secretary-General
Stephen O’Brien for his briefing, even if it leaves us
more anguished than before.
Our delegation once again takes the floor in the
understanding that it is our responsibility, as elected
members of the Security Council, to give our electors,
the membership gathered here, our opinion on the issue
at hand, even if the situation has not changed much since
we last discussed it. People tend to think that a great
deal is accomplished in these sorts of deliberations.
To save time, I could say that my statement last month
(see S/PV.7780) could serve as my statement today, but
I do not think that that is the case, because every time
we meet the situation is more tragic. Four months ago
6/23

26/10/2016

when we met, I believe it was on the topic of Syria, we
recalled the words of the American poet Robert Allen
Zimmerman and his well-known lyrics:
“How many deaths will it take till he knows that
too many people have died?”
The only positive development over the course of those
four months is that Mr. Zimmerman, that is Bob Dylan,
has been awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature. That is
the only good news in that regard.
The scenario is increasingly discouraging. We
continue to see a pitched battle in which thousands
of defenceless civilians have lost their lives, hostages
to a situation where they are neither perpetrators or
accomplices. The situation has simply become their
reality, controlled by those who manipulate their
interests in that part of the world.
The many initiatives for dialogue on Syria have
come up against the inability of the Council to defuse
the situation. The General Assembly has also held an
informal meeting on the subject, and we have seen
a New Zealand initiative, with backing from many
States, aimed at finding points of convergence in order
to improve the situation on the ground in any way
possible. We have sought to find a way to have some
impact — so that the bombing stops, so that people stop
dying unnecessarily.
We will support all of those initiatives since, in the
face of impotence, we must do something. It is difficult
to keep repeating our speeches, citing principles of
international humanitarian law but not enforcing them.
It is difficult to keep repeating that hostilities must cease
immediately, that civilians must be protected and that
the principles of humanitarian law must be respected.
A few days ago, a Venezuelan colleague said that the
responsibility for the crisis is shared by all members of
the Security Council, but certainly it lies more heavily
on those who support or finance either of the parties to
the conflict. They bear greater responsibility for what
is going on — a slaughterhouse.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): Today’s
briefing highlights once again the horror of the situation
in Syria. After nearly six years, the conflict gets even
more brutal and shocking. The situation currently
unfolding in eastern Aleppo, where the presence of a
few hundred terrorists is being used as a pretext for
indiscriminate attacks that are bringing misery and
death to more than 250,000 civilians, presents a new
16-34324

26/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East

and profoundly disturbing low. We need to ask ourselves
how the situation has been allowed to get so bad, but
more importantly, what are we going to do about it?
Bringing humanitarian relief to the people of Syria
remains an urgent priority. New Zealand will continue
working with Spain and Egypt as co-leads in the
Council’s consideration of humanitarian issues in Syria,
but it should be clear to everyone that even if, by some
miracle, the Syrian Government decided to relent in its
wilful obstruction of humanitarian assistance — and
we see little hope of that happening — that alone
cannot make much of a difference on the ground unless
the bombs stop dropping and the cessation of hostilities
is restored.
It was that fundamental reality that led New
Zealand to push Council members to set aside the
recent history of failed efforts and focus on what the
Council can now agree to do to help stop the slaughter
and make space for humanitarian relief and a return to
dialogue. We knew that it would not be easy and that
we would get pushback from various quarters. Even so,
we considered it our responsibility as a member of the
Council to try to find a way for the Council to act. The
continued inability of the most powerful members of
the Council to effectively address this issue is nothing
short of tragic. General Assembly politics are being put
ahead of people and, once again, preventing agreement
on effective international action.
We are appalled that Russia will not step back from
its current assault on eastern Aleppo for long enough to
allow the seeds of peace to begin to take root, or use its
influence to change the Syrian Government’s behaviour.
Humanitarian pauses may give some glimmer of hope
but, for now, the bombardment of eastern Aleppo
and its civilian population has resumed. It is brutal,
cruel and indiscriminate. It is fundamentally at odds
with international humanitarian law. It must stop. We
must also register our deep disappointment that other
permanent members declined to engage meaningfully
on the key provision in our draft of what effective
Council action might look like, other than to insist on
language that had already proven unacceptable.
Earlier this week, we had a curious situation in
which one side of the debate said that the key paragraph
in our draft resolution (S/2016/846) was not acceptable
because it would stop all air attacks over Aleppo, and
the other side said that it was not acceptable because
it would not. Both cannot be right. Yet for now, there

S/PV.7795

is no prospect of navigating through these mutually
inconsistent positions.
We understand that a third failed draft resolution
in as many weeks would serve no one, and certainly
not the people of Syria. But the problem we are looking
to address has not gone away, and neither will we. We
will continue to push for effective political action to
halt the catastrophe that is unfolding, and our draft
remains available as a basis for possible future action
by the Council. But for any Council action to be
effective, the Council has to come together and live up
to its responsibilities under the Charter. We know that
the divisions on the issue are acute and reflect the sad
realities of today’s international situation, but while we
cannot escape those realities, the Council must be more
than an echo chamber of developments elsewhere. We
need to at least be willing to try to get past the current
divisions and distrust. If we do not, the performance of
the Council and its members in addressing the Syrian
tragedy will be judged harshly by history.
Sides with influence over the parties on the
ground, and those directly involved in the conflict, bear
responsibility for the ongoing slaughter. But Council
members bear responsibility for how the Council
responds, or fails to.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.
That means I will have to discuss Mr. O’Brien’s
statement. My colleagues on the Council may have
noticed that Russia tries not to criticize the leadership
of the United Nations. We take great pains in our efforts
to work with the United Nations humanitarian staff,
especially those on the ground. We understand how
hard and dangerous their work is and what difficult
conditions they often have to operate in Syria, where
they are in constant contact with our embassy, which
does everything it can to help them to obtain practical
results in their humanitarian efforts on Syrian territory.
But Mr. O’Brien’s statement today compels me to make
some critical comments, particularly his supercilious
smile when he suggested that United Nations staff are
infallible. I do not think there is anything to smile about.
If we needed to be preached to, we would go to
church. If we wanted to hear poetry, we would go to a
theatre. When we invite United Nations staff, especially
senior Secretariat officials, to the Security Council,
we expect objective analysis of what has happened,

16-343247/23

S/PV.7795

The situation in the Middle East

which is clearly not what we got from Mr. O’Brien. I
have various things to say that were not covered in his
somewhat verbose statement.
Thanks to the active work of Russian experts,
the number of Syrian settlements now included in the
ceasefire has increased to 847. Almost 70 opposition
groups have said that they will accede to the cessation
of hostilities. Negotiations are continuing with the
commanders of armed groups in the governorates of
Homs, Hama, Aleppo and Quneitra. Russia is providing
Syrians with humanitarian assistance in alignment with
the Government and social organizations. Our foreign
partners have joined our efforts. Many tons of food and
medical equipment have been supplied, including with
the participation of the Russian reconciliation centre in
Hmeymim.
Russia continues to do everything in its power to
relieve the situation of the residents of Aleppo, whose
eastern districts have been held hostage by armed
groups led by the terrorist group Jabhat Al-Nusra. Last
week, in response to a United Nations appeal and as a
gesture of good will, a decision was made to halt all
Russian and Syrian air force flights in the region of
Aleppo starting on 18 October at 10 a.m. local time.
Planes have been flying no closer to the city than 10
kilometres, and the moratorium on flights is now in its
eighth day.
Mr. O’Brien did not have a word to say about the
moratorium. His statement implied that the air strikes
had not stopped for a single day and might even be
continuing as we speak. If he has evidence that any air
strikes occurred, let him by all means produce it. In
other words, if he disagrees that there have been no air
strikes for the past eight days, I ask him to produce
it. If he has no such evidence contradicting the fact
that there have been no air strikes for eight days, that
renders his entire statement dishonest. He spoke of
eastern Aleppo as though it were under continual attack
from chemical weapons. I would ask him to produce a
single fact about this. He should understand that he is
not here to tell a brilliant story but to deliver a report on
the realities of a situation. He spoke as if the residents
of eastern Aleppo were sitting there in the expectation
that a chemical weapon might explode over their heads
at any moment. Let him produce just one fact in support
of that, or leave this kind of storytelling to the sort of
novel he might end up writing one day.
8/23

26/10/2016

For three days, starting on 20 October, a 11hour humanitarian pause was instituted daily and
subsequently extended by a day. However, the situation
in Aleppo has been exacerbated by the fact that the
long-promised separation of the moderate opposition
from Al-Nusra has still not materialized. The American
side has not fulfilled its obligation in that regard. The
specific explanation given was that it would take seven
no-fly days to sort the moderates from the terrorists.
The Russian and Syrian moratorium on military flights
over Aleppo is now in its eighth day, while the moderates
and the terrorists have still not been separated. We hope
that the Lausanne-format discussions can provide some
movement in that direction.
During the humanitarian pause, an attempt was
made to organize the medical evacuation that the
United Nations humanitarian staff have constantly
claimed to be so essential. Buses and medical vehicles
were prepared to transport the sick and wounded. For
civilians who wanted to leave the city, six humanitarian
corridors were equipped with stations providing hot food
and first aid. Additional beds were set up in hospitals
in western Aleppo. In order to enable militants to leave
the city and travel towards the Turkish border or Idlib
unhindered, two corridors were opened in the area of
the Castello road and the Souq Al-Hai market. The
Syrian army command withdrew its forces at a distance
from the exit corridors so that the fighters could safely
leave Aleppo and avoid possible provocations.
How have events unfolded since then? Four
days later, United Nations representatives suddenly
announced that only two people had agreed to leave
the city. And then those two apparently changed their
minds. So what became of the 200 sick and wounded
who we had been assured were in dire need of assistance
and for whose sake Russia had been asked to stop the
air strikes? Instead of enabling us to conduct a medical
evacuation, the illegal armed groups began demanding
that painkillers and antibiotics be delivered to eastern
Aleppo and that wounded militants get medical help. The
Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria — which has lately virtually abandoned
the fundamental direction of its work on a political
settlement and has of its own volition switched over to
a parallel track — played along with this. Frankly, we
do not understand who is running the United Nations
effort in Syria. Is it Mr. O’Brien or Mr. Egeland?
Mr. Egeland gives everyone the impression that it is in
fact he who is heading up the humanitarian work in this
16-34324

26/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East

crucial area. And the United Nations staff in Syria are
in total turmoil.
The armed opposition that is mixed up with the
terrorists has blocked the humanitarian corridors and
has been directing fire along them. Jihadists have been
organizing show executions. Taking advantage of the
lull, the insurgents have begun to regroup and prepare
for active offensives aimed at breaking through the
front line. The Al-Nusra fighters and their associates
have rejected Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura’s
offers for a guaranteed exit from Aleppo. As early
as 21 October, the field commander of the Harakat
Nour Al-Din Al-Zenki, without waiting for the end
of the humanitarian pause, announced the beginning
of the decisive battle for Aleppo, and a press release
issued jointly by representatives of the Syrian National
Coalition and the Free Syrian Army attacked the United
Nations humanitarian initiative sharply.
The illegal armed groups, along with the local
council in Aleppo, have once again demonstrated that
they prefer to use residents as bargaining chips and
human shields to hide behind. By the way, that obvious
fact is never reflected in either the Secretary-General’s
reports or Mr. O’Brien’s briefings. The outside sponsors
embedded in groups in eastern Aleppo have been either
unable or unwilling to exert a positive influence on the
insurgents and convince them to stop shelling, release
civilians or leave themselves. Moreover, the groups
continue to receive arms and ammunition, including
TOW anti-tank missiles and American-produced manportable air defence systems.
We have to regretfully conclude that the United
Nations did not properly think through its operation
for transporting the sick and wounded. Its work with
the opposition groups and local council in the city was
neglected. Nor did the United Nations put the needed
pressure on the sponsors of the illegal armed groups
to ensure that they cooperated with humanitarian
personnel. At the same time, attempts began to shift the
blame for the problem onto someone else. Completely
unsupported claims were made that the wounded were
supposedly afraid to leave eastern Aleppo for fear of
some kind of reprisals from the Syrian Government.
They began asking us for additional security guarantees
for the evacuees, ignoring the fact that they had long
ago been given those assurances already.
Yet another real opportunity to normalize the
situation in Aleppo has been missed. The deficiencies of

S/PV.7795

the United Nations personnel are disappointing. After
asking for Russia’s help in implementing their poorly
thought-out initiatives, they have been unable to come
through on their part of the job when it mattered. That
exceedingly unprofessional approach has sometimes
cost us dearly as well. On 20 October, three officers
from the reconciliation centre in Hmeymim were
injured in the course of their duties as they prepared for
the medical evacuation. On 24 October, Mr. O’Brien
made a statement in which he attempted to distribute
responsibility for the failure of the evacuation
measures equally between the Aleppo local council, the
insurgents and the Government. In that connection, it
should be recalled that Damascus had raised objections
only regarding the artificial linking of the issues of
the medical evacuation and the supply of medicines.
In general, the Government has displayed goodwill
and constructiveness, and we have been working very
productively with it on this.
We are still open to cooperating with United
Nations humanitarian agencies on every issue related
to assisting those in need. At the same time, we are
still awaiting some genuine effort of the opposition and
its sponsors, who so far have done nothing but create
obstacles, disrupt humanitarian operations and threaten
humanitarian personnel. In future, we believe it would
be advisable to introduce humanitarian pauses only
with firm guarantees from the United Nations as to its
readiness for a medical evacuation.
The negative attitude to local pacification on the
part of some of our partners and, unfortunately, some
United Nations representatives is incomprehensible.
It is that practice, of which the end to the blockade
of Darayya is a successful example, that will enable
us to normalize situations through direct agreements
with local residents. However, at the moment the only
insurgents being evacuated are irreconcilable militants,
mostly from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) and Al-Nusra, who are not ready to lay down
their arms. The peaceful civilians are staying at home.
What forced displacement are we talking about? It
appears that someone would like to see the humanitarian
situation in the difficult cities remain in limbo. Does
somebody want to play along with the insurgents and
strengthen their position? That is a two-faced attitude
that has nothing to do with caring for people.
Despite the promises of some members of the
International Syria Support Group to work with the

16-343249/23

S/PV.7795

The situation in the Middle East

terrorists of Ahrar Al-Sham, the Shiite enclaves of
Al-Fu’ah and Kafraya are still on the list of the most
problematic areas. We have not succeeded in getting
Turkey to open the Nusaybin-Qamishli border crossing,
as a result of which assistance to Hasakah province has
had to be supplied by air.
In discussing the humanitarian situation in Syria,
we cannot fail to mention the effect of the unilateral
economic and trade sanctions against Damascus. Their
victims are the ordinary Syrians who are suffering under
the siege as a result of the continuing deterioration of
the country’s socioeconomic infrastructure, which was
of a very high standard before the start of the conflict.
We cannot agree with the conclusion of the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2016/873) that it is
impossible to make progress on the political track until
the cessation of hostilities is restored. That runs counter
to Security Council resolution 2254 (2015), which
includes no such link. A political settlement should
be the top priority, for the United Nations Secretariat
as well as for the Security Council. The same applies
to the fight against terrorism. And our approaches to
solving the fundamental issues should be united rather
than fluctuating according to the geopolitical mood in
one capital or another.
In conclusion, I would like to say a few words
about New Zealand’s initiative. We are grateful to the
delegation of New Zealand for its attempt to find a
position that the members of the Security Council could
unite around and that could somehow enable all of us to
take a step towards a political settlement in Syria and to
relieve the humanitarian situation there. But any such
attempt must respond to a fundamental question — how
do we continue the fight against terrorism within the
parameters it proposes?
In our view, the fundamental positions — which
we all agree on; they are affirmed in unanimous
Council resolution — are that the terrorists in both
Syria and Iraq must be deprived of their safe havens,
and that the ceasefire regime should not apply to the
terrorist organizations Jabhat Al-Nusra and ISIL. That
means that whatever ceasefire regimes are instituted,
we must always continue to fight the terrorists. We
have observed with regret that when such regimes
are introduced, the terrorists, as well as a number of
organizations that cooperate with them, are able to
regroup, gather strength and re-emerge at a new level
of militant activity. If a project could be launched that
10/23

26/10/2016

would enable us to fight the terrorists on a large scale
while improving the humanitarian situation and putting
us on track for a political settlement, we would all be
extremely grateful.
I now resume my functions as President.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I had
not intended to speak today. I thought this would be
one of the occasions when we would go into closed
consultations and talk to one another rather than to the
gallery. But I feel compelled, owing to the statement by
the Russian representative and the attack on the United
Nations, which has been trying in good faith to reach
people in desperate need and which I think has not gone
far enough in calling out a permanent member of the
Security Council. It has been trying around the clock
to work with the armed groups, with countries that
have attempted to exert influence, and with the Russian
Federation, and was never really given notice as to what
the Russian Federation’s plans were. Russia decides
that it is going to have a pause, decides the pause is
over and presents faits accomplis to the United Nations
and the international community, even though it is the
people of the United Nations who are there, vulnerable,
on the ground, trying to make deal happen for the sake
of the most vulnerable.
I would like to respond with a few comments.
I believe that what we just heard with regard to the
New Zealand draft resolution (S/2016/846) is that if a
draft resolution could be produced that ratifies what
the Russian Federation is doing, it would be happy to
support it. The representative of New Zealand should
bear that in mind. I would like to say — because one of
the things that the Under-Secretary-General mentioned
was the shelling of western Aleppo out of eastern Aleppo
and that was also one of the things that the Ambassador
of the Russian Federation went on at some length
about — that we condemn the shelling of civilian areas
in western Aleppo. It is outrageous. Is Russia prepared
to condemn any aerial bombardment of eastern Aleppo?
Does Russia believe that all the children who are being
killed in eastern Aleppo are themselves members of
Al-Qaida? Is that what happens — that you come out of
the womb and you are an Al-Qaida member, right from
the beginning?
Of course, Russia cannot condemn the shelling
and systematic aerial bombardment of eastern
Aleppo, because Russia is carrying out that systematic
bombardment of eastern Aleppo, and because Russia
16-34324

26/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East

has brought to bear in the conflict weapons that even a
brutal Syrian regime had never used before — bunkerbuster weapons that are designed to hit huddled families,
and hospitals that have had to be rebuilt several stories
down in basements. They are designed to target people
burrowed into the ground. They are not designed for
terrorists but to militarily conquer eastern Aleppo by
making civilians relent and cry uncle.
What is so remarkable and troubling about the
presentation we heard today is that what Russia really
wants from the United Nations is credit. Congratulations,
Russia, you have stopped using incendiary weapons
for a couple of days. Thank you for not using cluster
bombs in civilian areas. Thank you for staying the hand
of brutality with regard to bunker-buster weapons. No
one gets congratulations and credit for not committing
war crimes for a day, or a week. That is not how the
international system is structured, and nor how it
should ever be. If we look for an indicator of Russia’s
intentions, as we heard from Under-Secretary-General
O’Brien, there is the leaflet that Russian and Syrian
planes passed out. What is said in the Council sounds
so benevolent that one would think Russia is like the
Red Cross.
And then there is the leaflet, which is what they
dropped into the actual theatre where desperate civilians
are living. I will read out from the leaflet, which states,
“This is your last hope. Save yourselves. If you
do not leave these areas immediately, you will be
annihilated. We have opened a safe exit passage
for you. Make a quick decision. Save yourselves.
You know that everyone has given up on you. They
have left you alone to face your doom, and help is
available from on one.”
Would the Russian Ambassador state for the record
that Russia had nothing to do with these leaflets, which
came out of Russian and Syrian planes? I ask those
on the Council who support the Syrian regime if this
is a leaflet behind which they would also throw their
weight? Russia cannot have it both ways, pretending
to care about the well-being of the people in eastern
Aleppo, while at the same time threatening to annihilate
those who remain in their homes.
The representative of Russia made an announcement
with regard to six humanitarian corridors and urged
people, including those who were armed, as well as
medical evacuation units, to take those corridors. We
worked very hard with the United Nations and others

S/PV.7795

to try to use whatever influence we could to make
that happen. Here was our challenge. The families of
those who needed medical evacuation or, as was said
today, “the so-called wounded” — they are not the socalled wounded; they are the wounded by your bombs,
Sir — notwithstanding their grave and potentially fatal
injuries, were terrified. They were terrified of entrusting
their fates to the people who had been bombing their
neighbourhoods. That is an unfortunate fact, but it is
not a crazy one. How would we have reacted if we had
been there and subjected to the siege; if Russia and the
Syrian regime had refused to allow food in since 7 July;
if a leaflet threatening annihilation had been sent; and
if we had been told, “Here are your six corridors. Come
trust us. We have a humanitarian objective; we want to
help you with your medical issues.”
We threw our weight behind it because we were so
desperate, as well, to get these people out and we wanted
to support the World Health Organization and the
United Nations in their on-the-ground tactical efforts.
They do not become “so-called wounded” just because
they are terrified of ending up like the people in the
Caesar photographs. They are wounded, desperate and
terrified of being pulverized by the Russian Federation
and the Syrian regime.
Today, we have spoken a lot about both sides of
Aleppo, but Under-Secertary-General O’Brien also
referenced the shelling in Idlib. I would ask the members
of the Council who have not already done so — and it
is very hard to make oneself do this — to look at the
photographs of what happened in Hass today. Look at
the kids carrying their backpacks — frozen — as they
attempted to go to school before being hit either by the
Russian Federation or the Syrian regime. More than
a dozen parachute bombs fell on a school today. It is
not history. It is not Srebrenica 20 years ago. It is not
Rwanda 22 years ago. It is Grozny, but it is today and
in eastern Aleppo.
The Ambassador of the Russian Federation said
that if we needed to be preached to, we would go to
church. Given what is happening, I think that it might
be useful if more people went to church.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): You said, Sir, that
the United Nations should stick to facts. Today, Stephen
O’Brien stuck religiously to facts. The problem for you,
Mr. President, is that they are not facts that you like.
Let me just repeat three of the facts that I wrote down
from Stephen’s statement. They are all facts, reality

16-3432411/23

S/PV.7795

The situation in the Middle East

and in stark contrast to the absurd and surreal fantasy
theatre that we are hearing from Russia.
The first fact is that Aleppo has become a kill
zone, with 400 people — too many of whom were
children — who have been killed since Stephen’s latest
briefing to the Council (see S/PV.7780). The second fact
is that Syrian and Russian forces have not protected
medical facilities and have, indeed, deliberately attacked
hospitals. The third fact concerns the infamous leaflet,
stating “This is your last hope; you will be annihilated”.
Those are three facts. Everything else that Stephen said
aligns with my information and concerns facts, but
they are not facts that Russia likes. It is depressing to
see the level to which Russia is descending to defend
the indefensible.
What needs to happen now to allow humanitarian
access? Three things need to happen. Step one
requires immediately stopping the bombing — as
Stephen mentioned — everywhere: in Idlib, eastern
Aleppo and across Syria. Step two requires Russia
to use its influence with the Syrian regime so that it
cooperates with all those aid agencies seeking to bring
aid into Syria. Step three requires allowing genuine,
meaningful humanitarian pauses that are long enough
and coordinated with the United Nations so that aid
can go in and people requiring medical evacuation can
get out.
What should we, the Security Council, do about
it? I agree very much with almost everything the
representative of New Zealand said. Like Gerard,
I am appalled that Russia will not step back. I am
appalled that Russia used the right to veto a perfectly
reasonable and moderate draft resolution. I disagree
with Gerard on the point that there is some sort of sense
of symmetry between those who are blocking for one
reason and those who are blocking for another. There
is no symmetry between those of us who called for an
end to the bombing and those who say that the bombing
must continue. The United Kingdom will support any
effort to stop the bombing and any draft resolution that
is clear enough that step one has got to be an end to
the bombing. We should not try to find the midpoint
between the position of stopping and not stopping the
bombing. It is not possible to do that, and we should not
even want to try.
Finally, the one point on which I do agree with
Vitaly concerns fighting terrorism. I believe that we
all agree on that. We all want to see terrorism defeated
12/23

26/10/2016

in Syria and everywhere else. That is not what divides
us, but that is not the real issue. In our view, there
are approximately 200 terrorists from Al-Nusrah in
eastern Aleppo. Russia has a slightly different view
and says that they number approximately 1,000. Let
us take Russia’s number of 1,000. That is still only
one-hundredth the number of children in eastern
Aleppo. There are 100,000 children in eastern Aleppo.
If the genuine target of the military action is the 1,000
terrorists, why are the military bombs being used so
indiscriminately? Why are bunker-buster bombs, which
are designed to take out more than very precise targets,
being used? That is an indefensible military strategy in
eastern Aleppo. How many of the people in that school
in Idlib today were really terrorists? I suspect that the
answer is zero.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): As the
representative of a country so profoundly attached to
the United Nations and its values, I would like to clarify
several points.
First, I thank Mr. Stephen O’Brien for his briefing,
his courage and the work that he and his team have
carried out. When the credibility of a major Office of
the United Nations is called into question in such a way,
it must be defended. And that is what I would like to do
publicly today in defending the work of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and paying
tribute to the work of all the humanitarian personnel
who put their lives on the line every day and night to
save others. I think that that deserves the support of the
community of nations.
We are all aware that the so-called humanitarian
pauses, which are decided upon unilaterally without
prior consultation whatsoever, are not a solution. They
are welcome, of course, but they are not a panacea.
We all know that it is impossible to obtain access
authorization in just a few hours to allow for the
entry of humanitarian workers and the evacuation of
the wounded and their families. Blaming the United
Nations for such objective factors is akin to firing at an
ambulance, both figuratively and literally, because we
know that hospitals and health-care personnel are often
the targets of deliberate air strikes. The key to it all is
to put an end to the hostilities and, in particular, to the
bombing. That is the basis on which we can build. It is
therefore urgent to exert maximum political pressure
on the regime and its supporters. That was the goal of
the recent General Assembly meeting following the
16-34324

26/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East

veto by Russia of the draft resolution by put forward by
France and Spain.
That pressure must be increased until the tragedy
taking place in Aleppo has been brought to an end.
We cannot give up on that. I have said it and I will
reiterate that Aleppo is to Syria what Sarajevo was to
Bosnia and Guernica was to Spain. That means that the
situation must be viewed as a large-scale humanitarian
tragedy — a black hole that swallows up and destroys
all of the values that the United Nations holds dear and
a promise that a horrendous tragedy will occur if we
fail to act now.
I would also like to make a few brief comments
on the issue of terrorism. I have made these comments
before in this forum. Not only does Aleppo not help
to combat terrorism — an issue which should, in
fact, unite the entire international community — but
Aleppo also systematically helps to spur radicalization
and, by extension, terrorism. I will echo the words of
my Minister for Foreign Affairs, who stated in this
Chamber (see S/PV.7785) that the battle of Aleppo is
a gift to terrorists and those who become the victims
of terrorist attacks, like France, pay the price. As far
as I and my country are concerned, this is an issue that
affects our national security.
My second comment concerns humanitarian aid.
I would simply like to point out that we all know —
and here too let us call a spade a spade so that we
can make some headway — that the Syrian regime
and its supporters are responsible for blocking the
humanitarian aid. I have already stated that here. It is
particularly unfair and completely out of place to blame
the United Nations when humanitarian workers are on
the front lines attempting to save lives.
Lastly, the international community cannot remain
silent on the abuses that are committed daily in Syria.
If we and the rest of the world believe in the work of
the United Nations and the values that unite us as an
Organization, something must be done. If not, we will
to bear the collective and individual responsibility
for it for a long time to come. In that regard, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights did not mince words
when he spoke about crimes that have never before
been committed, including war crimes and crimes
against humanity. He stated that light must be shed on
serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. Impunity and weakness cannot
be an option when we are dealing with a tragedy like

S/PV.7795

that taking place in Aleppo. In that regard, France
welcomes the adoption by the Human Rights Council
on 21 October of a resolution (A/HRC/RES/S-25/1)
demanding that the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic to
conduct a special independent investigation on events
in Aleppo and identify the alleged perpetrators of
human rights abuses.
In the same vein, we will pay particular attention
to the findings of the internal board of inquiry
a, established by the Secretary-General after the
bombing of a United Nations-Syria Red Cross aid
convoy on 19 September in the north-west of Aleppo,
which, I recall, caused the deaths of more than 20
people. To make a long story short, the onus is on the
parties to a conflict to protect civilians and ensure
humanitarian access and medical care. The protection
of humanitarian workers in particular — as provided
for by resolution 2286 (2016), on health-care personnel
and infrastructure — is vital. We must make a strong
appeal for the immediate cessation of attacks on such
personnel and infrastructure.
Once again, France calls on the Syrian regime and
Russia to put an end to air strikes on Aleppo, and not
only for a few hours, and on that basis, along with the
rest of us, to commit to building the political transition
needed in order to find a genuine political solution to
the crisis in Syria. As long as that has not occurred and
the tragedy unfolding in Aleppo continues, political
pressure must continue and will increase. Like many
others, I would like to issue another appeal, which we
hope will become louder and be heard and responded to
in a tangible manner.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Under-Secretary-General O’Brien for his briefing. The
situation in Syria, and in particular in Aleppo, has been
escalating and has resulted in a serious humanitarian
situation. The international community should work
together and take swift action to ease tensions.
China welcomes the recent humanitarian emergency
initiative taken by the Russian and Syrian Governments
in order to help the United Nations in evacuating the
sick and the wounded. However, due to the fact that that
initiative did not receive a response from other parties
in Syria, the United Nations operation to evacuate the
sick and the wounded failed to be implemented. China
calls on the parties in Syria to effectively implement
the agreement on the cessation of hostilities, work

16-3432413/23

S/PV.7795

The situation in the Middle East

actively with the United Nations to create the conditions
conducive to achieving a ceasefire that would ease the
humanitarian situation, and move the process for a
political solution forward.
On the question of Syria, the international
community must remain committed to a political
solution, which is the ultimate way to resolve the
current situation. Efforts should be made to encourage
the parties in Syria to resolve their disputes through
dialogue. Such efforts must be focused in a balanced
manner on the four tracks of a ceasefire, political
negotiations, humanitarian relief operations and
synergies to fight terrorism. China welcomes the
diplomatic efforts of the United Nations, Russia and
the United States of America in Lausanne and Geneva,
and hopes that the parties concerned will soon reach
consensus on concrete issues so as to ease tensions,
help the parties to resume negotiations and, through a
Syrian-led political process, arrive at a settlement that
is acceptable to all parties concerned in order to address
the root cause of the humanitarian situation in Syria.
The incessant terrorist attacks by terrorists in
Syria have seriously hampered the United Nations
humanitarian efforts. Efforts to ease the Syrian
humanitarian situation must not neglect the fight
against terrorism. The international community should
strengthen coordination and unify standards and
resolutely fight all terrorist groups, as designated by the
Council, including the Islamic State, and work together
to prevent the breeding and spread of terrorism.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): In the end, there has
been a genuine debate among the members of the
Security Council, which we commend. In other cases, it
has proven impossible to discuss issues as complicated
as those we are witnessing in the humanitarian
field. Now, not only are we calling into question
the United Nations system and the reports being
presented, but we also recognize with some concern
that the issue of humanitarian aid is being distorted
and politicized. But this happens only when it is in
the interests of certain permanent members — very
influential members — of the Security Council. The
humanitarian topic is a complex one that is salient in
all the conflicts that we are, unfortunately, seeing take
place in the Middle East and Africa: in Libya, Iraq,
Yemen, Syria and Palestine. However, I believe we have
never discussed here, and perhaps will never discuss,
the humanitarian topic in Yemen in a debate like this
14/23

26/10/2016

one, or the topic of the humanitarian situation in Iraq,
which continues to combat terrorists and continues
its advance on Mosul. But we are not going to discuss
that here. I am sure that we have not discussed nor will
we discuss what the humanitarian consequences were
of the foreign intervention in Libya, or of the Israeli
aggression against the Gaza Strip.
In other words, in the Council the humanitarian
topic is used in a political way. It is manipulated; it is
distorted. And in this specific case it is used to attack
the Russian Federation for its active participation
in the fight against terrorism in Syria. What is
being disregarded here is the complexity of this
conflict — its origins are being deliberately ignored.
Most of the permanent members of the Security Council,
the important permanent members, have been involved
in this conflict since it began. They have fuelled this
war. They have encouraged it. They have financed it.
They trained groups that later become terrorists. And
now in all of Syria we are witnessing a tragic situation,
where there are deaths of innocent civilians, basically
at the hands of terrorism and owing to the dynamics
of war.
We think that we should not lose sight of this,
because the solution to the humanitarian issue is to end
this war. The way to do that is by relaunching talks
and political negotiaitons among all the stakeholders,
but particularly between the Russian Federation and the
United States, in order to reach a negotiated political
solution to end this conflict. We cannot continue to
stoke this war. We cannot allow the groups that call
themselves the moderate opposition to continue to fail
to disassociate themselves from terrorist groups. We
cannot allow other foreign Powers to continue to arm
those groups, and thereby continue to indirectly arm
the terrorist groups.
We in the Security Council need clearly to call things
what they. We have here a terrible case of manipulation
of the humanitarian issue in order to attack Russia. Our
position is that we understand that the Government of
Syria has a legitimate right to reconquer all its territory
and a legitimate right to combat terrorism. Of course,
we do not support either the deliberate bombing of
civilians nor attacks against civilian infrastructure.
We have consistently rejected that in all conflicts. But
we understand that the situation in Syria is complex.
All of Aleppo — east and west — is involved in the
conflict. Almost 1.5 million people live in western
Aleppo, while 250,000 live in eastern Aleppo, where
16-34324

26/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East

terrorist groups have holed themselves up. Reports of
their numbers vary, but this is not about numbers. This
is about civilians being used as human shields. The
Security Council cannot declare eastern Aleppo as a
sanctuary so that terrorist groups can hunker down.
Flying in eastern Aleppo are the flags of Da’esh and
those of other terrorist groups. Other combatants said
to be from the moderate opposition are intermingled
and fighting side by side with terrorists against the
Syrian Government.
We are therefore discussing here a partial picture
of the humanitarian issue. It is a terrible situation, and
we could hear thousands of stories about the fates of
innocent civilians in this war. This war has to end. The
Government of Syria must fully exercise sovereignty
over all its territory, and all must fight terrorism
together, which is the main enemy of the Syrian people.
What would they have us do here in the Council? That
there be no military operations in eastern Aleppo? That
terrorists be allowed to continue to be holed up in the
city? I do not know, but I believe we cannot make any
country here responsible for this type of leaflet. This is
a war, and a complex situation. But it seems to us that
there has been a major effort to establish humanitarian
pauses to allow the civilian population to leave Aleppo
through the corridors that have been opened up. It has
been said here that civilians have returned to the city.
But we cannot fail to mention that the terrorist groups
have executed civilians who have tried to leave the city.
Civilians are being used as human shields — the same
thing is being denounced in Mosul. What are we going
to do in Mosul? Should we suspend the offensive to
recapture the city from the hands of the terrorists?
I would therefore urge the members of the
Council — we have heard once again tragic reports. We
are also seeing the deliberate use of the humanitarian
situation for political ends. We, who have no ability
to influence this conflict militarily, call on those
that are doing so to abandon propaganda rhetoric
and political manipulation and return to the path of
dialogue so that, by assuming our responsibilities as
an organ of the United Nations, we can present to the
world a proposal for a political solution whereby the
Syrians themselves can resolve this situation without
any further foreign interference. Foreign interference
must end. Propagandist rhetoric must end. We should
work honeslty to combat terrorism head-on and to find
a solution that ends the humanitarian tragedy in Syria.

S/PV.7795

The President (spoke in Russian): I want to
apologize to the representative of Ukraine, who was
on the list right after the United Kingdom. But my eye
accidentally jumped to France and I gave the floor to
the representative of France, which I do not regret. I
now give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me the floor this time and
not preventing our delegation from taking the floor
today, like you did so skilfully yesterday, using your
prerogative as President and showing no respect to
my delegation.
I thank Mr. O’Brien very much for his sobering
briefing, which once again drew an absolutely
horrifying picture of the reality in and around Aleppo.
It was a truthful picture, not an imagined one.
I agree with the colleague from New Zealand who
said that it is unfortunate that we are not able to come
together to stop this tragedy. But I am not ready to
accept this collective blame, simply because it is just one
delegation — it is your delegation, Mr. President — that
is preventing us from doing that. Nor am I ready to
accept your attack, Mr. President, on the United Nations,
and personally on our own respected colleague from
the United Nations, Mr. Stephen O’Brien. He just states
the facts, and he is not attacking Russia at all. He is
just stating the facts. Your statement in your national
capacity, Mr. President, creates an impression that
you are living in some sort of parallel world, a kind of
twisted treality that is completely opposite to what we
see and hear every day, every minute — actually for
many months now — from the media, from the ground,
from the witnesses, from independent services, from
the United Nations sources.
The deteriorating security environment in Syria
continues to negatively impact the humanitarian
situation. Military activities, air strikes and shellings go
unabated on all active fronts of the Syrian battlefield:
Aleppo, Idlib, Rif Dimashq, Homs, Hama and so forth.
It all results in a further increase in the number of
people living under siege, which has now reached, as
we have just heard, more than 800,000 civilians in 18
different locations.
It is impossible to comprehend that the Syrian
Government continues to bomb its citizens. Just this
Monday, at least 10 air strikes by the Al-Assad regime’s
air force and its allies hit the town of Khan Shaykhun,
killing 7 civilians and injuring more than 50, according

16-3432415/23

S/PV.7795

The situation in the Middle East

to reports from the ground. Six civilians were killed
in Russian air strikes in the town of Kafr Takharim on
Monday. Two more were killed in the rocket shelling
by regime forces in the town of Durin on the Al-Ghab
plain. The list goes on as a grim reminder of the reality
in Syria.
News reports about the leaflets disseminated by the
regime forces in eastern Aleppo is more proof of the
Damascus cynicism. I was going to provide a quote,
but my colleague from the United States has already
done so.
It is dismaying to see that instead of focusing on
how to revitalize the nationwide ceasefire, the Russian
Federation is moving new types of arms and bomb
carriers to bases in closer proximity to Syria. Some of
them are moved from the territory of Crimea, which
is part of Ukraine and which Russia illegally annexed.
The recent deployment of the Russian naval battle group
in the vicinity of Syria sends a signal of clear intention
to further bolster the bombing campaign there. It can
hardly be interpreted as a confidence-building measure
or as a signal that the circumstances are conducive to
return to the negotiating table.
We again stress the urgent need for the United
Nations to look into the alarming reports of the
extensive use by Russia of incendiary weapons and
other indiscriminate weapons, including bunkerbusting bombs. We reiterate that those accused of war
crimes and crimes against humanity and those who are
behind them should be brought to justice.
Finally, we join the United Nations and our
colleagues in calling on all parties to the conflict
to immediately provide unconditional, unimpeded
and sustained access to the people in besieged and
hard-to-reach areas across Syria. Providing regular
humanitarian breaks and observing human rights are
the obligations of all parties to the conflict, not gestures
of goodwill that one party agrees to do today and rejects
tomorrow in order to gain political dividends. It is not
mercy, but a duty.
The President (spoke in Russian): I would simply
like to say that we cannot accept the criticism that
we did not follow procedure yesterday. We invited
everyone to speak after the end of the discussion,
and the Ukrainian delegation should also respect the
interests of all delegations that have put their name on
the speakers’ list to have an opportunity to speak on the
16/23

26/10/2016

agenda item that was discussed yesterday. However, let
us focus on the main topic we are discussing today.
Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): We thank under UnderSecretary-General Mr. Stephen O’Brien for his briefing
and commend him once again for his tireless efforts
to facilitate access for humanitarian agencies and to
contribute to reaching a sustainable solution to the
humanitarian needs of the millions of civilians in
Syria. In the current environment, in which the United
Nations and humanitarian agencies are operating
in increasingly dangerous and difficult conditions,
we must commend all those who keep risking their
lives to help the desperate civilians trapped in this
horrendous conflict.
In the past few weeks, we have witnessed an
intense escalation of fighting, especially in the city
of Aleppo, which has resulted in massive destruction
of civilian and other essential infrastructure, as well
as an overwhelming number of casualties, wounded
and displaced people. It is obvious that unless there
is progress in bridging the differences between the
main stakeholders, in particular on the strategy
to combat terrorist groups, the humanitarian and
political crises will deepen, with dangerous and
unpredictable consequences.
The humanitarian situation must be combined
with diplomatic and political efforts towards a final
resolution of the conflict. Disagreements among the
members of the Council, and in particular between those
involved in the conflict, will not bring peace to Syria.
Therefore, we reiterate our support to the members of
the Security Council that have been trying to galvanize
our collective efforts to press for the relaunching of the
agreement on the cessation of hostilities and for the
establishment of humanitarian corridors in the worst
affected areas.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I will try to be brief, because
I think much of what needs to be said has already
been said.
Japan’s position, as the Council knows, is that we
supported the draft resolution (S/2016/846) submitted
by France and Spain, which called for an immediate
cessation of bombing against civilians. That is something
that we stand by. The Security Council should stand
by the very important principle that indiscriminatory
attacks on civilians must stop.
16-34324

26/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East

The other factor in this situation is fighting
terrorism. We must fight terrorism and we must fight
it strongly, but that does not justify indiscriminate
attacks on civilians. I think there should be a very wide
understanding and agreement on this point.
When the delegation of New Zealand proposed a
draft resolution trying to unite the Security Council,
we supported that move and felt that it could be a useful
way of proceeding. However, as the representative of
New Zealand said himself today, the situation does not
seem to allow drafting to be a useful thing to do right
now. We do need a better, united understanding within
the Council in order to adopt a resolution.
Therefore, I once again feel, in listening to the
disagreement today, that we really need to go back
to the basics — saying no to indiscriminate attacks
on civilians and trying to save civilians. Like France,
I welcome the cessation of bombing by Russia and
Syria, which lasted for a number of hours. However,
the problem was that it was unilateral, and a unilateral
cessation requires a lot of work to be done by the United
Nations in order to make evacuations possible. Right
now, I can say only that we must stop the bombing and
that a ceasefire should last much longer. We should try
to find a way to prevent unilateral action from Russia
and Syria. Rather, we should seek an agreed cessation
of hostilities.
Again, I call on the countries on the ground
to realize that it is not just their strategic or tactical
interests that are on the line; it is people’s lives that
are on the line. I urge all those around the table and
all the members of the Security Council to really sit
down and think again so that we can perhaps revise the
draft resolution proposed by New Zealand and make
it useful.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I would to thank UnderSecretary-General Stephen O’Brien for his briefing
and to start my intervention by expressing our
deep gratitude to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the humanitarian partners
of the United Nations on the ground in Syria for their
bravery and tireless effort in assisting civilians affected
by the conflict.
Today’s debate on the humanitarian situation in
Syria only deepens the Security Council’s irreconcilable
differences. It is a self-fulfilling prophecy of a doomsday
scenario: that nobody will step in to help. That is the
character of the tragic and harrowing human drama that

S/PV.7795

we are scripting by projecting alternate realities onto the
situation. The Council is too important to be relegated
to witness to processes that take place outside of New
York. We have before us a draft resolution put forth
by New Zealand that aims to solve the humanitarian
question in Aleppo. Despite the pronounced readiness
to engage by almost everyone, we need walk the talk.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I, too,
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Stephen
O’Brien for the clarity of his briefing. Above all, I
welcome his commitment and that of his team to the
cause of the Syrian people, who are being sorely tried
indeed. We believe that the time has come to renew our
tribute to humanitarian personnel for the sacrifices that
they are willing to make, as well as to the medical staff
and others who are devoted to the cause of the Syrian
people.
Unfortunately, as we are all aware, the situation
continues to deteriorate. Violence has become
heightened in many areas, especially in eastern Aleppo,
where there are hundreds of civilian victims, including,
most unfortunately, many children. That does not take
into account the wounded. As has also been pointed out,
western Aleppo has unfortunately also been affected.
I will not dwell on the figures, which unfortunately
speak for themselves about the depth of the ongoing
tragedy in Syria. That is why my country wishes to
renew its call for a 48-hour humanitarian ceasefire,
especially in eastern Aleppo, as called for by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, in order
to make it possible for the more than 215,000 people
under siege to be assisted by humanitarian workers and
to conduct the evacuation of the injured and those most
vulnerable.
My country emphatically condemns attacks on
humanitarian convoys, especially the one against the
United Nations-Syrian Red Crescent convoy at Orem
Al-Kubra on 19 September, which led to the deaths of
almost 20 people. We express our support for the efforts
of the Secretary-General to identify those responsible
for that tragedy. In the same vein, with regard to
the tragic humanitarian situation, we condemn the
consistent practice of removing medical supplies and
equipment from humanitarian convoys destined for
people in urgent need, especially pregnant women.
When it comes to Palestinian refugees, they too
are suffering because of the tragedy. My delegation
condemns the deaths of four Palestinian refugees at the

16-3432417/23

S/PV.7795

The situation in the Middle East

Khan Eshieh refugee camp, south of Damascus. Along
the same lines, we express our concern regarding the
continued security constraints that the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East faces in gaining access to the Yarmouk
refugee camp. Those constraints also affect the situation
of other Palestinian refugees.
Clearly, the question we are all asking is what
the Security Council should do in these particularly
serious circumstances. Unfortunately, to date the
Council remains divided, especially with regard to
the unacceptable situation in Aleppo. We think the
time has come for the Council at last to take up its
responsibilities in the face of the ongoing deteriorating
situation on the ground and the continuing tragedy.
We therefore once again call on Council members
to demonstrate flexibility in order to reach a lasting
solution. Of course, we lent our support to the draft
resolution aimed at consensus submitted by New
Zealand. We believe the draft resolution provides a
good basis to work towards giving new impetus to the
cessation of hostilities, which would make it possible
not only to provide humanitarian assistance, but also
to resume the political process, which we believe to
be a priority. We also believe it is a priority to fight
terrorist groups, especially the Islamic State and the
Al-Nusra Front, with full respect for humanitarian law
and international humanitarian law.
Lastly, we encourage the talks that took place
at Lausanne, which are continuing in Geneva. We
renew our call on countries with influence, especially
the co-Chairs of International Syria Support Group,
to continue their efforts for the soonest possible
resumption of intra-Syrian negotiations, with a view
to finding a political solution to the crisis on the basis
of the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and
resolution 2254 (2015).
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as the representative
of the Russian Federation.
I regret that Ambassador Power left the Chamber.
Lately, she has tried to avoid direct polemics with me
in public, and I am sorry about that, particularly since I
will have to say a few words in response to her attacks
on us.
Ambassador Power unfortunately resorted to
a method she likes. She distorts Russia’s position,
presents it in some absurd way and then criticizes her
18/23

26/10/2016

own absurd rendering of that position. I noticed that
Mr. O’Brien said not a word in his statement about the
fact that for more than seven days now, neither Russia
nor the Syrian air force has been bombing Aleppo. She
says that we want to be thanked for that. We certainly
do not need their thanks, but Secretary of State Kerry
talked for weeks about how there had to be seven days
with no bombing. It must be a pretty important point
if the United States Secretary of State talks about it
for weeks. And does it seem a proof of objectivity in a
United Nations report (S/2016/873) when that fact goes
completely unmentioned in the report? When a United
Nations Under-Secretary-General says that bombings
occur daily, hourly, and on top of that adds that they are
practically dropping chemical weapons on the heads of
the citizens of Aleppo, is that a standard of objectivity?
Excuse me, that is not objectivity, it is deception.
Turning now to the leaflet that was shown. That
is certainly a very controversial fact. These things are
showing up everywhere on the Internet, which means
that the leaflet was dropped yesterday or today. And
even Ambassador Power explained that they were
dropping them from Russian and Syrian planes.But our
military command says that for the past seven or eight
days our planes have not been within 10 kilometres of
Aleppo. That must mean that American planes were
dropping them, right? Or that the whole thing is a false
rumour, of which there are a great many on the Internet,
and who knows where else. Presenting such stuff to the
Security Council and expecting it to be taken seriously
is simply ludicrous. I operate on the belief that we are
more serious than that here.
Ambassador Power says that the citizens of eastern
Aleppo were not leaving because they are terrified of
what awaits them. That is understandable. I completely
agree that of course both living in and leaving the
city is frightening. We proposed to the United States
that our armed forces could be stationed together with
American forces on the Castello Road, which could then
be freely used both for humanitarian convoys’ access
to eastern Aleppo and for leaving the city. The United
States turned that down. What about that attitude from
the humanitarian contingent — “What shall we do?
What shall we do?” We said what we could do — have
Russian and American soldiers standing together on
the Castello Road. No, they said, “You do it”. Let the
Russians put themselves in danger and be shot at by
terrorists? We will not do that. That is just dishonest.
16-34324

26/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East

Ambassador Power rightly emphasized the
fact — and we have discussed it at times — that the
residents of western Aleppo are also under fire. Indeed,
20 people are dying every week, and 50 or 60 are
being injured, on top of which they are under severe
psychological strain. I am sorry that Samantha Power is
not here. A few days ago, in a separate conversation with
her, she said that the United States was working on the
issue. They are working on it, and nothing is happening.
There has been no improvement. That means that their
protégés in eastern Aleppo are not doing their bidding,
and that they do not know how to stop this horror. Who
are they to criticize us and the Syrian Government,
who are trying to suppress this breeding ground where
terrorists and the other insurgents in eastern Aleppo
are endangering its citizens?
Nor should we be talking only about eastern
Aleppo when we discuss Syria — and, incidentally,
the humanitarian situation, civilian deaths and so
forth. A couple of months or more ago, the coalition,
supposedly with French planes, made a strike on
Manbij in northern Syria. It was reported that more
than 100 people died — an entire village was destroyed.
Ambassador Power promised that there would be an
investigation. We heard nothing. As for what happened
there or who did the bombing, we heard nothing.
Recently, two Belgian planes, also from the coalition,
bombed a Kurdish village. Six people died and some
were injured. The Belgians say it was not them. So
who was it? Ask the coalition. So why are they so upset
about our bombing and say nothing about their own?
Not to mention what is going on in Iraq, where there are
reports that in just the past few days almost 50 civilians
died and 100 people were wounded near Kirkuk. Let
us hold a briefing on the situation in Iraq and those
bombings in which Mr. O’Brien can undoubtedly give
us a demonstration of his oratorical talent.
Just the other day in Yemen, as we all know, 200
people in a funeral procession were killed and 500 more
were injured when it was bombed. The British delegation
issued a draft statement expressing regret. Regret. They
could not even bring themselves to condemn it. When
we told them that was not strong enough, they were
very happy to abandon the whole thing. Almost 1,000
people killed or injured, and all they have is regret.
How about that for standards? Many of us will have to
ask forgiveness for sins in Syria, in Iraq and many other
situations that we are acquainted with.

S/PV.7795

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt): I speak on behalf of the
co-penholders on the humanitarian situation in Syria,
namely, Spain, New Zealand and Egypt, and I will
deliver my statement in English instead of my national
language.
We are deeply concerned by the continuing
deterioration of the humanitarian situation throughout
Syria, and in Aleppo in particular, which includes
attacks on hospitals, doctors and first responders, as
well as on civilian infrastructure. The Security Council
has a responsibility to ensure full compliance of any
military operations with international humanitarian
law, as well as under the provisions of resolution
2286 (2016). We also regret the fact that, despite
many endeavours to address the situation, differences
between major stakeholders are preventing the Council
from guaranteeing the protection of Syrian civilians.
Nevertheless, we hoped that there could have been a
minimum of understanding to provide a basis for our
work, assuming that good could prevail.
As co-penholders, we feel that it is of the utmost
importance to shoulder our responsibilities towards
the Syrian people as part of a neutral humanitarian
approach. We have a collective responsibility to
respond to the crisis. Our past failures may constitute
an explanation as to why we have not been able to agree
on a solution. However, such failure cannot justify a
lack of action in the coming days. Therefore we ̶ ̶ Spain,
New Zealand and Egypt ̶ ̶ urge all Council members
to set aside their political differences and continue to
work on the issue in order to implement the following.
A ceasefire should be established in Aleppo, first
and foremost to allow full humanitarian access to the
city, as well as an opportunity for sound proposals to be
implemented. The duration of the ceasefire should be
guided by the assessment of the United Nations on the
basis of the actual humanitarian needs on the ground.
It would also provide an opportunity to consider steps
towards the implementation of Mr. De Mistura’s
proposals, namely a separation between terrorist
organizations and moderate opposition groups, which,
as far as we understand, is being studied in Switzerland.
The ceasefire must be observed by all parties.
Previous experience has proved that unilateral efforts
are not enough. All members of the International
Syria Support Group (ISSG) should do their utmost

16-3432419/23

S/PV.7795

The situation in the Middle East

to work with all parties on the ground in that regard.
A ceasefire must be fully coordinated with the United
Nations in order to ensure that the United Nations and
implementing partners can to deliver aid and carry out
medical evacuations.
A cessation of hostilities pursuant to resolution
2268 (2016) must be immediately and fully implemented
throughout Syria. Aleppo would come under the
cessation of hostilities regime at the end of the duration
of the ceasefire.
Finally, there has to be adequate and robust
monitoring of a ceasefire and the cessation of hostilities
within existing mechanisms set forth by resolution
2268 (2016) and the ISSG.
Egypt, New Zealand and Spain will work with
members of the Council and do our utmost to reach an
agreement on those elements. We would like to end our
remarks with a tribute to all the humanitarian workers
who risk their lives daily for the sake of the Syrian
people
The President (spoke in Russian): The
representative of the United Kingdom has asked for the
floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Given the pressure
that you are under to defend the indefensible, Sir,
your fantasy world has spread from Syria to Yemen.
I just wanted to set the record straight and say that the
United Kingdom did circulate a draft Security Council
statement on Yemen, but its content was to strongly
condemned the attack on the funeral. There was only
one Security Council delegation that did not wish to
support the statement, and that country was Russia.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a further statement in my national capacity as the
representative of the Russian Federation.
I thought my colleague’s memory was a little
better than that. Was three paragraphs all that the event
deserved? This is in fact the second version produced
in the wake of our comments. But in any case, it was
not a serious effort. We can talk about that another
time. I hope, finally, that we can use the same format
to talk about what is going on in Yemen and Iraq, in
a useful discussion. Look, here we have Uruguay,
setting a courageous example, always speaking first in
public meetings. Let us discuss things. On 31 October,
Mr. Ismael Ahmed will be here and we can talk about
what is going on in Yemen in a public meeting.
20/23

26/10/2016

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I shall delay beginning my statement so that
certain hypocrites can exit the Chamber. The exit of
the representatives of certain States who have shed
crocodile tears over the humanitarian situation in
Aleppo reveals their hypocrisy and mendacity. They
have put on this theatrical show on several occasions,
but their behaviour confirms our suspicions of their
complete lack of objectivity in their national policies
towards my country.
I was compelled to request the floor after I listened
to the misguided statements made by a number of
Security Council members and the representative of
the Secretariat, seeking as usual to distort the strenuous
efforts of the Syrian Government to provide necessary
services and support to those in need, and to vilify the
efforts of my country’s Government against organized
terrorism being supported by the same States that deny
my Government’s constitutional and legal rights under
international law to defend its people against terrorism
represented by the organizations of Da’esh and Jabhat
al-Nusra and associated terrorist, who are relics of
ignorant times and Wahabi in nature.
As a Government, we will not allow any discussion
about something called western Aleppo and eastern
Aleppo. We will not allow for a repetition of the sad old
scenario in which we used to talk about eastern Beirut
and western Beirut. There is one Aleppo and there is
one Syria. No one who plots against our country and our
territories will achieve anything with us. The blockade
is imposed on all of Syria, not just on eastern Aleppo or
on Aleppo per se. An unjust blockade is imposed on the
entirety of my nation. We have reiterated this thousands
of times and shall say it again and again, whether
anyone understands or not, and whether anyone refuses
to understand or not.
Some States that feigned tears today over Aleppo in
a theatrical fashion, as they have done before over the
towns of Darayya and the neighbourhood of Al-Waer
and other areas, have deliberately ignored the following
facts.
First, the representatives of these States ignored
the geopolitical landscape of the region, which reflects
16-34324

26/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East

the violation of the most basic norms of international
law by certain States, such as Turkey, which dreams
of restoring its Ottoman glory — which faded and will
not return —and repeatedly violates the sovereignty
of Syria and Iraq. Another example is Saudi Arabia,
which supports terrorism in the region and throughout
the world in the name of a religion that is innocent of
such claims, including by issuing Wahabi jihadi fatwas
legitimizing the bloodshed of Libyans, Yemenis and
others.
Similarly, the United States, Britain and France
have invaded and destroyed Libya, and before that the
United States and Britain invaded and destroyed Iraq
and killed millions of its people. The same goes for
Qatar, which uses its oil funds to supply terrorists with
all sorts of lethal weapons, and Israel, which is forming
an alliance with Jabhat al-Nusra in the occupied Syrian
Golan area. None of this has bothered Mr. O’Brien,
Mr. Ladsous, Mr. Feltman or the Secretary-General.
None of these violations of international law have
angered anyone at all. It is just business as usual.
Secondly, the representatives who have just exited
the Chamber, shirking their responsibilities, have
ignored the main reason for the painful deterioration
of the situation in Syria in general, and in Aleppo in
particular, and how Aleppo has been turned from the
economic capital of Syria, whose residents enjoyed a
decent standard of living with all services, into a city
whose residents suffer in terms of security, health,
education and livelihood. What happened in this
martyr city is to be blamed on the acts committed by
terrorist armed groups and foreign terrorist combatants
brought from all over the world — from New Zealand
to Canada — into Syria through Turkish territories,
facilitated by the Erdogan regime and with funding
from the Saudi and Qatari regimes.
As for the Governments of the United States,
France, Britain and other States, they ensured them a
supply of lethal weapons of all kinds. I bring with me
images of the new weapons, including American-made
rockets that have been sent to the moderate opposition
in eastern Aleppo. These moderate terrorists, who have
been genetically modified, are preparing to attack
western Aleppo. This is an image of one of the rockets
that have been dropped on a Church in western Aleppo;
we have thousands of images for anyone who wants to
see more.

S/PV.7795

Thirdly, the representatives who exited the
Chamber, shirking their responsibilities to maintain
international peace and security, have also ignored the
fact that terrorists in eastern Aleppo are using civilians
as human shields, as do Da’esh terrorists against the
innocent residents of Mosul in Iraq. The terrorists in
Mosul are the same as those in eastern Aleppo. They
continue to shower the neighbourhoods of western
Aleppo with dozens of bombs on a daily basis, claiming
thousands of martyrs and wounded, and are met with
a dubious international silence, especially from the
States whose representatives have left the Chamber.
It is deplorable that these States continue to call these
terrorists the “moderate arned opposition”, in a stark
provocation to the provisions of the international law.
Fourthly, the representatives who have left the
Chamber, shirking their responsibilities to maintain
international peace and security, ignored the reason
why the United States-Russia agreement on Aleppo of
9 September did not stand. The Syrian Arab Republic
Government committed to the cessation of hostilities,
which was exploited by terrorist armed groups to regroup
and summon fighters and military equipment from the
States that generously shed crocodile tears over the
suffering of our people in Aleppo in order to confront
the Syrian Government. These States disregarded the
fact that armed terrorist groups are responsible for
undermining and violating the agreement by rejecting
it in the first place. Immediately after the signing of
the agreement, 27 terrorist factions declared that they
would not honour it — this did not reach the ears of
Mr. O’Brien — and were targeting the humanitarian
convoy in Oram Al-Kubra.
These States also ignore the fact that the main reason
for the collapse of the agreement was the failure of the
United States to commit to separating the so-called
moderate opposition from the terrorist organizations and
its targeting of a military site of the Syrian army in Deir
ez-Zor on 17 September. The incident of 17 September
allowed the Da’esh terrorists to consolidate their control
over 300,000 civilians in Deir ez-Zor.
Fifthly, the representatives who have left the
Chamber, shirking their responsibilities to maintain
international peace and security, have ignored the
agreement reached in the context of the coordinated
Syrian-Russian effort for the cessation of hostilities
in eastern Aleppo, unilaterally for humanitarian
reasons, including the evacuation of the wounded, sick
and elderly from eastern Aleppo and the facilitation

16-3432421/23

S/PV.7795

The situation in the Middle East

of access to a team from the United Nations entities
working in Damascus, led by the United Nations
Resident Coordinator and the International Red Cross
and the Arab Syrian Red Crescent, in order to follow up
the evacuation operation and set up six humanitarian
corridors to allow civilians to exit, and two checkpoints
for armed militants, who were invited to normalize their
situation so as to be granted amnesty or to leave the
city. However, the terrorist groups that were using the
population as human shields undermined that operation.
Eight corridors were opened, six for humanitarian exit
and two for the armed groups’ exit, contrary to what has
been said by the American and British representatives.
Sixthly, the representatives who left the Chamber,
shirking their responsibilities to maintain international
peace and security, avoided identifying the persons
responsible for the suffering of the population of Aleppo
due to the lack of water, medicine, food and electricity,
in particular given the fact that the terrorists cut off the
water and power supplies to the city. The water plant is
controlled by the terrorists in Aleppo. Everyone should
pay attention to this detail. They are the ones who cut
off the water supply and who loot food and medicine
supplies intended for civilians in Aleppo. They are also
responsible, along with the air strikes by the so-called
international coalition, for the destruction of the power
station in the Suleiman Al-Halabi neighbourhood and
elsewhere, as well as other electricity and desalination
plants. Therefore, it is the terrorists and the international
coalition who are cutting off water and electricity
supplies to the residents of Aleppo.
My Government rejects the selective approach of
these States concerning the situation in eastern Aleppo
and other specific areas in Syria. All of Syria, including
Aleppo and the eastern, western, northern and southern
areas, suffer from Wahabi terrorism, supported by the
regimes of well-known Governments — Saudi Arabia,
Turkey, Qatar and Israel foremost among them. It also
suffers from the attacks of the allies of these States as
part of the so-called international coalition, and from
the American unilateral and arbitrary sanctions.
My country’s Government reiterates its firm
position that the only solution to the crisis is political
solution based on an inter-Syrian dialogue, under Syrian
leadership, without foreign intervention and without
preconditions, be they American, British, French or
other. My Government affirms that the political track
must go hand in hand with the counter-terrorism track,
which will continue unabated until all terrorist armed
22/23

26/10/2016

groups active in Syria have been eliminated. In that
context, my Government reiterates the importance
of the mission of the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral.
How can some of the delegations in this Chamber,
representing countries that sponsor terrorism, claim
to be fighting terrorism while parroting misleading
lies about ongoing military operations carried out by
the Syrian Army in Syria and the Russian ally? How
can they fight terrorism if they depend on terrorists as
sources of information? Is there a relationship between
those Governments and the terrorists?
To conclude, the battle for the liberation of Mosul
and all territories in Iraq is the battle of the Syrian
Government and its army, too. It is an absolute right of
the Iraqi Government to liberate Mosul from terrorism,
just as it is the right of the Syrian Government to liberate
Aleppo from that same terrorism. Iraq and Syria are
fighting the same terrorism in Mosul and in Aleppo.
The resemblance between the two ongoing military
operations in Aleppo and those in Mosul is significant.
Why is there support for the military operation in
Iraq, while the military operation in Aleppo faces
obstruction? Why are humanitarian corridors being
opened in order to push Da’esh terrorists out of Mosul
towards the Syrian town of Raqqa? And why are those
groups leaving Mosul for Raqqa being bombed by the
so-called coalition bombers? Why reject the RussianSyrian proposal to open the same corridors to allow the
same terrorists to leave eastern Aleppo? It is as if the
States supporting these terrorist groups were saying
that the terrorists in Syria are angels, while the same
terrorists in other places are devils.
I would have liked to ask the United States
representative why her Government did not open a
humanitarian corridor for the terrorist who attacked
the night club in Florida. Why was he not supplied
with food and medicine so that he could continue his
terrorist activities, for humanitarian purposes known
to Mr. O’Brien? Why were the terrorists who attacked
the Bataclan theatre in Paris not supplied by the
French Government with food and humanitarian aid
and offered a humanitarian corridor to leave Paris for
humanitarian reasons as well, known to Mr. O’Biren?
The same applies to Britain and elsewhere. I say to
those before me: enough hypocrisy. My country’s
people are the ones paying the price. This theatrical
farce must end. All members of the Council must fulfil
their responsibility to maintain international peace and
16-34324

26/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East

security, rather than settle scores between one another
to the detriment of our people in Syria.
The President (spoke in Russian): I give the
floor to Mr. O’Brien to respond to the questions and
comments made.
Mr. O’Brien: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity
to speak again. As an international civil servant acting
impartially, I do not retract, qualify or disclaim any fact
or part of my earlier statement, which, I can assure you
and each and every member of the Council, that I and
my team and the wider United Nations have put together
with great care, seriousness and professionalism.
I am prompted to state the age-old truth: Do not
shoot the messenger. Rather, I urge the Council to stand
up for the beleaguered people of Syria and to seize
the opportunity that I described of taking leadership
and those steps that are available to the Council and
which they can take to stop the violence now, to stop
the war now.
The United Nations continues its work undeterred.
It remains ready to work with all parties to deliver
humanitarian assistance, protect civilians and reach
people in need. While humanitarians have a particular
role, rest assured that we will work as one United
Nations, including our support for Staffan de Mistura
and his work.

S/PV.7795

I conclude by simply paying an undiluted tribute
and saluting again the brave, undeterred, faithful
humanitarian workers in Syria working tirelessly for
the people of Syria, who are caught up in this terrible
endless crisis and need life support and protection.
The President (spoke in Russian): I believe that, as
President of the Council, I can express the certainty that
United Nations humanitarian personnel will continue
their difficult work in Syria, as Mr. O’Brien said.
In my national capacity, however, I cannot fail to
note that it is clear from Mr. O’Brien’s response that
he has no information supporting the contention that
Russian and Syrian forces have been bombing over
the past seven days, just as he has no information that
chemical weapons have been used in eastern Aleppo
at any point in time. I just want to point that out for
the record.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I suggest that after the discussion we have just had
there is no need to continue with consultations. We
have had a briefing and consultations at the same time.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

16-3432423/23
