S/2021/91

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 February 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 28 January 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Mr. Tor Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, and His Excellency Mr. Ahmed
Aboul Gheit, Secretary-General of the League of Arab States, as well as the
statements delivered by Their Excellencies Mr. Ralph Gonsalves, Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines; Mr. Simon
Coveney, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Defence of Ireland; Mr. Marcelo Ebrard
Casaubón, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mexico; Ms. Ine Eriksen Søreide, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Norway; Mr. Sergey Lavrov, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Russian Federation; Mr. Rein Tammsaar, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Estonia; Mr. Mohamed Ali Nafti, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of Tunisia,
and by the representatives of China, France, India, Kenya, the Niger, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and
Viet Nam in connection with the video-teleconference on “The situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question” convened on Tuesday, 26 January
2021. Statements were also delivered by His Excellency Mr. Riad Al-Malki, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the Observer State of Palestine, and the
representative of Israel.
In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members for
this video-teleconference, the following delegations and entities submitted written
statements, copies of which are also enclosed: Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Brazil, the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, Costa Rica, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, the European Union,
Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Malaysia,
Morocco, Namibia, Peru, Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Saudi Arabia, South Africa,
the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey and the United Arab Emirates.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, these
briefings and statements will be issued as an official document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Tarek Ladeb
President of the Security Council

21-01410 (E) 030221 020321

*2101410*

S/2021/91

Annex 1
Briefing by the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, Tor Wennesland
I am honoured to address the Security Council for the first time in my capacity
as the Secretary-General’s Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and by the trust bestowed upon me in this role by the Secretary-General, the parties
and the members of the Council.
I thank the Palestinian and Israeli Governments for their warm welcome and
look forward to our initial meetings in the coming days and weeks.
I wish to join the Secretary-General in welcoming the presidential decree
issued by President Mahmoud Abbas to hold legislative, presidential and Palestinian
National Council elections this year. The holding of elections in the occupied West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, and Gaza will be a crucial step towards Palestinian
unity, giving renewed legitimacy to national institutions, including a democratically
elected Parliament and Government in Palestine. The United Nations stands ready
to support efforts for the Palestinian people to exercise their democratic rights.
Elections are a crucial part of building a democratic Palestinian State built on the
rule of law with equal rights for all. The forthcoming talks in Cairo to resolve
outstanding issues related to the holding of elections will be important for the
planned preparatory process to move forward.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis continues to take a staggering toll
across the occupied Palestinian territory and Israel. Concerted efforts to contain and
halt the spread of the virus have succeeded in lowering the overall number of active
cases in the West Bank and Gaza, but the cost in lives and livelihoods remains high,
particularly in the Gaza Strip.
As a result of the ongoing spread of the pandemic, Israeli and Palestinian
authorities extended or tightened movement restrictions in most areas during
the reporting period, significantly impacting daily life and limiting access to
basic services.
The United Nations and its partners continue to support the Palestinian
Government’s effort to control the COVID-19 pandemic through the delivery of
personal protective equipment, oxygen therapy machines, testing materials and
other critical equipment.
Through the efforts of the World Health Organization and UNICEF, the United
Nations is also supporting the Government’s preparedness to receive and eventually
administer vaccines. The Palestinian Government is working to procure a supply
of vaccines and anticipates support through the global COVAX Advance Market
Commitment facility. The initial allocations of vaccines to cover priority groups are
expected in the first half of 2021.
At the same time, Israel has launched a large-scale vaccination campaign for
its citizens and residents. In that context, the United Nations continues to encourage
Israel to help address the priority needs of Palestinians in the occupied Palestinian
territories and to support COVID-19 vaccine availability more generally. That will
be critical for the broader efforts of both Governments to control the pandemic and
is also in line with Israel’s obligations under international law.
Israel has worked closely with the United Nations and its partners throughout
the course of the pandemic to ensure that equipment and supplies are delivered
throughout the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and Gaza. It is
important that the same level of engagement and cooperation be sustained with
regard to the delivery of vaccines.
2/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

As I noted earlier in my opening remarks, President Abbas issued a longanticipated presidential decree on 15 January stating that legislative, presidential and
Palestinian National Council elections would be held later in the year. According to
the decree, legislative elections will take place on 22 May, followed by presidential
elections on 31 July and Palestinian National Council elections on 31 August.
I also note the amendment of the elections law raising the quota for female
representation from 20 to 26 per cent. I welcome that step and join the SecretaryGeneral’s call on Palestinian authorities to take further steps to facilitate, strengthen
and support women’s political participation, including as voters and candidates,
throughout the electoral cycle.
The United Nations has continued its engagement with the Palestinian Central
Elections Committee in support of free and fair elections and stands ready to support
the Committee and the Palestinian people as plans for elections progress.
In a separate development in Israel, on 23 December 2020, the Israeli Knesset
dissolved after failing to pass a budget, and general elections were scheduled for
23 March.
In a concerning development, on 17 January, Israeli authorities advanced
plans for some 800 housing units in Area C settlements. The following day, on 18
January, Israeli authorities published tenders for some 1,900 units in Area C and
an additional 210 units in East Jerusalem. Of the units advanced and tendered, the
majority are in settlements in outlying locations, deep inside the occupied West
Bank. More than 200 units are located in illegal outposts that Israeli authorities are
retroactively regularizing under Israeli law.
On 19 January, the Jerusalem District Court denied a request for an interim
injunction to freeze the tendering process for some 1,200 units in Givat Hamatos.
The bidding period for the tender closed on 18 January, and winning bids were
announced on 20 January.
I reiterate that settlements are illegal under international law and are a major
obstacle to peace. They undermine the prospect of achieving a two-State solution.
I urge the Government of Israel to cease all settlement activity in the occupied
territory, including in East Jerusalem.
During the reporting period, Israeli authorities demolished, seized or forced
owners to demolish 71 Palestinian-owned structures, including 19 residential
structures, displacing 73 Palestinians, including 17 women and 37 children. The
demolitions and seizures were executed owing to the lack of Israeli-issued building
permits, which are nearly impossible for Palestinians to obtain. Israeli forces also
bulldozed agricultural land and more than 2,000 Palestinian-owned trees, claiming
they were planted on State land.
On 23 December, the Magistrate Court in Jerusalem ruled in favour of a
settler organization, upholding an eviction order against four Palestinian families in
the Batan Al-Hawa section of the Silwan neighbourhood, in East Jerusalem.
I urge Israel to cease demolitions and seizures of Palestinian property, in line
with its obligations under international humanitarian law, and to allow Palestinians
in Area C and East Jerusalem to develop their communities.
Violent incidents, unfortunately, continued throughout the reporting period.
On 25 December, Palestinian militants in Gaza fired two rockets towards Israel,
which were both intercepted by the Iron Dome system. On 26 December, the Israel
Defense Forces (IDF) retaliated against what it said were Hamas targets in Gaza.
As a result, three Palestinian civilians were injured, including a 6-year-old girl, and
damage was caused to civilian structures.
21-014103/103

S/2021/91

On 18 and 19 January, three additional rockets were fired from Gaza towards
Israel, with two landing in the sea off Israel’s southern coast and one reportedly
landing in an open field, causing no damage or injuries. The IDF retaliated by
striking what it said were Hamas targets in the Strip, with no injuries reported.
On 23 January, an explosion reportedly caused by materials stored in a house
in Beit Hanoun resulted in injuries to 47 people, including 19 children and 15 women.
Turning to the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, two Palestinians,
including one child, were killed after reportedly carrying out attacks against Israelis,
and 63 Palestinians were injured, including two children and two women, in clashes,
attacks, search and arrest operations and other incidents. Eight Israelis, including
two soldiers, two women and one child, were injured by Palestinians during the
reporting period.
On 21 December, a 52-year-old Israeli woman was found killed in a forest near
the settlement of Tal Menashe in the occupied West Bank, having been attacked with
a stone. On 24 December, Israeli forces arrested a Palestinian man in the village of
Tura, near Jenin, on suspicion of the killing in a premeditated attack. According to
Israeli authorities, he subsequently confessed to the killing. Four other Palestinian
men were also arrested in connection with the killing.
On 21 December, a 17-year-old Palestinian opened fire at an Israeli police
post in the Old City of Jerusalem and was subsequently shot and killed by the Israeli
security forces.
On 1 January, a Palestinian man was left paralysed after being shot by live
ammunition by Israeli forces in the Al-Rakeez community, in the southern West
Bank, during a dispute between Palestinians and the Israeli forces over the seizure
of an electricity generator. An initial Israel Defense Forces internal probe found
that the shooting was accidental and happened in circumstances where the soldiers
feared for their lives, an account disputed by Palestinian eyewitnesses. The IDF
opened a further inquiry into the incident.
On 5 January, a Palestinian man was shot dead by the Israeli security forces at
the Gush Etzion junction, in the West Bank, after he allegedly attempted to carry out
a stabbing attack. The man’s body is being withheld by Israeli authorities.
I reiterate that the Israeli security forces must exercise maximum restraint and
may use lethal force only when strictly unavoidable in order to protect life. Particular
care should be taken to protect children from any form of violence. Furthermore,
the indiscriminate launching of rockets towards Israeli population centres violates
international law and must stop immediately. There can be no justification for attacks
against civilians.
There was an increase in settler-related violence throughout the reporting
period. That increase took place in the aftermath of the death of a 16-year-old boy
from the settlement of Bat Ayin while he was being chased by Israeli police on
suspicion of throwing stones at Palestinians.
During the reporting period, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs recorded 45 incidents in which Israeli settlers and others injured Palestinians
or reportedly damaged their property, resulting in 22 injuries and damage to
property. In two separate incidents in East Jerusalem and Al-Lubban Ash-Sharqiya,
near Nablus, a boy and a man were physically assaulted and injured.
Meanwhile, Palestinians perpetrated some 55 attacks against Israeli settlers
and other civilians in the West Bank, resulting in six injuries and damage to property.
On 3 January, a woman was critically injured by a thrown rock while driving near
Deir Nidham, close to Qalqilya.
4/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

All perpetrators of violence must be held accountable.
On 23 December, the Envoys of the Middle East Quartet met virtually to
discuss the prospect of Israeli-Palestinian peace and the latest developments on
the ground. I look forward to engaging with my counterparts very soon to identify
concrete steps to bring the parties back to the path of meaningful negotiations.
On 11 January, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Egypt, France, Germany
and Jordan met in Cairo to discuss ways to advance the Middle East peace process. In
their joint statement following the meeting, the Ministers emphasized their support
for the two-State solution based on the 1967 lines, United Nations resolutions and
international law, rejected unilateral steps and urged all parties, including the
Quartet, to take steps towards launching negotiations.
Briefly turning to the region, on the Golan, the ceasefire between Israel and
Syria has been generally maintained despite the continued violations of the 1974
Disengagement of Forces Agreement by the parties, leading to increased tensions.
There were also reports of air strikes attributed to Israel on locations in Syria
on 25 and 30 December and on 6, 13 and 22 January, resulting in casualties. On
6 January, United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) personnel
observed kinetic activity in the UNDOF area of operation involving the firing of
anti-aircraft tracer rounds from the north-east across the area of separation, with two
of them exploding mid-air. UNDOF personnel heard aircraft activity on the Alpha
side and explosions on the Bravo side.
UNDOF continues to liaise with both parties to remind them of their obligation
to respect the terms of the Disengagement Agreement and prevent any escalation of
the situation across the ceasefire line.
In Lebanon, consultations to form a Government continue. Participants in
the 2 December Paris conference, co-chaired by the United Nations and France,
expressed support for the Lebanese people and took stock of the response to the
4 August Beirut port explosion. Participants expressed concern about the political
deadlock and worsening socioeconomic situation.
While the situation in the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon area
of operations was generally stable, tensions remained high. There were increased
violations of Lebanese airspace by Israel and incidents of weapons-pointing across
the Blue Line between the Israel Defense Forces and the Lebanese Armed Forces.
As we contend with one urgent crisis after another, we must not lose sight of
our overarching goal — supporting Palestinians and Israelis to resolve the conflict,
end the occupation and achieve the vision of two States living side by side in peace
and security, based on the 1967 lines, United Nations resolutions and international
law. That solution must reflect that both peoples have an undeniable historic bond
with this place, that its holy sites are deeply important to three world religions and
that both peoples have a right to live on it independently and as free peoples.
Despite the significant challenges, achieving that outcome remains possible,
and there are opportunities unique to this moment that should not be missed. I
join the Secretary-General in welcoming the agreement signed between Israel and
the United Arab Emirates. I hope that the promise of the recent agreements made
between Israel and Arab countries will lead to a situation where a more peaceful
Middle East can be realized. However, it requires leaders on all sides to re-engage
meaningfully and return to the path of negotiations. I look forward to working with
Palestinians, Israelis and Quartet partners, along with Egypt, Jordan and other
regional and international stakeholders, to ensure that we create and preserve the
necessary conditions for progress.
21-014105/103

S/2021/91

In that context, allow me to reiterate that the financial situation of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East remains a
serious concern. The Agency is not only a lifeline for millions of Palestine refugees,
but is also critical for regional stability. I renew the Secretary-General’s appeal
for support.
I assume this role with deep appreciation for the crucial work that is being
carried out every day by United Nations personnel on the ground, and I look forward
to working with Deputy Special Coordinator Lynn Hastings and together with the
entire United Nations family to support the peace process and redouble our collective
efforts to strengthen the institutions of the Palestinian Authority, in line with our
respective mandates.
I wish to acknowledge and thank my predecessor for his perseverance in his
role and his friendship to me personally, both now and in my previous capacity.
Nickolay Mladenov’s performance as Special Coordinator is a hard act to follow.
I intend to continue Mr. Mladenov’s efforts to speak openly and frankly
with all sides. I will support and encourage Israelis and Palestinians in pursuit of
peace, urge them to refrain from taking damaging unilateral steps and help to create
an environment conducive to dialogue. I humbly request the Council’s support in
these efforts.

6/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

Annex 2
Briefing by the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States,
Ahmed Aboul Gheit
[Original: Arabic]
I would like to express my sincere gratitude for the holding of this important
meeting at a most opportune time. We have a window of opportunity — one that may
close quickly — to overcome the dangerous impasse that has stymied the political
process between Palestinians and Israelis in recent years.
The Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territories remains the longest and
most complex conflict and, at the same time, the issue that most affects interactions
in the Middle East. Unfortunately, this central issue, whose resolution could provide
an unprecedented opportunity for real and sustainable prosperity and stability for all
the peoples of the region, has, in recent years, been either ignored and deliberately
disregarded or addressed erroneously, dangerously and recklessly. A highly complex
issue has been considered from one point of view, and rights have been seen from
the perspective of one party, as if the other party, which is under occupation, did not
exist, or as if it were required merely to comply with something imposed on it as a
fait accompli, rather than offered to it.
For the last four years, the Palestinians have come under unprecedented
pressure from the outgoing United States Administration. Beyond the political
sphere, that pressure has been felt at the humanitarian level since the United States
froze its funding to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, a lifeline and source of stability for around 5.5 million
Palestinian refugees. Despite the seriousness of these and other unjust measures,
political positions remain firmly entrenched and highly dangerous. For decades,
the United States has played the role of mediator on the basis of a formula that
is acceptable to both sides — Palestinians and Israelis — namely, an end to the
occupation and the establishment of the independent State of Palestine. That formula
is known as the two-State solution and, in recent years, it has been marginalized by
the main mediator in the peace process. That marginalization has encouraged the
Government of Israel to intensify its settlement activity and threaten to implement
such dangerous and destructive projects as the annexation — de jure or de facto — of
occupied territory.
The former United States Administration laid a new foundation for a settlement
based not on the recognized terms of reference, or even negotiation between the
parties, but by fait accompli, as if this conflict had no history and no one had any
memory of it, and as if previous settlement efforts had been in vain and a waste of
time and effort.
The international community, represented by this Council, continues by
consensus to view the two-State solution as the only acceptable means of ending
the conflict between Palestinians and Israelis, and to view the establishment of
settlements in the West Bank and East Jerusalem as illegitimate and illegal. The
declaration that Jerusalem is the capital of Israel continues to be seen as illegal and
contrary to the logic of a negotiated solution. The international community continues
to believe that the 1967 borders must be the point of reference in the definition of
the future borders between the State of Israel and the independent State of Palestine.
In the next phase, a great deal of concerted, coordinated and common effort
will be required on the part of all parties interested in peace in the Middle East, in
order to reaffirm the two-State solution, together with its well-known and agreedupon international terms of reference, in preparation for the launch of a serious peace
21-014107/103

S/2021/91

process with a clear timetable, designed to settle the conflict once and for all rather
than manage it or coexist with it. We hope that the new United States Administration
will correct those unhelpful measures and policies and work, with the support of
influential regional and international actors, to get the political process back on
track. That will give the Palestinian people renewed hope that the international
community will do justice to its noble ambition of, and long struggle for, freedom
and independence.
In that regard, I welcome the recent announcement by the President of the State
of Palestine, Mahmoud Abbas, of a date for presidential and legislative elections,
and for elections to the Palestinian National Council, as an important step on the
road to Palestinian unification. I call on the international community to support the
Palestinian decision and help with the holding of elections throughout the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, which has seen three Palestinian
elections in the past.
Lastly, I hope that serious direct talks between the Palestinian and Israeli
parties, under international and Arab auspices, will begin as soon as possible to
achieve a two-State solution on the ground, taking advantage of the favourable
climate resulting from the recent peace agreements concluded by Israel and certain
Arab States.
I would like to thank you once again for holding this important session,
express my appreciation to the Secretary-General and congratulate the new United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Tor Wennesland,
whose extensive expertise will undoubtedly bring added value in the establishment
of peace in the region.

8/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

Annex 3
Statement by the Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Ralph E. Gonsalves
I thank His Excellency Mr. Mohamed Ali Nafti, Minister of State for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Tunisia, for convening today’s important open debate. I
also thank the briefers for their informative remarks. In addition, I wish Mr. Tor
Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, every success
in advancing the peace process and sustaining it to a successful conclusion, in
accordance with his mandate.
The ongoing Israeli-Palestinian conflict can be resolved only through direct
peace negotiations. To that end, we reaffirm the importance of the Middle East
Quartet and the regional players in promoting effective dialogue and compromise to
settle the long-standing differences between Israel and Palestine, with the support
of international partners. In an effort to address the impasse between the parties,
we echo President Abbas’ call on the United Nations to convene, in early 2021, an
international conference to launch a genuine peace process.
In addition, honouring the Palestinian people’s long-held quest for selfdetermination and statehood by revisiting the question of full membership at the
United Nations is a matter that is long overdue and an essential component of a
lasting two-State solution in the drive for sustainable peace in the Middle East.
Peace and security within well-defined, internationally acceptable borders for Israel
and Palestine are central requisites for any lasting settlement.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines remains deeply concerned about the critical
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory as a result of the unlawful measures
and practices by Israeli authorities. In that connection, we reiterate that all settlement
activities, including the recently announced plans to build 800 housing units in the
West Bank, as well as tenders for construction of a new settlement of over 2,500
housing units, violate international law. We are also concerned about reports of
settler violence against Palestinians, including children, and we call for adherence
to the provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention and all relevant United Nations
resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016).
The critical socioeconomic and security situation in Palestine, as well as
the attendant humanitarian consequences, demand urgent attention. As Israel’s
13-year blockade continues to deprive millions of Palestinians living in the Gaza
Strip of their fundamental rights, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
has exacerbated the hardship experienced by the Palestinian people. We therefore
call for the immediate lifting of the blockade and all forms of coercion against the
Palestinians. The unprecedented funding shortfall for the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East has caused a significant
decrease in the vital services provided to Palestinian refugees across neighbouring
countries, including Lebanon and Syria. In that regard, we reiterate our calls to the
international community for increased assistance to be distributed swiftly to those
in need.
Further, we remind Israel, as the occupying Power, of its legal responsibility
to provide medical supplies and COVID-19 vaccinations to Palestinians living in the
West Bank and Gaza. While vaccine nationalism can produce short-term results at
a domestic level, no country will be safe from COVID-19 until every country and
everyone is safe. We acknowledge the efforts of the Palestinian Authority to secure as
many vaccines as possible, including through the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access
(COVAX) facility. We take this opportunity to encourage international support for
the efforts of the Palestinian Authority to secure vaccines, and we call for further
21-014109/103

S/2021/91

support for the COVAX facility. When vaccines do arrive for use in Palestine, the
unimpeded and quick passage through Israeli checkpoints will be critical to allow
for their distribution without further delay.
Before closing, I will turn to the internal political situation in Palestine.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines commends the ongoing efforts of the Palestinian
people to advance democracy in a mature and well-organized manner. We welcome
the announcement by President Mahmoud Abbas of the holding of parliamentary
elections on 22 May, presidential elections on 31 July and Palestinian National
Council elections on 31 August.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines remains firmly supportive of the Middle
East peace process, within the framework of international law. We continue to
support all efforts towards a two-State solution on the basis of the pre-1967 borders,
with Jerusalem as the capital of both States. In order to achieve that, we need to
facilitate dialogue between Israel and Palestine. Let us act with urgency to get this
process on the road.

10/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

Annex 4
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Defence of
Ireland, Simon Coveney
This will be my last intervention during Tunisia’s presidency, so I want to
warmly acknowledge the excellent work of the team, in Tunis and in New York. Let
me also take the opportunity to send my best wishes to Foreign Minister Jerandi for
a speedy recovery.
I welcome Foreign Minister Al-Malki and Ambassador Erdan to the Council.
Ireland looks forward to working constructively with Palestine, Israel and the wider
international community during our term on the Council.
We also welcome Special Coordinator Wennesland and thank him for his
comprehensive briefing. Let me assure him of Ireland’s strong support as he takes
up his new responsibilities.
Finally, I want to welcome the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States,
Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit. Ireland works closely with the League and appreciates the
important role it plays regionally.
Ireland aligns itself with the statement to be made by the Head of Delegation
of the European Union (annex 30).
In his final speech to the Security Council on the Middle East, the late Kofi
Annan reminded his listeners that
“the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is not just one regional conflict among many.
No other conflict carries such a powerful symbolic and emotional charge,
even for people far away” (S/PV.5584, p.2).
His words still ring true in Ireland, where there is great public and political interest
in the peaceful resolution of this conflict, which has gone on for far too long.
Ireland’s approach to the Israel-Palestinian conflict is based on respect for
international law and the agreed international parameters. We are firmly committed
to a negotiated two-State solution that ends the occupation that began in 1967, with
Jerusalem as the capital of both States, on the basis of international law, including
all relevant Council resolutions. We know that will not be easy. Progress requires
dialogue, and ultimately there can be no substitute for direct negotiations between
the two parties.
During the lowest moments of our own peace process in Ireland, we never
lost sight of the need for what was called then the “duty of hope”. We encourage the
Council to renew its commitment to tackle the most intractable conflicts that we
face. It is time to look afresh at how we can assist Israelis and Palestinians to bring
new momentum to resolving this conflict.
Confidence-building measures, such as the resumption of cooperation
between Israel and the Palestinian Authority last December, which can help build
trust, are vital and should be encouraged and supported. The engagement of the
parties themselves, and that of international partners, is critical to opening the way
for dialogue.
Ireland welcomes the bilateral agreements between Israel and United Arab
Emirates, Bahrain, the Sudan and Morocco. Those new partnerships have the
potential to contribute to a just and peaceful resolution to the Israel-Palestine
issue. We encourage regional partners to identify concrete ways to build trust and
cooperation between Israel and the Palestinian Authority.
21-0141011/103

S/2021/91

We salute the efforts of Egypt, Jordan, France and Germany in the Munich
format to lend momentum. We want to see a reinvigorated role for the Quartet, and
we look forward to a fresh engagement by the United States Administration.
We are interested in learning more about President Abbas’ proposal for an
international peace conference and how such an initiative could align with other
international efforts to bring new impetus to the peace process.
We welcome the presidential decree issued on the 15 January by President
Mahmoud Abbas to hold legislative, presidential and Palestinian National Council
elections this year. The holding of elections in the West Bank, East Jerusalem and
Gaza is a crucial step towards Palestinian unity and reconciliation, giving a voice
to Palestinians throughout the occupied Palestinian territory and renewing the
legitimacy of national institutions, including a democratically elected Parliament
and Government.
We stand ready to assist with free, fair and inclusive elections. And we echo
the Secretary-General’s call on the Palestinian authorities to facilitate, strengthen
and support women’s political participation throughout the electoral cycle.
Last month the former Special Coordinator, Nickolay Mladenov, briefed the
Security Council (see S/2020/1275) on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016).
Ireland reaffirms its position that all settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian
territory is illegal under international law. Israel’s latest decisions to advance plans
for the approval and construction of thousands of new settlements in the West Bank,
are contrary to international law.
I am extremely concerned at the Israeli decision last week to award a tender
contract for the construction of housing for an entirely new settlement, in Givat
Hamatos. I urge Israel to reverse that decision and halt all continued settlement
expansion, including in East Jerusalem and other sensitive areas. Continued
settlement activity is not only illegal, but it also erodes trust between Palestinians
and Israelis.
The acceleration in demolitions and confiscations of Palestinian-owned
structures in the West Bank and East Jerusalem in recent months is also deeply
concerning. Making already vulnerable Palestinians homeless in the midst of a
global pandemic is unacceptable. We call on Israel to halt demolitions, the number of
which in 2020 was the highest since 2016, according to Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, and to allow for legal construction for Palestinian
communities.
As part of our commitment at the Council to ensure accountability, Ireland
will continue to speak out against unilateral actions that fail to respect the resolutions
of the Council and are in breach of international humanitarian law.
We also speak out clearly against violence. The missiles from Gaza into Israel
must stop; disproportionate Israeli military retaliation must stop; the attacks against
civilians in the occupied Palestinian territories, by Israeli settlers or by Palestinians,
must stop.
Ireland is a proud supporter of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), whose programmes deliver essential
services to Palestinians in the occupied Palestinian territory and in the region, and
I have visited many of them myself. I urge others within the region and beyond,
including the new United States Administration, to step up and fund UNRWA.
Its vital work needs support now more than ever. We are particularly concerned
about the situation in the Gaza Strip, where 80 per cent of the population depend on
humanitarian assistance. The rise in coronavirus disease cases has affected children
12/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

in Gaza in need of access to life-saving medical treatment. Once again, Ireland calls
on Israel to lift the illegal blockade of Gaza.
Ireland stands with Palestinian and Israeli people alike as they battle that
dreadful virus. Ending the worst effects of the pandemic requires constructive
cooperation to support timely, effective and unimpeded vaccination of all in both
Israel and the occupied Palestinian territory.
I also want to address important regional issues, which we will have an
opportunity to discuss again, I hope, in much more detail.
We welcome the Al-Ula Declaration of 5 January by the members of the
Gulf Cooperation Council and Egypt and thank all of those who made it possible.
The Declaration represents a key milestone in the development of closer regional
integration and stability, and we hope that progress can be made and built on.
The terrible conflicts in Yemen and Syria continue to drive unimaginable
humanitarian suffering and instability across the region. We must redouble efforts
towards their resolution and continue to provide pivotal assistance to all those who
need it. Of course, there will be a time for a detailed discussion in relation to Iran and
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. I note the comments that have been made in
relation to that, and I look forward to a detailed debate on that at a future moment.
Let me conclude as I began, by quoting the late Kofi Annan. In that final
address to the Council on the Middle East, he said,
“the Quartet ... retains its validity because of its singular combination
of legitimacy, political strength and financial and economic clout. But the
Quartet needs to do more ... to create the conditions for resuming a viable
peace process. It needs to engage the parties directly in its deliberations …
and to be clearer at the outset on the parameters of an endgame deal. And it
will have to be open to new ideas and initiatives.” (ibid., p. 5)
I can think of no better guidance today as we once again look at this important task.

21-0141013/103

S/2021/91

Annex 5
Statement by the Secretary of Foreign Affairs of Mexico, Marcelo
Ebrard Casaubón
[Original: Spanish]
I thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Tor
Wennesland, and the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States, Mr. Ahmed
Aboul Gheit, for their detailed briefings on the situation in the Middle East, and I
commend the Tunisian Minister of State, Mr. Mohamed Ali Nafti, for his excellent
leadership of the presidency of the Security Council during the month of January.
I also recognize the participation of ministers and other high-level officials from
Council members. I welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the State of
Palestine, Mr. Riad Al-Malki, and the delegation of Israel.
In this first debate of the year on the situation in the Middle East, it is important
that we reflect on how the Security Council can contribute to the resumption of
negotiations for a solution to the conflict in the region. It is encouraging to have
new actors in the Council and beyond to give renewed momentum and a collective
approach to this issue.
We therefore welcome Mr. Wennesland as Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process and express our appreciation for Mr. Nickolay Mladenov’s many
years of work in carrying out that responsibility.
Our objective is clear — to promote a comprehensive and final two-State
solution to the conflict that addresses Israel’s legitimate security concerns and allows
for the establishment of a politically and economically viable Palestinian State,
living side by side in peace with Israel within secure and internationally recognized
borders, as well as the special status of Jerusalem, in accordance with international
law and relevant United Nations resolutions. It is essential to reaffirm the political
commitment to the search for a negotiated settlement.
The responsibility for resuming the peace process lies, in the first instance,
with the commitment of Israel and Palestine. The international community must
encourage, facilitate and support that process in order to guarantee a just and
sustainable peace in the region.
Mexico is especially interested in multilateral initiatives to achieve a
negotiated solution, whether through the possibility of a revitalization of the Quartet
or the convening of an international conference under the auspices of the United
Nations, as has been proposed by Palestine. Any diplomatic initiative to cement
peace in the region is welcome.
At the current juncture, the parties must refrain from actions that hinder the
peace process. Mexico believes that it is essential to uphold the provisions of resolution
2334 (2016), which stresses that the cessation of Israeli settlements is fundamental
to the two-State solution. Settlement activity, as action contrary to international law,
including international humanitarian law, represents an obstacle to efforts to reach a
lasting solution that will bring peace to Israelis and Palestinians. Therefore, and in
accordance with the above, we condemn the expansion of settlements and call for an
immediate halt to their expansion, as well as a halt to the demolitions of Palestinian
structures, in order to reverse the negative trends on the ground.
Mexico hopes that the recent establishment of diplomatic relations between
Israel and several Arab countries represents an important step towards stability and
provides an opportunity to broaden mutual understanding and relaunch the Middle
East peace process.
14/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

We welcome progress in the intra-Palestinian dialogue and stress the
importance of holding presidential, legislative and Palestinian National Council
elections in the near future. The support of the international community is essential
for a peaceful and democratic electoral process to take place.
As long as the conditions for a political solution and a lasting peace are not
in place, it will be hard to meet the basic needs of the Palestinian population. That
is why all parties must avoid violent actions and ensure that the human rights of
both Israelis and Palestinians are respected and protected. In that regard, Mexico
strongly condemns the attacks by organizations in Gaza against Israel and the
disproportionate responses to those attacks.
The humanitarian situation was already complex, but the coronavirus disease
pandemic has had serious economic, social and humanitarian consequences for the
population in the West Bank and especially in Gaza. The pandemic has highlighted
the need to resume and expand economic and financial cooperation between
Palestine and Israel, as well as to facilitate the safe passage of people, goods, medical
equipment and supplies, and vaccines.
Mexico appreciates the work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East in addressing the basic and humanitarian
needs of Palestinian refugees, mainly in the West Bank, the Gaza Strip, Lebanon,
Syria and Jordan. Its work continues to be instrumental in providing education and
health services to Palestinian refugees.
Mexico recently made a new financial contribution of $750,000 to the Agency
to support the continuity of its operations for the Palestinian population, one of the
most vulnerable in the region.
As a country committed to the peaceful settlement of disputes, Mexico will
continue to support all efforts aimed at establishing a lasting peace in the region,
based on mutual respect and in full compliance with the rule of law.

21-0141015/103

S/2021/91

Annex 6
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway, Ine
Eriksen Søreide
I thank Tunisia for the initiative and Minister of State Mohamed Ali Nafti for
chairing the meeting today. Please also pass on my warm regards, Mr. President,
to Foreign Minister Othman Jerandi. I wish him a speedy recovery. Let me thank
Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland for his briefing and congratulate him on his
appointment. I would also like to extend my gratitude to Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for
his dedication and skilful leadership during the past five years.
As an elected member of the Security Council, Norway will work to promote
the resumption of negotiations on outstanding final status issues. Negotiations should
build on the previous agreements between the parties and be based on international
law, relevant Security Council resolutions and internationally agreed parameters.
We will explore ways in which the Council can be a dynamic, constructive partner
in this process.
Like the other Council members, Norway strongly supports a negotiated
two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. It is preordained that Israelis
and Palestinians live side by side. The path to doing so in peace goes though the
establishment of two States within secure and recognized borders. That is the
only sustainable way to realize the legitimate national aspirations and safeguard
the security and dignity of both peoples. Moreover, it is the only approach that
has the commitment of the Israeli and Palestinian leadership and is supported by
international consensus.
For a future two-State solution to work, it must be viable. A Palestinian
State cannot exist unless there is an end to the occupation and the preconditions
required for economic growth are in place. Only a prosperous Palestine can ensure
stable revenues for the Palestinian Authority. The Palestinian State needs strong and
transparent institutions, so our support for reforms must continue.
We welcome the announcement of the forthcoming Palestinian elections. The
Palestinian people deserve a State that is democratic, based on the rule of law, with
security, equal rights and opportunities for all. A viable State requires national unity
and a unified government, accountable to its people. Furthermore, pending a just
and agreed political solution for Palestine refugees, it is our shared responsibility to
ensure that United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East has the resources it needs to continue delivering on its mandate.
The achievements of the Palestinian State-building process deserve
recognition. Cooperation between the parties is crucial and ongoing. The international
community remains committed in its support. The Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for
the Coordination of the International Assistance to Palestinians (AHLC), chaired by
Norway, is still the central mechanism for enabling the parties and the international
community to uphold the institutions and the platforms of cooperation needed to
build a future Palestinian State.
At the AHLC meeting on 23 February, Norway will call for increased
international support for these purposes. There is an urgent need to solve outstanding
fiscal issues, ensure continued banking relations and further develop cooperation
arrangements. The meeting will also focus on the situation in Gaza and the need to
maintain calm, open for access and mobility and complete ongoing projects to build
basic infrastructure. Further efforts to combat the coronavirus disease pandemic in
Palestine, including vaccine distribution, are also urgently needed.

16/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

Norway has joined the Security Council with the fundamental belief that it
is possible to peacefully settle even entrenched conflicts through dialogue, peace
diplomacy and coordinated international support. During its term on the Council,
Norway will draw on its long-standing experience and network of contacts in the
region. Our policy is to speak and listen to everyone.
The primary responsibility for moving negotiations forward lies with the
parties. I encourage them to take steps to create mutual trust and foster a public
atmosphere conducive to negotiations on all final-status issues. It is our duty as
members of the Security Council to support them. We should work together to
identify areas of common ground and to create it where there is none.
A proven success factor for building conditions that are conducive to peace
is the mobilization of civil society and the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women at all levels and in all phases of the process. While the Security Council
attaches importance to the women and peace and security agenda, it is often
overlooked on the ground.
Norway will remain an outspoken defender of international law, including
international humanitarian law and international human rights law, in all conflict
situations on the Council’s agenda. We will continue to speak out to enhance the
protection of civilians, in particular children.
The Security Council has repeatedly expressed the position that all Israeli
settlement activities on occupied Palestinian territory are illegal under international
law. Those activities severely undermine the prospects for a two-State solution by
eroding the possibility of establishing a contiguous, independent and sovereign
Palestinian State. Norway is particularly concerned by the ongoing settlement
activity in key areas of the West Bank.
Violent conflicts elsewhere in the region have a negative effect on the
possibilities for negotiated peace between the Israelis and the Palestinians. Similarly,
an unresolved Israeli-Palestinian conflict continues to be an impediment to regional
stability. That having been said, we see glimmers of hope in the region. Norway
welcomes the normalization of relations between Israel and several Arab States,
facilitated by the United States. Regional integration is key to promoting economic
and social development. The agreements that have been reached do not solve the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, but they create new regional dynamics that we should
take advantage of in our efforts to promote peace and stability.
A window of opportunity is opening for broader international efforts to support
bilateral negotiations between Israel and Palestine. The modalities for such talks
can take many forms. The Security Council and such initiatives as a reinvigorated
Quartet will be important to ensuring a process that is both credible and successful.
Peace between the Israelis and the Palestinians has been elusive and is long
overdue. Mindful of the challenges and the obstacles, we must redouble our efforts
to ensure that serious negotiations are resumed. We have no time to lose.

21-0141017/103

S/2021/91

Annex 7
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian
Federation, Sergey Lavrov
[Original: Russian]
First of all, I would like to express my gratitude to our Tunisian friends for
convening today’s meeting in a timely fashion. Clearly, a candid exchange of views
in the Security Council on the Middle East settlement is long overdue. It is necessary
to review the previous stage, identify the reasons for the continuing deadlock and
outline the key areas of joint work for the future.
The goal of achieving a sustainable and comprehensive Middle East
settlement should remain a focus for the international community. The Palestinian
issue continues to have a major influence on the overall situation in the Middle
East and North Africa. This region is experiencing the disastrous aftermath of the
geopolitical experiments in the wake of the “rules-based order” concept promoted
by our Western colleagues.
Clearly, the steps to dismantle the international legal framework for a Middle
East settlement approved by the Security Council and replacing collective diplomatic
efforts with “art of the deal” diplomacy cannot produce the desired outcome. On the
contrary, such unilateral actions delay the prospects for a just settlement of existing
problems. Importantly, the process of normalizing Israel’s relations with the Arab
States, which was launched in 2020 and which we welcome, should be aimed at
stabilizing the Middle East region rather than at being used to put the Palestinian
issue aside until, as they say, better times.
The first step towards resuming the peace process should include reaffirming
Security Council resolutions and other fundamental documents, including the
Madrid principles. This approach would focus on Israel’s illegal settlement activities,
plans to annex occupied Palestinian territories, the status of Jerusalem, the refugee
problem and the borders. All of those issues should be determined through direct
political dialogue between the Palestinians and the Israelis. Israel’s legitimate
security concerns must be addressed. The two-State solution remains the basis for a
sustainable settlement benefiting both sides.
We are convinced that the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) is the only organization that provides
effective assistance to millions of Palestinian refugees in the West Bank and Gaza, as
well as in neighbouring Arab countries. International financial support for UNRWA
activities must continue.
In conjunction with our Egyptian and other partners, we will continue to help
the Palestinian political movements restore unity among their ranks based on the
platform of the Palestine Liberation Organization. Overcoming the inter-Palestinian
split will create conditions for a serious dialogue with Israel, stabilize the situation
in general and improve the humanitarian situation in and around the Gaza Strip.
We consider it important to step up as soon as possible the international
efforts supporting the restart of direct Palestinian-Israeli talks in order to resolve a
number of fundamental issues concerning a final status. We are convinced that, to
ensure progress on this path, we need to use the mediating functions of the Quartet
of international mediators, which is the only legitimate mechanism approved under
Security Council resolutions. We are confident that, in close cooperation with the
parties to the conflict and key Arab countries, the Quartet can play an effective part
in the settlement.
18/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

Russia was receptive to Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas’ initiative to
convene an international conference on a Middle East settlement. Our country has
advocated holding such a forum from the beginning, a fact enshrined in resolution
1850 (2008). To support this initiative, we propose holding a ministerial meeting in
the spring or summer of 2021 with Russia, the United States, the United Nations
and the European Union — as members of the Quartet — and four Arab countries,
namely, Egypt, Jordan, the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain, and of course, Israel
and Palestine. It is also important to invite Saudi Arabia, as it was the drafter of
the Arab Peace Initiative. Such a meeting could become a working platform for a
comprehensive analysis of the situation and help the parties start a dialogue.
Taking advantage of the opportunity afforded by today’s meeting, I would like
to again note Russia’s willingness to host a Palestinian-Israeli summit in Moscow, as
the sides requested earlier. We are open to discussing these and other proposals. We
will appreciate any comments. We encourage our regional and international partners
to accept our invitation to start a dialogue in order to find ways of undertaking
collective action in the name of establishing peace and stability in the Middle East.

21-0141019/103

S/2021/91

Annex 8
Statement by the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Estonia,
Rein Tammsaar
I thank Special Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing. I wish him success
in his new role and look forward to supporting him in his efforts. I also welcome
Secretary-General Aboul Gheit and thank him for his statement.
Estonia continues to support all efforts aimed at resuming meaningful
negotiations between the Israelis and the Palestinians on all final status issues, based
on international law, relevant Security Council resolutions and agreed parameters.
We look forward to engaging in this regard with the members of the Middle East
Quartet and the regional players, including the League of Arab States.
We view positively the normalization of relations between Israel and certain
Arab States, which hopefully gives impetus also to reviving the Middle East peace
process, with the aim of achieving a two-State solution. We have welcomed the
decision by the Palestinian Authority to resume civilian and security coordination
with Israel and call upon both parties for further mutual steps to improve prospects
for resuming peace negotiations.
We welcome the decree by President Abbas on holding legislative, presidential
and National Council elections. It is essential that all relevant stakeholders support
holding free, fair and inclusive elections involving all Palestinians throughout the
occupied Palestinian territories. We call upon all Palestinian factions to commit
to international law and democratic principles prior to elections. We call on the
Israeli authorities to facilitate the holding of elections across the entire Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem.
Estonia calls on all parties to refrain from any unilateral steps that might
undermine the viability of the two-State solution. We call for the prevention of any
acts of violence against civilians, including acts of terror, provocation, incitement
or destruction. We also call on Israel to halt ongoing settlement expansion and
demolitions taking place in the occupied Palestinian territories. Israel’s latest
decisions to advance plans for the approval and construction of settlement units in
the West Bank and East Jerusalem, including in Givat Hamatos, are worrying and
contrary to international law.
Finally, I would like to join others in reiterating the important role that the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) plays in the stability of the region, including its efforts to mitigate the
impact of the coronavirus disease on Palestinian refugees. We are deeply concerned
about UNRWA’s critical financial situation. Estonia has increased its support to
UNRWA in recent years and urges all countries to continue or increase their support
to the Agency as well.

20/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

Annex 9
Statement by the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, Migration
and Tunisians Abroad, Mohamad Ali Al-Nafti
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I would like to convey to you, Mr. President, the greetings of
the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Migration and Tunisians Abroad, Othman Jerandi,
who is unable to preside over this meeting, and to express my sincere gratitude
and appreciation for your positive interaction with the initiative of the Tunisian
presidency of the Security Council to hold this ministerial meeting. That interaction
confirms the importance accorded by the Security Council to Middle East issues,
particularly the just Palestinian cause.
I welcome the new United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, Tor Wennesland, and wish him success in his duties. I appreciate
the important information and valuable guidance that he provided in his briefing,
which will, I hope, be the starting point for the desired active contribution to United
Nations, international and regional efforts to advance peace in the Middle East.
On behalf of the other members of the Council, I extend my deepest thanks
and appreciation to the former Special Coordinator, Nickolay Mladenov, for his
valuable efforts throughout his tenure.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States,
Ahmed Aboul Gheit, for his briefing, which reflected the League’s important role in
supporting United Nations and international efforts to address issues in the region,
in particular the central issue, namely, the question of Palestine.
This meeting is being held as the international community celebrates
the seventy-fifth anniversary of the establishment of the United Nations and
commemorates the first meeting of the Security Council in January 1946. The
Palestinian people is not participating with us in these celebrations. For seven long
decades, it has groaned under a brutal occupation, without losing faith in international
law or the role of the United Nations and its various bodies, particularly the Council,
in upholding its legitimate rights in order to support peace and security in the Middle
East and worldwide.
Today we call for an end to the suffering of the Palestinian people, for the
continuation of work to stop the aggressive policies of the occupying Power and
for an end to that Power’s systematic practices of killing, displacing and detaining
Palestinians in flagrant violation of all human rights, demolishing homes, expanding
settlements, profaning holy sites and violating international human rights law and
international humanitarian law, practices that result in tragedy and suffering.
Despite many decades of international efforts, dozens of resolutions of the
Council and the General Assembly and the conclusion of agreements, successive
Governments of Israel have ignored and even violated those resolutions and have
taken unilateral measures as part of a policy of faits accompli in order to change
the legal and historical status of the occupied Palestinian and Arab territories. The
nations of the world unanimously agree that the situation is illegal and threatens the
prospects of a just and peaceful solution.
We must therefore ask ourselves whether we can continue to live with the loss
of faith, on the part of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples, in international law,
the United Nations and the international community in general. Can we continue to
accept the fact that the occupying Power has not been properly held to account for
seven decades of violations and disregard for Council resolutions?
21-0141021/103

S/2021/91

It is unacceptable for this situation, which has serious implications for the
peoples of the region and for international peace and security, to continue. As much
as we value the efforts made to reach a just, comprehensive and lasting settlement of
the long-standing Palestinian issue, which is at the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict,
we hope that the Council and the international community will make a quantum leap
in their approach to the just Palestinian cause, in order to break the deadlock that
has prevailed for years, marshal the international desire for peace and put an end
disregard for United Nations resolutions.
The President of the Republic of Tunisia, Kaïs Saïed, attaches particular
importance to the Palestinian cause, which he considers his personal cause, and
which is a top priority in our country’s foreign policy, particularly during our current
membership of the Council. With Mr. Saïed’s support, Tunisia has always sought to
promote peaceful, just and lasting settlements to various unresolved international
issues, particularly the question of Palestine, in accordance with international legal
requirements.
We therefore call today for a comprehensive and unified international
initiative, coordinated among the Council, the Secretary-General and the Middle
East Quartet in accordance with frameworks to be agreed upon, in order to ensure
the active and binding engagement of the interested parties in a practical process
to relaunch serious, credible negotiations based on an established timetable, with
the participation of the Palestinians, in order to achieve a just, comprehensive and
lasting peace in the Middle East on the basis of international law, authoritative
international resolutions, the agreed-upon terms of reference for a settlement, the
Arab Peace Initiative and the vision put forward by the President of the State of
Palestine, Mahmoud Abbas.
In order to ensure the success and sustainability of the process, the international
community must persuade the Israeli authorities to comply with United Nations
resolutions, end the occupation, withdraw fully from all occupied Arab territories,
including the occupied Syrian Golan, bring all settlement activity to a complete and
immediate halt in accordance with resolution 2334 (2016), definitively abandon its
annexation plans, lift the unjust blockade of the Gaza Strip and stop all other forms
of collective punishment and economic strangulation of Palestine.
The process for the achievement of a peaceful settlement cannot be relaunched
while such practices and violations, which are totally contrary to international
legitimacy and the requirements of international law, continue.
Our commitment to peace is a strategic choice that reflects our belief in the
values of truth and justice and our support for international legitimacy. That choice
is matched only by our determination to support the struggle of the Palestinian
people for the restoration of its legitimate rights, which do not lapse with time; the
establishment of its independent and sovereign State with the borders of 4 June
1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital; and the settlement of all final-status issues,
particularly that of Palestinian refugees.
As the economic and social situation in the occupied Palestinian territories
continues to deteriorate, and given that the enormous challenges posed by the
coronavirus disease pandemic have exacerbated the suffering of the Palestinian
people, we hope that international efforts will be combined to help the Palestinians
to counter the pandemic’s effects, in accordance with resolution 2532 (2020), which
was unanimously adopted at the start of July 2020 at the initiative of Tunisia and
France.
Tunisia reiterates its support for the vital role of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East in alleviating the suffering of
22/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

refugees in its various areas of operation until a just solution to the issue is found. My
country calls on regional and international actors to continue to provide assistance
and enhance the humanitarian response in order to ensure the continuity of the vital
services provided by the Agency.
I reiterate the commitment of Tunisia to supporting all efforts to resume
progress towards a peaceful settlement in the Middle East on the basis of United
Nations resolutions and the internationally agreed-upon terms of reference.
Today we have a historic responsibility to renew our support for the values
of truth and justice and to strengthen the faith of the Palestinian and Arab peoples
in international legitimacy and in the Council to maintain international peace and
security, restore stability in the region, lift it out of the crucible of violence and
tension in which it has languished for decades and bring to an end a long-standing
human injustice that has had repercussions for generations of Palestinians.
Let us make the seventy-fifth anniversary of the establishment of our
Organization a historic occasion on which we work together to build a United
Nations that is more unified, demonstrates more solidarity and is more responsive
to challenges. Let us also use the occasion to strengthen faith in the multilateral
system, build a better future for all our peoples, without exception, and reaffirm
the values of impartiality, freedom and self-determination enshrined in the San
Francisco Charter.

21-0141023/103

S/2021/91

Annex 10
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Dai Bing
[Original: Chinese]
China welcomes His Excellency Mr. Mohamed Ali Nafti, Minister of State
for Foreign Affairs of Tunisia, to preside over this meeting. We thank Special
Coordinator Tor Wennesland and Secretary-General Ahmed Aboul Gheit for their
briefings. Today is the first time that Special Coordinator Wennesland participates
in a meeting of the Security Council. We extend a special welcome to him as he takes
up that important mandate.
This is the first time that the Security Council is considering the question
of Palestine in 2021, but it is the seventy-fourth year that the Palestinian issue has
been on the United Nations agenda. As we have said many times, what is lacking
with regard to the Palestinian issue is not ambitious plans but the courage to deliver
on promises and the integrity to uphold justice. The long-cherished aspirations and
legitimate demands of the Palestinian people for an independent State cannot be
delayed indefinitely. New changes are on the horizon in the current international
context and the situation in the Middle East. The international community should
take this opportunity to launch new efforts for peace with a greater sense of urgency,
push for renewed progress in the Middle East peace process and start afresh.
First, we must mobilize diplomatic efforts and form synergies to advance
the peace process. Palestine and Israel are long-standing neighbours. They should
rebuild mutual trust and find a way to live next to each other and coexist peacefully.
The international community should increase cooperation, establish a
multilateral mechanism to promote peace with broad participation and form
a strong synergy in favour of peace and to foster dialogue. The relevant parties
with significant influence on the Palestinian issue should maintain an objective
and impartial position. They should act based on the fundamental interests of the
Palestinian people and the countries of the region and make efforts to advance the
Middle East peace process. China supports the Arab countries’ just position on
the Palestinian issue and appreciates and supports the important role played by the
League of Arab States and other regional organizations. President Abbas proposed
holding an international conference on peace in the Middle East this year. That
important initiative deserves the international community’s positive consideration.
As the Security Council bears the primary responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security, it is duty-bound to seek to resolve the Palestinian
question. Under the current circumstances, the Council should listen to the voices
of Palestine and the countries of the region, as well as regional organizations, and
actively promote the early resumption of dialogue between Palestine and Israel on an
equal footing in order to overcome differences and factors of conflict.
China will actively participate in and strongly support all efforts that are
conducive to the political settlement of the Palestinian-Israeli issue. As a permanent
member of the Security Council, China will continue to push for a greater role by the
Council in the Middle East peace process.
We have taken note of Palestine’s announcement that it will hold a general
election this year. China welcomes that announcement and sincerely hopes that the
election will be held smoothly so as to enhance intra-Palestinian reconciliation and
more effectively safeguard and promote the interests of the Palestinian people.

24/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

Secondly, we must abide by the international consensus and stop acts that
undermine mutual trust. The relevant United Nations resolutions on the Middle
East issue, the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the twoState solution are the correct way forward, which has been borne out by history.
They are the basic tenets for resolving the Palestinian issue and should continue
to be implemented.
The settlements issue is one of the core aspects of final-status negotiations on
the question of Palestine and is related to the prospects for the realization of the twoState solution. Resolution 2334 (2016) clearly states that settlement construction in
the occupied Palestinian territory violates international law. In the past two weeks,
more than 800 settlement housing construction plans were approved and tenders for
more than 2,600 units were initiated. China is deeply concerned about the continued
advancement and significant expansion of Israeli settlement activities and calls for
the cessation of all settlement activities in the occupied territories.
The parties concerned should resolve the issue of the occupied Palestinian
territories in accordance with the relevant United Nations resolutions and delineate
the final border between Palestine and Israel through peaceful negotiations. We call
on the parties concerned to adhere to the strategic choice of peace talks, cherish
the results of the existing dialogue and refrain from taking actions that would
escalate tensions. Israel should stop demolishing Palestinian houses and destroying
Palestinian property, prevent violence against civilians and lift the blockade on
the Gaza Strip as soon as possible. At the same time, Israel’s right to exist and its
reasonable security concerns should also be fully respected and guaranteed.
Thirdly, we must adhere to a people-centred approach and improve the
humanitarian situation in Palestine. The difficulties faced by the Palestinian people
for survival and development cannot be ignored. Under the current situation, we
must pay particular attention to the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic on Palestine, including promoting the fair distribution of vaccines and
helping the Palestinian people to combat the pandemic. China appreciates the fact
that the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) provides education and medical services to Palestinian refugees and
contributes to improving the humanitarian situation in Palestine. The international
community should continue to increase political and financial support to UNRWA.
Since the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, China has sent a team of
medical experts to help Palestine in the fight against the pandemic, provided four
batches of anti-epidemic material assistance to Palestine and anti-epidemic supplies
to UNRWA’s health facilities and delivered health kits to Palestinian refugees in
Palestine, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria through UNRWA.
China is a sincere friend of the Palestinian people and has always been
concerned about the Middle East peace process. In December last year, President
Xi Jinping sent a message to the General Assembly on the annual observance of the
International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People for the eighth consecutive
year, emphasizing China’s firm support for the just cause of the Palestinian people to
restore their legitimate national rights and for efforts towards the peaceful settlement
of the Palestinian issue. China is ready to continue to work with the international
community in its unwavering effort to achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting
solution to the Palestinian question as soon as possible and contribute positively to
peace, stability and development in the Middle East.

21-0141025/103

S/2021/91

Annex 11
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
[Original: English and French]
I welcome the presence of several ministers among us, and I thank Mr.
Wennesland for his briefing. France welcomes his appointment as Special Coordinator
and assures him of its full support.
France, like the European Union, has consistently upheld its commitment
to international law and to the agreed parameters for the settlement of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict. We have done that in the name of the multilateral system that we
have built together and whose preservation cannot go hand in hand with a selective
reading of the resolutions adopted by the Security Council itself, but also because
those resolutions set out the only realistic solution to date to put an end to the oldest
conflict on the Council’s agenda.
The two-State solution was established with the aim of bringing about a just
and lasting peace in the region. It is the only way to ensure Israel’s security, on
which France will never compromise, and to respect the inalienable rights of the
Palestinians. The parameters for the resolution of the conflict are well known: two
States, living in peace and security within secure and recognized borders based on
the 1967 lines, both with Jerusalem as their capital. It is up to the parties, and the
parties alone, to resume talks on that basis and to jointly make the changes they
deem necessary for peace in order to resolve all final-status issues.
France is concerned about the increasing number of Israeli activities on the
ground. Those decisions threaten the two-State solution. France condemns Israel’s
recent decisions to advance and approve thousands of housing units in the settlements
in the West Bank and East Jerusalem, including in areas that are particularly sensitive
for the viability of a future Palestinian State, such as Givat Hamatos and Har Homa.
We reiterate our call on the Israeli authorities not to implement those decisions. We
are very concerned about the increase in demolitions and confiscations of Palestinian
structures, including those financed by France and the European Union.
France and its European partners will not recognize any changes to the
1967 lines other than those agreed between the parties. We recall the obligation
for all States to distinguish in their exchanges between the territory of Israel and
the territories occupied in 1967. That distinction must particularly be reflected in
bilateral agreements and in all trade — for example, through the differentiated
labelling of products from the West Bank and East Jerusalem settlements.
At this critical juncture, it is urgent to create the conditions for a resumption of
direct negotiations between the parties. That is what France is striving for, together
with its German, Egyptian and Jordanian partners, in the context of the positive
dynamic created by the normalization of relations between Israel and several Arab
countries. In Cairo on 11 January, our Ministers reiterated their readiness to support
the step-by-step approach necessary to create a climate of trust between Palestinians
and Israelis.
The announcement by the Palestinian Authority of the resumption of its
cooperation with Israel is a step in the right direction. Increased cooperation will be
needed to respond to the coronavirus disease pandemic. France reminds Israel of its
responsibilities under the Geneva Conventions as an occupying Power, particularly
with regard to vaccines.

26/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

France and its partners will work with all actors to achieve a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East based on international law. We welcome the commitment to
the two-State solution recently expressed by the new United States Administration
and its rejection of any unilateral action that would undermine it.
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East continues to play an essential role in the pursuit of a lasting peace. France
calls on all Member States to contribute to its budget, which is in a critical state.
Finally, the cohesion of Palestinian governance is an essential element in
achieving this peace. France welcomed the adoption by President Abbas of the
decree providing for the holding of legislative and presidential elections, followed by
elections to the Palestinian National Council beginning in May. That decision must
now be translated into action so that elections can be held throughout the Palestinian
territories. France calls on all Palestinian political stakeholders to take constructive
action to enable the Palestinian people to appoint their representatives. It calls on
the Israeli authorities to facilitate the holding of elections throughout the Palestinian
territories, including in East Jerusalem. Alongside its European partners, France
stands ready to support the preparation and organization of free and impartial
elections within the set deadlines.
It is more urgent than ever for the international community to preserve the
two-State solution. France appeals to the responsibility of everyone and will spare
no effort to ensure that a new dynamic is set in motion.

21-0141027/103

S/2021/91

Annex 12
Statement by the Permanent Mission of India to the United Nations
At the outset, I welcome all the foreign ministers to this open debate on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
Let me congratulate and extend a warm welcome to the new Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process. I also acknowledge the presence of
the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States and thank him for his briefing.
It is heartening to see positive developments with regard to the Israel-Palestine
issue. India welcomes the announcement of the convening of legislative, presidential
and Palestinian National Council elections later this year in Palestine and urges
all parties to take necessary further steps to ensure that those elections are held
smoothly, fulfilling the democratic aspirations of the Palestinian people.
We acknowledge and appreciate the efforts, inter alia, of Egypt in the process
of rapprochement between the Palestinian parties, thereby bringing them together to
end the internal divide. The resumption of civil and security cooperation between
Israel and the Palestinian Authority has also begun to alleviate the situation on the
ground in Palestinian territories.
The normalization of relations between Israel and some States members of the
League of Arab States is also an important development, which has the potential to
promote regional cooperation for peace, security and prosperity. Further, that can
provide the necessary momentum for the resumption of direct negotiations between
Israel and Palestine.
India has always called for a just and comprehensive solution to the IsraelPalestine conflict, and has welcomed all peaceful efforts to achieve a two-State solution
through direct negotiations between the two parties. In that context, India reiterates
its support for President Abbas’ call to hold an international peace conference with
the participation of all relevant parties to achieve the vision of a sovereign and
independent Palestine living side by side in peace and security with Israel.
We support the efforts of the Secretary-General and the Special Coordinator
to resume the peace process, including by revitalizing the Quartet, and help mediate
the peace negotiations. We also take note of the joint efforts by Egypt, Jordan, France
and Germany aimed at strengthening the collective commitment on the part of the
international community to facilitate the peace process.
India has made a multi-year enhanced annual financial contribution of
$5 million to support the work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) in providing humanitarian
assistance and essential services. As an incoming member of the UNRWA Advisory
Commission, India will continue to strengthen its contribution to the Agency.
On the development aspect of our engagement with Palestine, India has been
consistently supporting Palestinian nation-building efforts through human resource
development and institution-building. We are currently undertaking several projects
in many sectors, including health, education and technology, of around $72 million.
We also provide over 250 scholarships for Palestinian youth and officials on an annual
basis. India has also supplied critical life-saving drugs and medical equipment to
Palestine as assistance during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
On the broader regional developments, India welcomes the signing of the
Al-Ula Declaration, which has ushered in rapprochement and reconciliation among
the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries. We acknowledge the key role of a
unified GCC in promoting peace, stability and prosperity in the region.
28/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

The commencement of talks between Israel and Lebanon last year was
a significant development. India looks forward to the swift formation of the
Government in Lebanon that can offer political stability and also tackle the grave
socioeconomic challenges being faced by the people of Lebanon. India will continue
to stand by Lebanon during its time of need.
India has committed itself and contributed to the efforts to bring lasting
peace and stability to the region through the deployment of our personnel as part
of United Nations peacekeeping forces, including in the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon and the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force, through
substantial and timely humanitarian assistance and through development cooperation
and capacity-building. India proposes to supply vaccines to the region to help the
countries fight the COVID-19 pandemic.
In conclusion, India reaffirms its commitment to a just solution to the
Palestinian issue and stands ready to continue its engagement with the region,
with an abiding faith in realizing the vision of sustained peace and stability in the
Middle East.

21-0141029/103

S/2021/91

Annex 13
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Kenya to the
United Nations, Martin Kimani
I join others in congratulating Mr. Tor Wennesland on his appointment as
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process. He can count on Kenya’s
constructive engagement throughout his time and in his efforts. I also thank him
and Secretary-General Aboul Gheit for the informative briefing on the current
developments in the region and in particular the position of League of Arab States.
Kenya condemns all violations, by all parties, that endanger the peace and
prosperity of the people in the Middle East region.
We are concerned by the persistent acts of violence and clashes between
Palestinian and Israeli security forces and settler-related violence. It is our hope that
the cessation of hostilities by both parties, and the Israeli Government’s commitment
to policies, legislation and actions geared towards immediate cessation of settlement
activities will pave the way for a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the region.
We reiterate our strong condemnation of any use of terrorism to further a
political agenda no matter how urgent that agenda may appear.
The practicality and full implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) needs to
address not only the issue of settlements, territorial contiguity and the viability of the
two-State solution, but also factor in the socioeconomic implications of settlements.
All those elements have implications on the sustainability of peace and security in
the region.
Like the rest of the world, the Israelis and Palestinians are experiencing the
dire impact of the pandemic on households and on other income-generating activities.
That new threat is compounding the already existing challenges in the region.
In that regard, measures that have the potential of acting as bottlenecks to
equitable economic recovery and domestic, regional and international investments
need to be reviewed to mitigate against the suffering of the most vulnerable.
We call for reinforced cooperation between the Israeli and Palestinian
authorities in the area of delivery of critical supplies, including food and medicine,
and the movement of health and other essential workers in and out of the West Bank,
East Jerusalem and Gaza.
Concurrently, the international community should remain seized on the
urgency to support national and regional efforts geared towards the resumption of
meaningful negotiations to achieve a comprehensive peace based on the vision of
two-States in line with the pre-1967 borders.
It is our hope that all parties will come on board, including through participation
in the proposed international conference and in alignment with the agreed normative
frameworks, road maps, the Charter of the United Nations, international law and the
relevant resolutions pertaining to Israel and the question of Palestine.
I join others in welcoming the presence of His Excellency Riad Al-Malki,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the State of Palestine. The presidential decree of
15 January on election dates is an important step in strengthening the Government
structure and fostering political legitimacy, democratic space and national ownership
for all the Palestinian people.
Kenya also welcomes the normalization of relations between Israel and
countries in the Arab world as an important step towards lasting peace in the Middle
East. The normalization of relations between the Israelis and Palestinians as two
viable States living side by side, within secure and recognized borders, should also
be a priority.
30/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

Annex 14
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
[Original: French]
At the outset, I would like to wish Mr. Tor Wennesland every success in his
new position, which he is beginning with the detailed briefing he has just given us on
the situation in the Middle East. I would also like to assure him of my country’s full
support in carrying out his mission to achieve a fair and equitable settlement of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. To his predecessor, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, I would like
to express our gratitude for the dynamism and efficiency he has shown in fulfilling
his mission.
The Niger wholeheartedly welcomed the announcement made by Palestinian
President Mahmoud Abbas on 15 January that legislative and presidential elections
would be held in May and July. My country welcomes the announcement of those
elections, which will enable Palestinians, including those living in the West
Bank, Gaza and East Jerusalem, to renew the legitimacy of their institutions. The
compromise reached by Hamas and Fatah reflects the Palestinian people’s desire for
reconciliation and unity.
We hope that the upcoming elections in both Palestine and Israel, which are
a crucial step, can contribute to improving relations between the two countries and
to creating conditions for the resumption of political negotiations, with a view to
achieving the two-State solution.
It goes without saying that the elections in Palestine will need the full support
of the international community if they are to be the success we are hoping for.
While there are signs of an easing in relations between Israel and some
countries of the region, the situation in Palestine continues to deteriorate. In that
regard, the Niger deplores the continued construction of Israeli settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territories. That worrying trend, which we have continuously
condemned, resulted early this year in the approval of plans for the construction of
some 800 new housing units in the West Bank, as well as requests for tenders for the
construction of 2,500 others, including 460 in East Jerusalem.
We equally deplore the policy of demolition of Palestinian properties by Israel,
the occupying Power, as well as the forced displacement, expulsion and transfer
of Palestinian civilians, which constitute a flagrant violation of international law
and relevant United Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016). Those
practices, as well as the modification of the historical and legal status of the occupied
city of Jerusalem, including the Al-Aqsa Mosque, are acts that endanger the viability
of the two-State solution and the return to the pre-1967 borders. As such, they cannot
be tolerated.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to express its concern about the
humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian territories as a result of the
coronavirus disease pandemic, which has been aggravated by the fragility of the
health system, extreme poverty and food insecurity, among other things. The Gaza
blockade, which has lasted for 13 years, as well as the drastic reduction of funding
to United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
endanger the lives of thousands of Palestinians, mostly women and children. It is
high time to respond to President Mahmoud Abbas’ request for the organization
of an international peace conference involving all the parties concerned, including
the Quartet, in order to take advantage of the new prospects for the only viable
solution — that of creating a viable Palestinian State within its 1967 borders, living
side by side and in peace with Israel.
21-0141031/103

S/2021/91

Annex 15
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom
to the United Nations, Barbara Woodward
As others have done, I would like to thank Special Coordinator Wennesland
for his briefing and welcome him to this new role. I also thank the Secretary-General
of the League of Arab States for joining us today and for his briefing.
Let me start by welcoming President Abbas’s announcement of dates for
legislative and presidential elections in the occupied Palestinian territories for the
first time since 2006. We encourage the Palestinian leadership to work towards
strong, inclusive, accountable and democratic institutions, based on respect for the
rule of law and human rights. Free and fair elections are an important and necessary
step.
Turning to the conflict, I should first reiterate the United Kingdom’s longstanding position on the Middle East peace process. We support a negotiated
settlement leading to a safe and secure Israel living alongside a viable and sovereign
Palestinian State, based on the 1967 lines with agreed land swaps, Jerusalem as
the shared capital of both States and a just, fair, agreed and realistic settlement for
refugees. The United Kingdom supports existing Security Council resolutions as a
basis for this settlement, including resolution 2334 (2016).
With our commitment to the two-State solution in mind, we condemn the
Government of Israel’s decision on 20 January to award tenders, and therefore
proceed towards the construction of settlement units in the prospective East
Jerusalem settlement of Givat Hamatos, an extremely sensitive area of the West
Bank. Settlements are illegal under international law and remain an obstacle to peace
and a threat to the two-State solution. The decision undermines the potential for
future peace talks. The United Kingdom has also expressed concern at the additional
3,900 settlement units that have been advanced across the West Bank throughout
January. We again urge Israel to immediately cease settlement expansion in the West
Bank. And we remain concerned by the demolitions and evictions of Palestinians
from their homes.
We condemn the murder of Esther Horgan, which occurred in a suspected
terror attack by a Palestinian suspect on 20 December in Tal Menashe. The United
Kingdom is clear about our condemnation of all acts of terrorism, as they gravely
undermine the prospects for peace. Equally, we condemn all violence by Israeli
settlers against Palestinians.
This month also saw the firing of rockets on 17 January from militant groups
in Gaza. The United Kingdom condemns the firing of rockets at civilian populations.
Any attacks targeting civilians are unlawful and unjustifiable. The United Kingdom
continues to encourage actors to put forward long-term sustainable proposals to
resolve the threat posed to Israel’s security by Hamas, Palestinian Islamic Jihad
and other militants in Gaza. We call upon Hamas and other terrorist groups to
permanently end their incitement and rocket fire against Israel. We continue to
urge the parties to prioritize progress towards reaching a durable solution for Gaza,
and we encourage Israel to take the necessary practical steps to ensure Gaza’s
reconstruction and economic recovery.
As we have consistently done, we join the United States and other Council
members today in rejecting unilateral action on both sides.
The United Kingdom has been a strong supporter of recent Arab-Israeli
normalization agreements. Normalization changes the regional context and presents
32/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

opportunities for moving ahead with material benefits and new partnerships, to help
deliver long overdue Israeli-Palestinian peace.
A two-State solution is the only viable long-term solution. It is the only way
to permanently end the Arab-Israeli conflict, deliver Palestinian self-determination
and preserve Israel’s Jewish and democratic identity.
We echo the incoming United States Administration’s hope that the process
will unlock options for advancing a two-State solution. We look forward to working
with the new Administration, alongside regional partners and the Israeli and
Palestinian leaderships, to seize this positive momentum, helping deliver greater
regional prosperity and security and making progress on a solution to the conflict.
We continue to support that goal.

21-0141033/103

S/2021/91

Annex 16
Statement by the Acting Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations, Richard Mills
Let me at the outset join others in taking a moment to wish Foreign Minister
Jerandi, who was supposed to join us on screen today, a swift, full recovery from the
coronavirus disease.
I also want to take a moment to welcome Mr. Tor Wennesland, the new
United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process. It is a
complicated file he has taken over, but his broad experience — not only on the
Middle East peace issues, but also on the wider region — means that he has a depth
of understanding that the United States hopes will help bring about a peaceful and
sustainable resolution of the conf lict. I know that we have expressed our thanks
before, but I would like to take just one more moment to express the gratitude and
appreciation of the United States Government for the work and professionalism of
Nickolay Mladenov, Tor’s predecessor.
As this is the first time that the United States is addressing the Security
Council on this issue since President Biden was inaugurated, and in the light of
some of the comments that have been made earlier by colleagues and our briefers, I
thought it useful to share with the Council some of the contours of the United States
approach to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict under President Biden.
Under the new Administration, the policy of the United States will be to
support a mutually agreed two-State solution, one in which Israel lives in peace
and security alongside a viable Palestinian State. This vision, as I know we have
just heard, although under serious stress, remains the best way to ensure Israel’s
future as a democratic and Jewish State, while upholding the Palestinian people’s
legitimate aspirations for a State of their own and to live with dignity and security.
Peace cannot be imposed on either the Israelis or the Palestinians.
United States diplomatic engagement will begin from the premise that
sustainable progress must be based on active consultation with both sides and that
ultimate success requires the active consent of each. Unfortunately, as I think we
have heard, the respective leaderships are far apart on final-status issues, Israeli
and Palestinian politics are fraught, and trust between the two sides is at a nadir.
However, these realities do not relieve States Members of the United Nations of the
responsibility of trying to preserve the viability of a two-State solution. Neither
should these realities distract from the imperative of improving conditions on the
ground, particularly the humanitarian crisis in Gaza.
In this vein, the United States will urge Israel’s Government and the
Palestinian Authority to avoid unilateral steps that make a two-State solution
more difficult, such as annexation of territory, settlement activity, demolitions,
incitement to violence or providing compensation for individuals imprisoned for
acts of terrorism. We hope it will be possible to start working to slowly build
confidence on both sides to create an environment in which we might once again be
able to help make progress on a solution.
In order to advance these objectives, the Biden Administration will restore
credible United States engagement with Palestinians as well as with Israelis. This
will involve renewing United States relations with the Palestinian leadership and
the Palestinian people, which are relations that have atrophied over the last four
years. President Biden has been clear in his intent to restore United States assistance
programmes that support economic development and humanitarian aid for the
Palestinian people and to take steps to reopen diplomatic missions that were closed
34/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

by the previous United States Administration. We do not view these steps as a
favour to the Palestinian leadership. United States assistance benefits millions of
ordinary Palestinians and helps to preserve a stable environment that benefits both
Palestinians and Israelis.
At the same time, I must be clear: the United States will maintain its steadfast
support for Israel. Under the Biden Administration, the United States will continue
its long-standing policy of opposing one-sided resolutions and other actions in
international bodies that unfairly single out Israel. The United States will also work
to promote Israel’s standing and participation in United Nations bodies and other
international organizations. We hope to be able to cooperate with Member States on
these issues.
On a final note, I also want to make clear that the Biden Administration
welcomes the recent normalization agreements between Israel and United Nations
Member States in the Arab world, as well as Muslim-majority countries. I was very
pleased to hear those agreements praised by others speaking before me. I think that
reflects everyone’s understanding that peaceful cooperation among Member States
in the Middle East is an important contribution to regional stability.
The United States will continue to urge other countries to normalize
relations with Israel, and we will look for other opportunities to expand cooperation
between erstwhile adversaries. Yet we recognize that Arab-Israeli normalization
is not a substitute for Israeli-Palestinian peace. The conflict between Israelis and
Palestinians may not be the major fault line in the Middle East, but its resolution
would nevertheless significantly benefit the region as a whole. It is the hope of the
United States that normalization can proceed in a way that unlocks new possibilities
to advance a two-State solution.
In conclusion, let me add a comment on the mention of the Quartet by previous
speakers: the United States looks forward to working with Israel, the Palestinians,
Security Council members, the Quartet and the new United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process over the next several years.

21-0141035/103

S/2021/91

Annex 17
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Hai Anh Pham
I would like to thank Mr. Tor Wennesland for his first briefing and wish
him great success in his new role as Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process. Viet Nam affirms its full support for him in this role.
I welcome His Excellency Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit, Secretary-General of the
League of Arab States, His Excellency Mr. Riad Al-Malki, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Expatriates of Palestine, and Ambassador Gilad Erdan, Permanent
Representative of Israel, to this meeting.
Viet Nam welcomes the Palestinian Authority’s recent announcement of the
parliamentary and presidential elections to be held later this year. These long-waited
elections will be a crucial step in strengthening Palestinian solidarity and helping
the Palestinians overcome multiple challenges and achieve progress in the peace
process. Viet Nam believes that successful elections will contribute to stability in
the region and the achievement of a just, long-standing and comprehensive solution
to the question of Palestine. In that regard, Viet Nam calls upon the United Nations
and all relevant parties to support Palestinian efforts aimed at holding free and fair
elections with the participation of all eligible voters from all parts of the occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem.
The Middle East peace process has been delayed for a long time, and the
situation is far from improving. In the past few years, violence never ceased to cause
casualties to civilians, many of whom were children and women. We condemn all
attacks against civilians. The humanitarian conditions have showed little sign of
improvement. Security Council resolutions, especially resolution 2334 (2016), has
continued to be violated. The Palestinians are increasingly losing their confidence
in the possibility of a long-lasting and just solution.
Viet Nam support all initiatives and steps by all relevant parties that may
help reverse those negative trends. There are hopes for new dynamics to revive the
peace process. We call upon the Quartet to take a reinvigorated and active role in
this process. We also encourage countries and organizations of the region, including
the League of Arab States, to make sustained efforts to contribute to the peace
process. Hopes for the Palestinian people need to be built upon concrete actions by
all concerned.
At the same time, we continue to express our concern about the recent
expansion of settlements in the West Bank, including the announcement by the
Israeli Government earlier this month of the plan to build 800 settlement units
and others, as the Special Coordinator has reported. These activities constitute a
serious violation of resolution 2334 (2016) and other related resolutions, undermine
the hopes for a two-State solution and make the contiguity of a future Palestinian
State practically impossible. We join other States Members of the United Nations
in calling on Israel to immediately cease all of its illegal settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem.
The challenges in the peace process are further compounded by humanitarian
ones. The international community must continue its efforts aimed at helping
to address the humanitarian crisis in the occupied Palestinian territories. Viet
Nam reiterates its call for the continued provision of much-needed humanitarian
assistance to the Palestinian people, including Palestinian refugees. We acknowledge
the importance of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), along with other United Nations agencies and
36/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

international organizations, in alleviating the plight of the Palestinians and call for
stronger support for UNRWA to ensure the continuity of its vital programmes and its
contribution to regional stability. In the light of the ongoing financial shortfalls, we
urge the international community to provide UNRWA with the funding necessary to
ensure the continuity of the Agency’s indispensable operations.
In conclusion, Viet Nam reaffirms its solidarity and consistent support for
the just struggle of the Palestinian people for their inalienable rights, as well as for
the two-State solution and the establishment of an independent State of Palestine
that coexists in peace with the State of Israel along the pre-1967 lines and with East
Jerusalem as its capital.

21-0141037/103

S/2021/91

Annex 18
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of
the State of Palestine, Riad Al-Malki
Allow me at the outset to congratulate Tunisia on its skilled presidency of the
Security Council and to express our appreciation for the convening of today’s highlevel open debate, as well as to wish my brother Othman Jerandi a swift recovery.
I also wish the President of Mexico a swift recovery. May this year witness an end
to this terrible pandemic. Let me note in this regard that the occupying Power has
not provided any vaccine to the Palestinian people under occupation to this day,
insisting it is under no obligation to do so.
Allow me also to thank Foreign Minister Lavrov for his participation and
take this opportunity to thank Russia for its leading role in the Quartet in the most
difficult of circumstances, and President Putin for his repeated efforts to bring the
parties together, as well as the Foreign Ministers of Ireland, Mexico and Norway,
colleagues with whom I have worked closely to advance peace, and the Deputy
Foreign Minister of Estonia, for participating in this meeting.
I also congratulate Mr. Tor Wennesland for assuming his functions as the
United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process. We look
forward to working with him in his new capacity to advance a just peace. I also
welcome my brother Mr. Aboul Gheit, who remains a tireless advocate of peace.
I also wish to express our appreciation to the States that recently concluded
their Security Council terms, namely, Belgium, the Dominican Republic, Germany,
Indonesia and South Africa, thanking them for their commitment to international
law and peace and for their support for the rights of the Palestinian people. I would
also express our congratulations to India, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico and Norway and
wish them every success as they undertake their new terms on the Council.
The countdown for the demise of the two-State solution is under way. Some
say the time has already elapsed. It is our collective responsibility to salvage the twoState solution on the pre-1967 borders before it is too late. Some wonder if this is the
right time for peace. But the very reasons that demonstrate how difficult achieving
peace is going to be, including the situation on the ground, the mistrust and the
illegal unilateral actions, should prompt more, not less, international involvement,
especially since we all agree we are running out of time.
How much trust was there when the parties to the conflict met in Madrid 30
years ago? How ready were they to negotiate? How willing was the Prime Minister
of Israel at that time, Mr. Yitzhak Shamir, to make peace? How pleased were the
Palestinians that the Palestine Liberation Organization could not even send its own
delegation? What did the situation on the ground look like?
The world decided it was time to solve the conflict, and it was not going to
take “no” for an answer. I can tell Council members with certainty that, without
Madrid, we would not have made it to Oslo. The momentum for peace is something
we create, not something we wait for, and I know there is no lack of willingness
around this table and beyond to see peace prevail.
We therefore reiterate our call for a collective approach mobilizing the
international community and demonstrating its resolve to achieve peace. In that
context, we call for the revival of the Quartet and its engagement with partners
and the parties, as well as for the continued mobilization of the Security Council.
We also reiterate our call for the convening of an international peace conference
that can signal a turning point in this conflict, as the Madrid Conference did three
decades ago, and to launch final-status negotiations based on the international terms
38/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

of reference and parameters. Our call for multilateral engagement is not an attempt
to evade bilateral negotiations but, rather, an effort to ensure their success.
Does anyone here believe that Israel has really dropped its annexation plans?
Or is the reality actually that it is finalizing those plans on the ground as we speak,
advancing more than 3,000 new settlement units in the last few weeks alone,
accelerating the demolition of Palestinian homes and the displacement of our people,
with settler violence reaching an all-time high and with repeated provocations at
holy sites, especially Al-Haram Al-Sharif?
Israel’s goal has always been the same: grabbing maximum Palestinian
geography with minimum Palestinian demography. The outcome of that policy is
known: millions of Palestinians enduring oppression, discrimination and blatant
segregation, denied their most basic rights and deprived of control over their land,
their resources, their borders and their lives. Who would accept that? We cannot.
Would any of those you? The question therefore remains how to convince Israel to
choose peace, not annexation, or, in the words of former United States President
Jimmy Carter, peace, not apartheid.
In 2016, the Quartet stressed the urgent need for affirmative steps to reverse
negative trends on the ground in order to “prevent the entrenchment of a one-State
reality of perpetual occupation and conflict that is incompatible with realizing the
national aspirations” (S/2016/595, annex, p. 2) of the Palestinian and Israeli peoples.
In response to the rapid deterioration of the situation on the ground, the Security
Council adopted resolution 2334 (2016), a road map to salvaging the two-State
solution and achieving peace.
In his speech explaining why the United States did not resort to the veto,
Secretary Kerry explained that the two-State solution was not only a Palestinian
interest, an Israeli interest, a regional and international interest, but also a United
States interest. He stressed that the “critical decision about the future — one State or
two States — is effectively being made on the ground every single day”, noting that
“the status quo is leading towards one state and perpetual occupation, but most of
the public either ignores it or has given up hope that anything can be done to change
it”, adding that “with this passive resignation, the problem only gets worse, the risks
get greater, and the choices are narrowed”.
This lucid assessment about the urgency to act to salvage the two-State
solution was followed by four years during which the Trump Administration used the
United States’ might and influence to support Israel’s unlawful efforts to entrench
its occupation and control, breaking with decades of United States diplomacy. Even
the most vulnerable, millions of Palestine refugees, were not spared as the Trump
Administration withdrew United States funding from the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), seeking to bring
the Agency to collapse in spite of the international consensus on its indispensable
role pending a just solution. What if these considerable resources were used to
advance freedom, justice and peace, not annexation and apartheid?
The last four years have tested our collective resolve, and the international
consensus has endured and prevailed. The members of the Council, the Quartet,
the Munich Group and the international community as a whole stood up against
annexation, reaffirmed their support for Palestinian rights, supported UNRWA and
continued working for a just and lasting peace. Now is the time to heal and repair the
damage left by the previous United States Administration.
President Abbas has congratulated President Biden on his election and
expressed our hope for the resumption of relations and positive engagement. We
look forward to the reversal of the unlawful and hostile measures undertaken by the
21-0141039/103

S/2021/91

Trump Administration and to working together for peace. We welcome the decision
of the new Administration to rejoin the rules-based international order and hope that
the United States will play an important role in multilateral efforts for peace in the
Middle East.
This is not a time for passive resignation but a time for resolute action. Without
such action, neither reversing negative trends on the ground, first and foremost
illegal settlement activities, nor resuming meaningful final-status negotiations
will be possible. The deterioration of the situation on the ground is directly linked
to the attempts of one party to prejudge and dictate the outcome of negotiations,
implementing annexation that would destroy any prospect for a sovereign and
contiguous State of Palestine while pretending to accept a two-State solution.
There are those who ask: what can be done that has not been tried already? But
did the world truly use the toolbox available to it to end this occupation and conflict?
How does the world deal with other conflicts? Does it say that the parties shall
negotiate and just wait for them to be ready and agree? Or does it find the necessary
resources to push parties towards negotiations and away from unlawful unilateral
actions, including by upholding third parties’ obligations? Does it only condemn
violations, or make sure that their cost far outweighs their benefits by creating
incentives for compliance with obligations and disincentives for their breach? Does
the Council, in adopting its resolutions, accompany them with the means to ensure
their implementation as per its Charter duties, or does it offer its resolutions as mere
advice for the parties to decide if they take it or not?
Since both parties say that they are committed to peace, why not allow the
deployment of international observers truly empowered to assess compliance?
Why fear consequences for whomever breaches their legal obligations? Why not
conduct final-status negotiations under international auspices? Why reject the idea
of binding time frames? That is the path towards changing the dramatic reality that
is under way in Palestine. We stand ready to do our part and will continue fulfilling
our obligations.
An entire nation is yearning for freedom, and its calls must be answered. We
do not ask for anything more than what the Charter of the United Nations prescribed
for all peoples, and neither will we accept anything less. We cannot accept a future
of walls and blockades, humiliation and subjugation. We will spare no effort in
advancing an independent, sovereign, viable, contiguous and democratic State of
Palestine on the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. We will do so
by resorting to peaceful means alone, even in the most challenging of circumstances.
While we pursue our long journey to freedom and peace, we call for immediate
protection for our people, who are equally entitled to security, until such time when
we can ensure their protection as a sovereign State.
President Abbas has issued a decree calling for Palestinian legislative and
presidential elections, as well as elections for the Palestinian National Council. That
is an integral part of the efforts to resume our democratic life and to achieve national
reconciliation and unity. We thank all those who are supporting these efforts and
ask for international support and assistance to ensure the integrity of the elections,
including by helping to avert and remove any Israeli obstacles to their conduct,
notably in East Jerusalem, as well as respect for the outcome.
In this period of electoral campaigns, there are those who, in trying to secure
votes, remain committed to international law, the two-State solution and peaceful
means, and those who instead announce settlements, advance annexation and persist
in their provocations. May people not be duped by the ills of demagogy, supremacy
40/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

and domination and rather choose the path of equal rights, mutual respect and shared
dignity. With your help, may our future be one of freedom, security and prosperity
for all — a future of peace, not apartheid.

21-0141041/103

S/2021/91

Annex 19
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Israel to the United
Nations, Gilad Erdan
I would like to take this opportunity to welcome the new Security Council
members and the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Tor
Wennesland, and wish them luck in their respective positions. It is my hope that their
arrival will help rid the Council of its old habits and bias against Israel and instead
focus on the real threat to peace and security: the tyrannical regime in Tehran.
Tomorrow, here at the United Nations and around the world, we will mark
International Holocaust Remembrance Day and mourn the unfathomable murder of
6 million Jews. Indeed, 76 years after the liberation of Auschwitz, where three of my
grandparents and millions of others endured the worst hell on earth, there is another
genocidal regime epitomizing the very words and actions of the Nazis.
Iran does not try to hide its intention of destroying the world’s only Jewish
State, spreading anti-Semitism, denying the Holocaust and even proposing legislation
calling for Israel’s destruction by the year 2041. How is it possible that the Iranian
Parliament proposing to annihilate a Member State is not at the top of the Council’s
agenda? Especially on the eve of such an important day, when we commemorate the
Holocaust and no doubt you will all pledge “never again”? Holocaust survivor and
Nobel laureate Elie Wiesel astutely said, “I learned to trust the threats of enemies
before the promises of friends”. I hope that you will disprove Wiesel’s warning.
Iran should be the focus of the remarks of the members of the Security Council
today, for there is no greater force endangering and destabilizing the Middle East,
and there is no bigger threat to peace and security around the world. The regime
does not stop at threatening Israel. It has spent the time since signing the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) developing its nuclear capabilities and
deepening its knowledge in a way that makes clear it has not abandoned its intention
of becoming a nuclear Power.
As a recent report of the International Atomic Energy Agency indicates,
Iran continues with its clandestine activities, including nuclear-contaminated sites,
and lately even creating the infrastructure needed for producing uranium metal, a
sensitive material that could be used in a nuclear warhead. These are just the latest
in a long list of violations that leave no doubt of Iran’s intentions. We cannot allow
the most dangerous regime in the world to possess the most dangerous weapon of all.
And yet this will not be the focus of the debate on the Middle East by an
institution entrusted with promoting peace and security. Absurd.
I would like to be clear: Israel has no grievances with the Iranian people.
They, too, are victims of the regime’s extremist ideology. President Rouhani and
Minister Zarif are responsible for thousands of executions and grave violations of
the human rights of their own citizens. Indeed, it is impossible for anyone to remain
unmoved by the brutal murder of Rouhallah Zam.
Rouhallah was a 47-year-old husband, father of two and journalist. He was
forced to flee his home after expressing opposition to the Iranian regime. Rouhallah
continued to share the truth about Iran from France, where he lived as a refugee. He
was lured back to the Middle East, where he was abducted. Pictures later released by
Iran’s Revolutionary Guard showed him blindfolded. Back in Iran, he faced a sham
trial and was found guilty of the nonsensical crime “corruption on Earth.” He was, as
expected, sentenced to death. Despite a global campaign, Rouhallah was executed,
and, in the face of criticism, President Rouhani defended that barbaric murder as
“lawful.”
42/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

Thousands of Iranians are paying the price for the international community’s
complacency when it comes to the regime’s grave violations of human rights and its
inhumane behaviour. The way in which Ayatollah regime operates is reminiscent
of the darkest period in history. We should all remember this tomorrow when we
commemorate the Holocaust.
The reality in 2021 is not the reality of 2015. What we all know today about
Iran is not what the international community knew when it signed the nuclear deal
with Iran. Now we know that, contrary to the signatories’ premise, Iran did not use
the removal of sanctions to improve the lives of its citizens but instead doubled down
on its malign activities. Rather than using the dividends of the nuclear agreement
to build schools and hospitals, it built an arsenal of missiles. Rather than using its
resources to fight the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), it wasted them on funding
terrorist proxies and undermining peace and security.
Iran has a long history of lying to the international community. It must not
be trusted. As the secret Iranian archive that Israel revealed proves, Iran lied to
the international community when it signed the agreement. It failed to disclose its
massive nuclear-weapons programme, trying to keep it hidden so that it could be
used once the deal’s “sunset” provisions have expired.
Iran deceived the world when it signed the agreement, and it continues to
deceive the world today. The regime believes that its recent violations and rogue
behaviour will force the international community to lift the sanctions and return
to the JCPOA. The Council must not give in to this nuclear extortion and must not
remove sanctions.
As the regime’s behaviour proves, the sanctions have taken a toll on the
Iranian economy. That must be leveraged to ensure that Iran has a reason to change
its destructive behaviour and abandon its nuclear ambitions. Prior to the deal, we all
saw that Iran agreed to come to the negotiating table only when it faced the essential
combination of crippling sanctions and a credible military threat.
Returning to the JCPOA and giving up that leverage, even if intended to lay
the groundwork for a future agreement, would be a mistake. It will rule out any
possibility of a long-term settlement that has real, effective enforcement mechanisms
and that will secure peace in the region.
We appreciate the commitment of the international community to blocking
Iran’s pathway to nuclear weapons, but we believe that once sanctions have been
lifted and Iran’s economy begins to improve, it will have no reason to negotiate.
Once back in the JCPOA, all Iran has to do is wait for the restrictions to expire
automatically in less than a decade.
It is undisputable that the JCPOA does not prevent Iran from acquiring nuclear
capabilities. It merely delays it by a few years. Unfortunately, it gives international
legitimacy to a tyrannical, genocidal, rogue regime to become a nuclear Power once
it expires. The striking speed and efficiency with which the regime manages to
restore its uranium production capabilities is clear proof of the deal’s flaws.
Again, the Security Council must not allow the world’s most dangerous
regime to possess the world’s most dangerous weapon. Israel knows how to protect
its citizens, and we will never allow Iran to become a nuclear Power or become a
nuclear threshold country. In that regard, we appreciate President Biden and his
Administration’s commitment to assuring that that will never happen. We will work
together to achieve that important goal.
As new Member States enter the Security Council, I hope that the approach
towards the Israeli-Palestinian conflict will change. I suggest that the Council
21-0141043/103

S/2021/91

discuss the real obstacles to peace: Palestinian incitement and a culture of hate.
For years, Palestinian incitement against Israel has prevented any possibility of
reconciliation, and that has brought terrible consequences. Even in 2020, as we all
fought the pandemic, there were hundreds of attempted Palestinian terrorist attacks
against Israelis. Just a few weeks ago, an Israeli woman, Esther Horgan, a mother of
six, was brutally murdered when she went out for a run.
Time and again, Israel has expressed its willingness to negotiate and find
a viable solution to the conflict. We are a people dedicated to peace. We pray for
peace. We educate our children on the importance of peace. Israel has repeatedly
demonstrated that it will make peace when there is a willing partner. That was true
decades ago when we made peace with Egypt and Jordan and it is true today as we
expand the number of peace agreements.
The Security Council must encourage the Palestinians to join the circle of
peace as well. The only way to achieve peace is through direct bilateral negotiations
without preconditions. If President Abbas were truly serious about peace, he would
stop inciting violence. He would not be doing his utmost to find new ways to continue
his pay-to-slay policy, including by trying to establish a new bank to transfer funds
to terrorists. He would come to the negotiating table without making outrageous
demands and would not call for another pointless international conference. Any
call for such a conference is just a distraction. It is just another form of Palestinian
rejectionism. Abbas has suddenly remembered that he cares about democratic values.
After 15 years of avoiding elections, it is no coincidence that he chose to announce
his intention to hold elections as the new Administration entered office.
The Middle East of today is not the same Middle East as before. It is no
longer held hostage by the Palestinians. Thanks to the Abraham Accords, things
have changed for the better. The Accords have brought incredible opportunities to all
those who embraced them. Those opportunities are even greater than the economic
and cultural cooperation already taking place. They bring stability and new hope for
the future of the region. The Palestinians tell Member States that they want peace, so
let them explain why they called the peace agreements a “betrayal” and a “stab in the
back”. Let them explain why they joined Iran in opposing the agreements.
Finally, I would like to shatter the latest blood libel being spread by the
Palestinians — the false and grotesque accusations about Israel’s campaign to
vaccinate its people. Thanks to the winning combination of essential early steps
taken by Prime Minister Netanyahu, its national health-care system and its people’s
resilience and experience with emergencies, Israel is leading a successful vaccination
campaign that includes all parts of Israeli society. We are also sharing what we have
learned with other countries.
Israel is known for lending a helping hand whenever and wherever it can.
COVID-19 is no exception. For us, human life is paramount. Over the past six
months, Israel’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs provided millions of dollars’ worth of
aid to assist countries in their struggle against the pandemic. In addition, since the
onset of the pandemic, Israel has worked closely with United Nations bodies to assist
the Palestinians, training medical staff and supplying them with essential equipment.
Those efforts were praised by the previous Special Coordinator, Mr. Mladenov.
According to international agreements, the Palestinian Authority is responsible
for the health care of its own population, just as it is responsible for the education
system. It informed Israel that it intends to purchase vaccines from the Russian
Government, and Israel has announced that it will facilitate their transfer. Those are
the facts. Anyone who joins the Palestinian campaign of lies either does not know
the facts or is motivated by politics or anti-Semitism. There is a long history of using
44/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

every crisis to spread anti-Semitism and blame the Jews. I hope that, on the eve of
International Holocaust Remembrance Day, the members of the Council will check
the facts and not allow that bigoted tradition to continue.

21-0141045/103

S/2021/91

Annex 20
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Argentina to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
Argentina understands that the only solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict
lies in negotiations between the two parties aimed at seeking agreement on the finalstatus issues set out in the Oslo Accords, namely, Jerusalem, refugees, settlements,
borders and security measures.
Argentina supports a peaceful, final and comprehensive resolution of the
Palestinian question, in line with the two-State solution and based on the 1967 borders
and what the parties decide in the negotiation process, in accordance with the relevant
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions. Argentina is convinced of the
important role that the United Nations can play in finding a solution to the conflict.
We are therefore grateful for the tireless work of Mr. Nickolay Mladenov as Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process. We welcome the appointment of Mr.
Tor Wennesland as his successor and wish him every success.
In the context of the coronavirus disease pandemic, we would like to highlight
the important contribution of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) in preventing further deterioration
of the humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian territories, which are
particularly vulnerable to the negative consequences of the pandemic. Therefore,
now more than ever, we reaffirm the need for the international community to develop
appropriate responses to ensure that UNRWA has the necessary funds to be able to
continue providing its services to more than 5 million Palestinian refugees.
Argentina reaffirms its support for the inalienable right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination and to establish an independent and viable State,
recognized by all nations, as well as the right of the State of Israel to live in peace
with its neighbours within secure and internationally recognized borders.
Argentina also reiterates its concern over the ongoing and steady increase in
illegal Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian territories and calls for a halt
to their expansion. As the General Assembly has repeatedly noted, settlements are
contrary to international law, hinder peace and undermine the prospect of a solution
with two States living in peace and security, thereby promoting the continuation of
an unsustainable status quo. The gravity of the situation has been recognized by the
Security Council in resolution 2334 (2016), whose provisions we fully endorse.
Furthermore, Argentina condemns the firing of rockets from Gaza against
civilians in Israel, as well as all violent acts by Hamas and other armed groups.
Palestinian leaders need to genuinely address Israel’s security concerns.
With regard to the situation in East Jerusalem, Argentina reaffirms the special
status of Jerusalem in accordance with the relevant United Nations resolutions,
including resolution 478 (1980). In that context, we reject any unilateral attempt to
alter it, in particular regarding the Old City, which has a special significance for the
three great monotheistic religions. The Holy City must be a place of encounter and
peace. Jews, Muslims and Christians must be guaranteed free access to the holy sites.
Any attempt to deny or diminish the historical link and the profound significance of
those sites to any of the three monotheistic religions is completely unacceptable and
does not contribute to finding a solution to the conflict, reinforcing prejudice and
mistrust between the parties. Argentina believes that Jerusalem is one of the issues
whose final status should be defined by the parties in bilateral negotiations.

46/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

In relation to the Syrian Golan, Argentina maintains a principled position
regarding the illegality of the acquisition of territory by force and respect for the
territorial integrity of States. We firmly believe in the principle of the peaceful
settlement of disputes. We therefore believe it important to seek a negotiated solution
to the conflict between Syria and Israel with a view to ending the occupation of the
Golan Heights as soon as possible, in accordance with resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) and the principle of land for peace.
Finally, Argentina would like to once again urge the Palestinians and the
Israelis to resume peace talks, while acting in good faith, with flexibility and in
accordance with international law and the relevant General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions, in pursuit of an agreement on the outstanding issues relating to
the final status of Palestine in all its aspects.

21-0141047/103

S/2021/91

Annex 21
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Azerbaijan to the United Nations
I have the honour to deliver this statement at the quarterly open debate on
the situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question, on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
The question of Palestine has historically been an issue of concern and vital
importance to the Non-Aligned Movement, and it is with deep regret that we witness
the passing of yet another year without a resolution to that injustice. Constituting
a matter of international peace and security and also being the cornerstone
for peace in the Middle East region, the situation there remains critical and
unsustainable, and it therefore continues to require the immediate attention of the
international community.
Looking back, the figures for 2020 are appalling. In the Gaza Strip, 49
Palestinians, including 13 children and three women, were killed by the Israeli
occupying forces as a result of air strikes and during demonstrations, clashes, military
operations and other incidents, while 2,940 Palestinians were injured, including
some 434 Palestinians by live ammunition. In the occupied West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, 22 Palestinians were shot and killed, including one woman, and
3,802 Palestinians were injured, including 801 children. In 2020, it was documented
that the Israeli occupying authorities demolished or seized 593 structures in the
occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, resulting in the displacement of 687
people, including 347 children and 177 women, and affecting 18,860 others.
Reflecting on that dismal reality, the Non-Aligned Movement takes this
opportunity to reaffirm its abiding solidarity with the Palestinian people as they
continue to endure this tragic injustice, its unwavering support for their inalienable
rights, including to self-determination, and its commitment to the alleviation of their
plight and to the achievement of a just, lasting and peaceful solution to the question
of Palestine in all its aspects. That solution is well known and must be in line with
international law, the relevant United Nations resolutions and the Charter of the
United Nations itself. The tools provided by multilateral diplomacy are the way to
achieve such a solution, which cannot be imposed unilaterally, forcibly or unfairly.
It is high time to activate those tools in the service of justice and peace. That is the
only way to bring an end to the conflict.
The Security Council has a clear responsibility to ensure the maintenance of
international peace and security. Therefore, it must uphold its Charter duties and
act to ensure the implementation of its own resolutions, which not only constitute
the foundation for a peaceful solution to the conflict but also are legally binding on
all States Members of the United Nations. We are deeply concerned that this body
has for too long been unable to fulfil its mandate on this important question. At this
critical moment, that requires immediate action in order to hold Israel, the occupying
Power, accountable for its violations. The absence of justice fosters only greater
impunity and further destabilizes the situation on the ground, severely diminishing
the prospects for peace.
The States members of the Non-Aligned Movement deplore the ongoing Israeli
intransigence and its illegal policies and measures, which are greatly undermining the
realization of a peaceful solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The Movement
reiterates its grave concern regarding the continued deterioration of the situation
on the ground in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem and
in particular the Gaza Strip, where the illegal and suffocating Israeli blockade has
imposed a dire humanitarian situation and deplorable socioeconomic conditions,
which have only worsened in this time of a global pandemic.
48/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

The Non-Aligned Movement continues to believe that resolution 2334 (2016)
provides the most viable path towards peace, setting forth the essential requirements
and parameters for the achievement of the two-State solution, based on the pre-1967
borders, in accordance with the long-standing terms of reference for peace endorsed
by the international community, the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
principles, including the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
Quartet road map. Hence, we call for its full and effective implementation.
Israel must be compelled to cease completely all illegal settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, the demolition of
Palestinian homes and property, the forced displacement of Palestinian civilians, all
acts of violence, provocations and incitement against Palestinian civilians and other
human rights violations, many of which may amount to war crimes.
Israel must fully comply with its duties and responsibilities under international
law, including its legal obligations under the Fourth Geneva Convention as the
occupying Power. It must immediately cease all policies and measures aimed at the
alteration of the demography, character, identity and legal status of the occupied
territories. It also must respect the historic status quo at the holy sites in occupied
East Jerusalem, including at Al-Haram Al-Sharif. The Non-Aligned Movement
also reaffirms its support for Jordan in preserving and administrating the Islamic
and Christian holy sites in Jerusalem, including Al-Haram Al-Sharif, and for
the Hashemite custodianship of the holy sites, as exercised by His Majesty King
Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein of Jordan.
The Non-Aligned Movement commends the efforts of His Majesty King
Mohammed VI as Chair of Al-Quds Committee of the Organization of the Islamic
Cooperation. The Non-Aligned Movement welcomes the “Call for Al-Quds/
Jerusalem”, signed in Rabat on 30 March 2019 by His Majesty King Mohammed VI
of Morocco and His Holiness Pope Francis, stressing the important role of Al-Quds/
Jerusalem as a city of tolerance and mutual respect among the people of the three
monotheistic religions and the need to preserve its specificities and its features as a
city of peaceful coexistence.
The Non-Aligned Movement demands once again that Israel abide by resolution
497 (1981) and withdraw fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of 4
June 1967, in implementation of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). The members
of the Non-Aligned Movement condemn the statement made by the President of the
United States of America on 21 March 2019 regarding the occupied Syrian Golan,
as well as the subsequent unilateral and arbitrary proclamation on “Recognizing
the Golan Heights as part of Israel”, and call on the Security Council to shoulder its
responsibility by clearly condemning this provocative statement and proclamation.
In the absence of a solution, the member States of the Movement reiterate their
call for the continued provision of the necessary humanitarian and socioeconomic
assistance to the Palestinian people, including Palestine refugees. The Movement
expresses its deep appreciation for the invaluable work done and the essential
assistance provided by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) to Palestine refugees, welcomes the extension
of its mandate until 30 June 2023 and urges donors to provide the necessary funding
support for UNRWA at this crucial time.
In conclusion, the Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms its abiding solidarity
with the Palestinian people, as well as its unwavering support for their just cause, and
renews its commitment to further strengthening and coordinating the international
efforts to achieve a just, lasting, comprehensive and peaceful solution to the Question
of Palestine in all its aspects, including for the plight of the Palestine refugees based
21-0141049/103

S/2021/91

on resolution 194 (III). We express our sincere hopes that this year will witness
tangible progress in the heroic quest of the Palestinian people to attain justice and
fulfil their inalienable rights and legitimate national aspirations, including their right
to self-determination, freedom and independence in their sovereign and independent
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

50/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

Annex 22
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Bahrain to the
United Nations, Jamal Fares Alrowaiei
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, and the Permanent
Mission of the Republic of Tunisia for holding today’s important open debate on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
I also congratulate Tor Wennesland on assuming the position of United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and wish him success
in performing all his tasks. My sincere thanks go to his predecessor, Nickolay
Mladenov, for his valuable efforts throughout his time in the role.
The Middle East faces many challenges and threats, with the continuation of
armed conflicts in various countries in the region and foreign intervention in the
affairs of a number of them, resulting in the weakening or even collapse of State
institutions and the creation of fertile ground for the emergence of terrorist groups
that continue to threaten the security of the region and the stability of its peoples.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has also contributed to people’s
suffering. In most countries in the region, the health sector is in decline as a result
of years of conflict, and medical assistance is difficult to provide to those in need
because of conditions on the ground. The Kingdom of Bahrain therefore reiterates
its support for the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire and emphasizes the
importance of settling conflicts and disputes through constructive dialogue and by
peaceful means, in accordance with the principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations, in a way that helps to eradicate the causes of tension in the region.
The Arab Gulf region has witnessed an important development, namely,
the outcome of the Summit of the Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the
Gulf, held in Saudi Arabia, which reflected the determination of the countries of
the Council to promote collective measures and address the challenges that could
hinder Gulf action, in order to achieve the aspirations of the peoples of the Gulf.
The Ula Declaration also represents an important step towards promoting regional
stability and achieving Gulf integration, which will contribute to the establishment
of security and stability in the Middle East.
On the basis of the wise vision of His Majesty King Hamad bin Isa Al
Khalifa, the Kingdom of Bahrain emphasizes the importance of encouraging the
international community to develop a comprehensive vision to address the security,
political, economic and health challenges, which begins with the establishment of
peace, security and stability. Therefore, in accordance with its consistent policy of
promoting a culture of peace, coexistence, tolerance, understanding, acceptance
of others and respect for neighbouring countries, the Kingdom of Bahrain signed
a declaration of peace with Israel, followed by memorandums of understanding
between the two countries in a number of areas. In those memorandums, fruitful
bilateral cooperation is established and opportunities are provided to consolidate
efforts to bring about just and comprehensive peace in the region and build regional
confidence, in order to make progress towards resolving the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict on the basis of the two-State solution, pursuant to the resolutions of the
agreed-upon international terms of reference and the Arab Peace Initiative.
The Houthi militias, supported by Iran, continue to commit cowardly acts of
terrorism against the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. We strongly condemn these repeated
terrorist attacks, and Bahrain stands with Saudi Arabia in all measures it takes to
preserve its national security.
21-0141051/103

S/2021/91

At the political level, we appreciate the sincere Saudi efforts that contributed to
the implementation by the Yemeni parties, represented by the legitimate Government
and the Southern Transitional Council, of the Riyadh agreement, which is essential
to strengthening and unifying Yemeni efforts to confront these terrorist militias and
achieve the aspirations of the Yemeni people.
In conclusion, the complex, intertwined challenges facing the Middle East
oblige us to act collectively while respecting the purposes and principles enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations — the most important of which is nonintervention in the domestic affairs of States — honouring our commitment to good
neighbourliness and mutual respect and resolving crises peacefully so that the region
can enjoy peace and stability.

52/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

Annex 23
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh to the
United Nations, Rabab Fatima
I wish to commend Tunisia for its successful stewardship of the work of the
Security Council in January 2021. I also take this opportunity to warmly congratulate
Mr. Tor Wennesland for his appointment as Special Coordinator for the Middle East
peace process. I thank the briefers for their comprehensive briefings to the Council
today.
My delegation aligns itself with the statements made by the representative
of the Niger on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and by the
representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
(annex 21). I wish to add the following points in my national capacity.
The year 2020 was an extremely difficult one for the whole world due to the
pandemic’s grave consequences on human health and devastating effects on national
economies. The pandemic has torn apart the fabric of each and every society in the
world, including in the occupied Palestinian territories. It was Israel’s obligation to
protect the health and safety of all people in the occupied territories under its control,
but they miserably failed to do so. The situation could not be more egregious for the
people of Palestine, as Israel, the occupying Power, continues to exploit the pandemic
and aggressively advance its settlement and annexation schemes, entrenching its 53year military occupation of the Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.
Throughout the course of 2020, the Israeli security forces killed over 70
people, including women and children, injured thousand others and forcibly displaced
many innocent Palestinians from the West Bank, including East Jerusalem. These
are demonstration of the brutality of the occupying Israeli authorities reflecting an
occupation system that works primarily to demolish structures instead of planning
to reflect the Palestinian population’s present and future needs.
Despite repeated calls on the Israeli authorities not to deal with settlements, fresh
approval was given on 17 January 2021 to construct some 780 homes in settlements
across the West Bank. Echoing the Secretary-General’s call of 18 January, we express
our deep concern at the decision to continue settlement activity, which constitutes
a flagrant violation of international law. We call upon the international community
to get Israel to cease its systematic violations of international humanitarian law and
human-rights principles.
I would like to raise one crucial point with regard to the management of
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Concerns have been expressed about the
discriminatory way Israeli authorities have implemented the vaccine policy since
commencing roll-out of COVID-19 vaccines, disregarding their obligations with
regard to Palestinians’ health care. We call on the Israeli authorities to immediately
comply with their obligations under international law to the occupied population in
Gaza and the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, by ensuring the provision of
vaccines to all persons in the territory under its control, as well as to Palestinian
prisoners and detainees in Israeli facilities. The differential access to vaccination
between Israelis and Palestinians in the midst of the pandemic is deplorable and
unacceptable.
Bangladesh reiterates its unwavering support to the people of Palestine and
fully endorses the calls to ensure the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
including the rights of self-determination, based on the two-State solution using
the pre-1967 borders with East Jerusalem as the capital of a Palestinian State.

21-0141053/103

S/2021/91

Furthermore, we call for the maintenance of the sanctity of Islamic and Christian
holy places, particularly the Al-Aqsa Mosque, at all costs.
Bangladesh welcomes the recent announcement that the legislative, presidential
and Palestinian National Council elections will take place on 22 May, 31 July and
31 August 2021, respectively. We express hope that all countries will support this
electoral process to ensure Palestinian national reconciliation.
The international community, including the United Nations, has repeatedly
expressed serious concerns in the past over cycles of violence, allegations of
excessive use of force by the Israeli forces, and violations of international human
rights law and international humanitarian law in the occupied Palestinian territory.
These concerns remain unheeded and, therefore, valid even today due to the lack of
strong punitive actions.
To change the course, accountability and an end to impunity must become
immediate priorities for the international community. Impunity for Israel’s ongoing
violations has merely furthered such practices, which undermine any prospects of
an equitable and peaceful solution, as stated in relevant United Nations resolutions,
including resolution 2334 (2016) and other peace initiatives.
The international community, with the Security Council at the forefront, must
act to ensure accountability for all Israeli violations and to provide protection for the
Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territory. The international community
must ensure that the Palestinian people enjoy their rights, using all international
legal mechanisms, including, if necessary, sanctions, to end the occupation of the
State of Palestine.
During the celebration last year of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding
of the United Nations, our leaders made a clarion call to resolve the Palestinian
crisis. We cannot sit idle anymore.

54/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

Annex 24
Statement of the Permanent Mission of Brazil to the United Nations
Brazil would like to thank Tunisia for convening this quarterly debate on the
situation in the Middle East.
The resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict remains relevant to peace and
stability in the Middle East. Building on the momentum generated by the signing of
the Abraham Accords, we encourage the parties to resume negotiations and engage
in new and creative diplomatic efforts in order to achieve a just and comprehensive
settlement. Brazil reiterates its support for a negotiated two-State solution, with
Israelis and Palestinians living side by side in peace and security.
Strengthening Palestinian institutions is a crucial step for achieving a solution
based on two democratic and sovereign States. We therefore commend the Palestinian
Authority’s announcement that there will be legislative and presidential elections
later this year.
We have also noted the Commissioner-General’s urgent call for additional
funding for United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA). As a member of its Advisory Commission, Brazil reaffirms its
willingness to cooperate with the Agency, in accordance with its capabilities, as we
did throughout 2020.
The conflict in Syria continues to take an increasing toll on human life. More
than 75 per cent of the Syrian population is now in need of humanitarian assistance,
according to the latest Global Humanitarian Overview. The situation is worsened by
the spread of the pandemic and its effects on the economic well-being of the most
vulnerable populations. Given this grim reality, the humanitarian exemptions for any
sanctions programme related to Syria must be closely followed so as to ensure that
they do not undermine access to food and essential health supplies. The protection
of civilians, including humanitarian and medical personnel, and compliance with
international humanitarian law must also remain priorities.
Brazil reaffirms its support to the efforts of the Special Envoy, Geir Pedersen,
in facilitating a solution to the conflict through the implementation of resolution
2254 (2015). We took note of the fourth round of meetings of the Constitutional
Committee, earlier in December, and hope that its members can make substantial
progress in their coming session. Brazil remains convinced that only a Syrian-owned
and Syrian-led, United Nations-facilitated political process, with due regard for the
preservation of Syria’s territorial integrity, will bring lasting peace and provide
relief for the suffering of the Syrian population.
Regarding the situation in Yemen, Brazil strongly condemns the attack that
took place in Aden on 30 December, targeting the newly formed governmental
Cabinet. The injuring and killing of innocent civilians are unacceptable under any
circumstances and must be put to an end.
The attack is a tragic reminder of the need to make progress in the path towards
peace in Yemen. We urge all parties to renounce the escalation of violence and to
engage in good faith in direct talks under the leadership of Special Envoy Martin
Griffiths, who has our full support. Additionally, we call on the parties to ensure
safe and unhindered humanitarian access, as well as to respect their obligations
under humanitarian law.
We have taken note of the United States decision to designate the Houthis as
a terrorist organization. We welcome that country´s commitment to ensuring that
humanitarian aid and commercial imports can continue unimpeded.
21-0141055/103

S/2021/91

Brazil welcomes the much-sought rapprochement between Qatar and Saudi
Arabia, as they reopened their airspace and borders on 4 January. The occasion
marked the resolution of the diplomatic crisis between some of the Gulf Cooperation
Council countries. We also commend the efforts of Kuwait and the United States in
mediating the three and a half year-long dispute.
Brazil is following closely the developments of the intra-Libyan talks and
commends the constructive discussions held in Geneva this month under the Libyan
Political Dialogue Forum. We hope that progress on the political track will have
an impact on the situation on the ground, helping to consolidate a lasting and
comprehensive ceasefire. The arms embargo is also an indispensable element to deescalate the conflict, and we reiterate our call for its full implementation.
As we consider the situation in the Middle East, it is necessary to bear in
mind that long-term political stability and economic prosperity are interdependent
and mutually reinforcing. Efforts to support the peaceful resolution of conflicts
should be coupled with initiatives to promote socioeconomic growth, which are key
to building resilient and inclusive societies.
In addition, it is important to point out that religious minority communities
often withstand violence and persecution, particularly in times of conflict.
Safeguarding religious freedom should therefore be kept a high priority, so that those
communities can continue to live in their own country and practice their faith in
peace and dignity.
Finally, after almost 10 years, as Brazil reaches the end of an era heading
up the Maritime Task Force of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, we
would like to take this opportunity to thank the Security Council and all those who
collaborated with Brazilian peacekeepers during that time. Brazil remains ready to
engage constructively with all its partners in efforts directed at promoting a more
peaceful and prosperous Middle East.

56/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

Annex 25
Statement by the Chair of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, Cheikh Niang
On behalf of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, I would like, at the outset, to congratulate Tunisia for its
able presidency of the Security Council this month and to thank Foreign Minister
Othman Jerandi for his presence at today’s meeting as a testimony of Tunisia’s
long-standing support for the Palestinian cause, including through its membership
of the Committee.
I wish to acknowledge the presence at this debate of Ms. Ine Eriksen Søreide,
Norway’s Foreign Minister, and of Mr. Riyad Al-Malki, Foreign Minister of the
State of Palestine.
The Committee would like to congratulate India, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico and
Norway upon taking their seats on the Council and wishes them every success in
exercising their responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations.
Allow me to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, former Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process for his tireless efforts and commitment to bringing
about a just and lasting solution between Israelis and Palestinians.
Similarly, I welcome Mr. Tor Wennesland, the newly appointed Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, to whom the Committee wishes
success in bringing the peace process to its rightful and long-overdue conclusion: a
just peace that will ensure the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including
to self-determination and independence. The Committee’s support to his endeavours
will not waver.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has further undermined the
already fragile social, economic, humanitarian and political situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, complicated by the crippling restrictions on movement and
access imposed for decades by Israel, the occupying Power.
Notwithstanding the pandemic, Israel has continued to expand its illegal
settlement network in the occupied Palestinian territory, including in and around East
Jerusalem and Bethlehem. The most recent announcement concerns the construction
of nearly 800 new housing units in the West Bank and the retroactive so-called
“regularization” under Israeli law of two additional illegal outposts, decisions that
have been broadly denounced by the international community. This is the first
announcement of the year of furthering illegal settlements, following a record
for Israel’s settlement campaign in 2020, as attested to by the reports of various
organizations, including the Israeli organization Peace Now. Moreover, a newly open
road in the Jerusalem area separating Palestinians and Jewish settlers along its entire
track, and which has been called “the apartheid road” even by Israeli media and
human rights groups, offers yet more evidence that annexation remains very much
on the table for the Government of Israel and is being continually pursued.
Allow me to reiterate in the strongest terms that Israeli settlements in occupied
areas are illegal under international law, as reaffirmed, inter alia, in resolution
2334 (2016), and constitute an obstacle to peace. The Committee calls on Israel to
immediately halt all settlement construction and expansion and all measures of de
facto annexation.
The Committee further highlights paragraph 5 of the resolution, which calls
on Member States to distinguish, in their dealings, between Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and that must include their dealings
21-0141057/103

S/2021/91

with regard to settlement activities. That would also apply to the labelling of products
originating in Israeli settlements.
With the COVID-19 pandemic affecting the Palestinian civilian population,
the Committee echoes the concern expressed by many about the way in which Israeli
authorities are rolling-out the COVID-19 vaccine, disregarding their obligations
to ensure public health in the occupied territory. The Committee calls on Israel,
the occupying Power, to immediately comply with its duties under international
humanitarian law by ensuring the provision of vaccines to the Palestinian population
under its control in Gaza and the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, as well as to
Palestinian prisoners and detainees being held in Israeli jails.
In the absence of accountability, Israel’s measures to acquire more Palestinian
territory, demolitions of Palestinian homes and structures, as well as forced
displacement of Palestinian civilians, settlers’ violence and other violations of
human rights and international law, continue unchecked. The Committee calls on
Israel and the international community to ensure that the rights of the Palestinian
People are respected and upheld, including the inalienable right to live in freedom
and dignity in an independent and sovereign State.
The Committee supports the call made by the President of the State of
Palestine, Mahmoud Abbas, for an international peace conference under the auspices
of an expanded Middle East Quartet that would allow regional players to contribute
to the advancement of the peace process. The Committee calls upon the SecretaryGeneral to follow-up on the request made to him to facilitate the resumption of
Quartet efforts to that end. The Committee also reiterates the importance of the roles
of the General Assembly and the Security Council in promoting a peaceful solution
of the question of Palestine and urges serious mobilization in that regard.
The Committee calls on all parties to refrain from unliteral acts that would
jeopardize the possibility of restarting the peace process. Israeli and Palestinian
leaders should seize the opportunity to re-engage in meaningful negotiations to
realize the two-State solution on the basis of the pre-1967 borders, in line with
international law and the relevant United Nations resolutions. The Committee
stresses the centrality of the Arab Peace Initiative, the plans for the convening of an
international peace conference, the recent meeting of the Middle East Quartet, as
well as the efforts of Egypt and others in advancing the reconciliation process among
the Palestinians.
The Committee joins the Secretary-General in welcoming the decree issued
recently by Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas to hold legislative and presidential
elections starting in May 2021, as a way to renew democratic pillars in a way that
would embody and implement the hope of generations of Palestinians for a just,
peaceful and prosperous future.
In the meantime, United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) continues to struggle with severe financial
problems, as witnessed in recent months by its inability to pay staff salaries and
deliver urgently needed humanitarian and livelihood support to Palestine refugees
in need and the great anxiety that has caused within the refugee community. The
Committee reiterates its call on Member States to maintain their strong support to
UNRWA and commits to continuing its support for the Agency to attract international
solidarity with Palestinian refugees in a way that is sustainable, predictable and
long-term.
Ahead of the proposed international conference later in 2021 to discuss and
adopt a strategy for a sustainable UNRWA, on 23 February, the Committee will
convene a virtual meeting with the Commissioner-General of UNRWA, Mr. Philippe
58/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

Lazzarini, with a view to help mobilize international solidarity with Palestinian
refugees and support to UNRWA.
In 2021, the Committee will continue to engage with Member States and
regional groups in view of harnessing wider support for the new opportunities lying
ahead for the advancement of the Palestinian cause. In that context, the Committee
will support every initiative aimed at the full realization of the inalienable rights
of the Palestinian people and a just solution based on the relevant United Nations
resolutions that ensure two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace
and security along the pre-1967 lines and with East Jerusalem as the capital of the
Palestinian State.
Let us turn the tragic phase in which we are living into a historic moment
of bold action taking us to the just solution of allowing Israelis and Palestinians
to enjoy to the fullest their human rights and endless possibilities for a bright and
prosperous future.

21-0141059/103

S/2021/91

Annex 26
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Costa Rica to the
United Nations
I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this important and timely open
debate. Allow me to congratulate Tunisia on its successful presidency of the Security
Council in January.
Costa Rica welcomes the recent appointment of Mr. Tor Wennesland as
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and of Ms. Lynn Hastings as
Deputy Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, where she will also
serve as the United Nations Resident Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator
for the Occupied Palestinian Territory. I would also like to reiterate my delegation’s
full support as they exercise their duties. Costa Rica also welcomes the recent
announcement made by the Palestinian Authority to hold general and presidential
elections for the first time in 14 years, starting with legislative elections on 22 May.
By the same token, we celebrate the normalization of ties between Israel and the
United Arab Emirates, the Kingdom of Bahrain, the Republic of the Sudan and —
most recently — the Kingdom of Morocco.
Nevertheless, Costa Rica would like to stress three points.
As we have stated previously in the Council, we are deeply concerned by
the increase in Israeli annexation plans, settlement expansion, demolitions, seizures
and evictions. We regret the recent announcement made by the Israeli Government
regarding plans for the construction of approximately 800 homes for Jewish settlers
in the occupied West Bank. We express our deep concern about the data provided
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, recognizing 2020 as the
second highest in terms of demolitions of Palestinian structures since the agency
began keeping such statistics in 2009. We reiterate that under international law
these settlements, expansions, demolitions and seizures are all illegal. We call on
Israel to immediately and completely cease all settlement activities and to freeze the
demolitions and seizure of Palestinian structures.
Regarding the ongoing vaccination process, we urge Israel to ensure swift,
fair and equitable access to the vaccine to those who are under its occupation in
the West Bank and Gaza. The right to health is a fundamental human right and
Israel, duly hailed as the country which has to date achieved the widest vaccination
coverage in proportion to its population size, is also required by the Fourth Geneva
Convention to maintain health services in the occupied Palestinian territory. It is in
everyone’s interest to ensure that those who cannot purchase vaccines on the global
market have their needs met fairly and adequately.
Finally, we welcome the recent meeting held between Egypt, France, Germany
and Jordan aiming at both the revitalization of the Middle East Quartet and the
reactivation of bilateral peace negotiations. Costa Rica reiterates that the only path
towards a peaceful and equitable solution to the long-standing conflict between
Israel and Palestine requires dialogue and direct negotiations between the parties
based on international law, Security Council resolutions and internationally agreed
parameters, recognizing that the two-State solution is an indispensable requirement
to a comprehensive peace in the Middle East region.

60/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

Annex 27
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Cuba to the
United Nations, Pedro Luis Pedroso Cuesta
[Original: English and Spanish]
We support the statement delivered by the representative of Azerbaijan on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
In this first 2021 open debate on the situation in the Middle East, we reiterate
the condemnation of the attacks launched against Aden International Airport, on
30 December 2020, which resulted in the death of over 30 civilians and injured
dozens of other people. We express our heartfelt sympathies to the families and
closed relatives of the victims.
We welcome the decision of Qatar, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates,
Bahrain and Egypt to normalize their relations.
The pandemic has forced us to face a new reality which poses colossal
challenges to health systems, economies and our societies at large. Its manifold
effects call for joint actions that privilege cooperation and solidarity over
political differences.
We reiterate our deep concern over the impact of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) on the countries of the Middle East and call for serious efforts to
prevent any action that could lead to a sharper deterioration of stability and security
in that region.
As the pandemic compounds the socioeconomic and humanitarian situation
of the Palestinian people, Israel continues its occupation, its policies of annexation,
its escalation of the illegal and colonizing practices and measures, including the
construction and expansion of illegal Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territory, punitive demolitions, seizures of resources from Palestinian institutions,
the forced displacement of hundreds of civilians and the blockade of the Gaza Strip.
It is disturbing that another year has ended without the Security Council taking
action to end Israel’s military aggression and occupation of the Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, in accordance with its resolution 2334 (2016); while
Israel, with impunity, is reinforcing its policy of illegal settlement expansion in the
occupied Palestinian territory and threatens to annex the Palestinian territories of
the Jordan Valley and other areas of the West Bank and East Jerusalem. We call once
again on the Security Council to fulfil its responsibility under the Charter of the
United Nations for the maintenance of international peace and security, and to call
for Israel’s immediate and complete halt of all its colonizing policies and practices.
We reaffirm our unrestricted support for a comprehensive, just and lasting
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which allows the Palestinian people to
exercise their right to self-determination and to have an independent and sovereign
State on the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and which guarantees
the right of return for the refugees.
We express our unwavering solidarity with the Palestinian people and
Government and our support for the admission of the State of Palestine as a full
member of the United Nations. We also support the Palestinian President’s initiative
to hold an international peace conference.
We regret the precarious situation in which the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East finds itself as a result of the
withdrawal of the United States financial support.
21-0141061/103

S/2021/91

The aggressive, unilateral and unjustified actions of the United States in the
Middle East severely undermine the legitimate interests of the Arab and Islamic
nations and lead to a dangerous escalation in the region.
We reiterate our rejection of the so-called deal of the century, drawn up by the
previous United States Administration, which ignores the two-State solution, which
has been historically supported by the United Nations, the Non-Aligned Movement,
the League of Arab States, the Organization for Islamic Cooperation and other
international actors.
The unilateral decision of the United States Government to recognize
Jerusalem as the capital of Israel, to establish its diplomatic mission in that city,
disrespecting its historical status, as well as recognizing Israel’s sovereignty over
the Syrian Golan, constitute serious violations of the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and the relevant Security Council resolutions. We call, once again,
for the total and unconditional withdrawal of Israel from the Syrian Golan and from
all occupied Arab territories.
We ratify our full support for the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action with Iran
and our rejection of the United States’ withdrawal from the agreement, as well as its
attempts to ignore the validity of resolution 2231 (2015), which endorsed the plan.
We support the search for a peaceful and negotiated solution to the situation
imposed on Syria, without foreign involvement and with full respect for its
sovereignty and territorial integrity. We reaffirm our strongest condemnation of the
United States’ sanctions against Syria and the implementation of the Caesar Act,
which hampers the reconstruction of that country, especially in the complex scenario
of COVID-19, and blatantly violates the Charter of the United Nations, international
law and the human rights of the Syrian people.
It is inadmissible that some countries experience the application of unilateral
coercive measures which violate the human rights of their peoples, international law
and the Charter of the United Nations. We call for the immediate and unconditional
end to those arbitrary and illegal measures imposed against sovereign States. Their
application in the current juncture creates additional difficulties to confront the
pandemic in the countries against which they are enacted.
The defence of the right to peace continues to be a paramount priority for
Cuba. We support the urgent call of the Secretary-General to put an end to armed
conflicts, hostilities and the scourge of war and instead open up opportunities for
diplomacy and cooperation. All wars, including unconventional wars and the socalled low-intensity warfare, must cease.
It is the duty of all States to uphold multilateralism and the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, including respect for the sovereign
equality of States and their political independence, unity and territorial integrity; the
peaceful resolution of conflicts; non-interference in the internal affairs of States and
refraining from the use or threat of use of force in international relations.

62/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

Annex 28
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Ecuador to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
At the outset, I would like to congratulate Tunisia on its successful presidency
of the Security Council in January 2021.
Ecuador is addressing the Council to reiterate its position on the question
of Palestine, reaffirm its solidarity with Palestine and reiterate its commitment to
alleviating the difficult situation faced by its people, which will be achieved only
with a political, peaceful, final and just solution for the parties, based on the existence
of two States, Palestine and Israel, within the recognized borders of 1967.
This first debate of the year on the Palestinian question is marked by worrisome
news — according to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA), demolitions continue at alarming levels. The destruction of property,
including houses, animal shelters, latrines and solar panels, which are essential to the
livelihoods, well-being and dignity of community members, is further exacerbated
by the threat of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
In that regard, the international community must reject any kind of illegal
settlement policy, in particular demolitions and confiscations of Palestinian-owned
structures, including water and sanitation and humanitarian assistance structures,
throughout the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
According to OCHA, as of November 2020, 689 structures had been
demolished in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, more than in any full
year since 2016, leaving 869 Palestinians homeless. Ecuador expresses its concern
about the humanitarian situation, human rights violations and non-compliance with
international humanitarian law in the occupied Palestinian territory.
Furthermore, Ecuador rejects any kind of incitement to violence, which further
distances the parties from a solution. We reiterate the call made in resolution 2334
(2016) on both parties to demonstrate calm and restraint and to act in accordance
with international law, including international humanitarian law.
We express our deep concern about annexation measures that constitute
serious violations of international law, as well as seriously affect the possibility of a
two-State solution and undermine the prospects for renewed negotiations.
We call on all parties to make collective efforts to initiate credible negotiations
and to strengthen regional and international diplomatic efforts to achieve without
delay a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
Finally, the Security Council must ensure the effective implementation of
resolution 2532 (2020) and a global ceasefire and cessation of violence.

21-0141063/103

S/2021/91

Annex 29
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I would like to congratulate you on the Tunisian presidency of
the Security Council this month, and to welcome your efforts to lead the Council’s
work in the light of the many challenges facing the international community as a
result of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
I would also like to thank the United Nations Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Tor Wennesland, for his briefing and wish him well
in his new role. Egypt appreciates the efforts made by his predecessor, Nickolay
Mladenov, over a period of some five years, to settle the Palestinian question and
bring peace to the Middle East.
Egypt aligns itself with the statements of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, the Group of Arab States and the Islamic Group.
As we begin this year’s first open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, the region continues to suffer the repercussions
of the many crises that arose in the last decade and to face long-standing crises
that have resulted in insecurity and instability. The COVID-19 pandemic and its
economic, social and humanitarian consequences have worsened the humanitarian
situation and deepened the crises in the Middle East. In particular, the fact that large
numbers of Arab citizens have migrated and sought asylum in the last decade has
compounded their pandemic-related suffering.
Egypt has always emphasized that the crises in the Middle East in the past
decade should not divert our attention from the issue that is at the heart of security
and stability in the region, namely, the Palestinian question. The Arab peoples
continue to look forward, as they have for generations, to the liberation of all the
Arab territories occupied in 1967, in both Palestine and the occupied Syrian Golan.
Although the Council continues to monitor developments related to the
Palestinian question, the situation has worsened significantly, and international
efforts have failed to halt the deterioration on the ground. The Israelis have maintained
the pace of their settlement activity and have in fact increased it by announcing the
construction of thousands of housing units in settlements in the West Bank. Those
units will further isolate the city of Jerusalem from the West Bank and undermine
the chances of achieving the two-State solution. Their construction runs counter to
international law and United Nations resolutions, particularly resolution 2334 (2016).
The project represents the imposition of a fait accompli and the tacit implementation
of the Israeli annexation plan, which Egypt and the entire international community
have opposed.
The occupying Power has also continued to confiscate Palestinian land, expel
Palestinians and demolish their homes. Israeli settlers have violated the rights of
the Palestinian people in the West Bank. The holy places in Jerusalem been not
been spared. Israeli incursions and violations in the Haram Al-Sharif have continued
despite the site’s particular importance to Muslims around the world. Egypt therefore
affirms its total rejection of any attempt to Judaize Jerusalem and supports the
efforts of the Jordanian Hashemite custodianship of the holy places to preserve the
historical status quo in Jerusalem.
The only way of remedying the current deteriorating situation is to resume
negotiations between the Palestinians and Israelis under the auspices of the Quartet,
in accordance with the initiative of the President of the State of Palestine, Mahmoud
64/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

Abbas, to hold an international peace conference. In that way, the negotiations would
be based on agreed-upon international terms of reference and relevant authoritative
international resolutions, in all of which the right of the Palestinian people to an
independent State based on the 4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, is affirmed.
Egypt believes that the Palestinian people must be supported and that the
right atmosphere must be created for the resumption of negotiations between the
two sides through practical steps on the ground to alleviate that people’s suffering,
especially in the humanitarian field and in view of the repercussions of the COVID-19
pandemic. In addition, the blockade of the Gaza Strip must be lifted and donor
countries must support the work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East so that it can address its financial crisis and fully
implement its mandate in the light of its vital role in supporting Palestinian refugees.
Egypt will also continue to communicate with the Palestinian and Israeli sides and
all regional and international partners, particularly the Munich format countries, to
support the Quartet’s efforts to resume negotiations.
I can only welcome the presidential decree on the holding of legislative and
presidential elections, and elections to the Palestinian National Council. The decree
is important in terms of support for the institutions of the Palestinian State and the
achievement of national reconciliation, for which Egypt continues to strive.
Egypt endorses the call for a global ceasefire, including the appeal made by
the Secretary-General, to enable the peoples of the region to address the enormous
challenges arising from the pandemic and lay the groundwork for a comprehensive
political process based on the terms of reference set out in the relevant Council
resolutions on resolving protracted regional conflicts. The United Nations must
ensure that efforts to resolve the crises in Syria and Yemen peacefully are guided by
the peoples of those countries, free from foreign intervention, and that the countries’
sovereignty and independence, and the unity and integrity of their peoples and
territories, are maintained.
Egypt also supports the efforts of the Special Envoys of the Secretary-General
for Syria and Yemen to reach a political settlement, a comprehensive ceasefire and
the implementation of relevant Council resolutions, and emphasizes the need for
the Council to play a more active role in efforts for the political settlement of those
crises, in order to help to establish conditions for the voluntary and safe return
of refugees.
Egypt therefore welcomes the implementation of the Riyadh Agreement and
the successful formation of a new Government in Yemen. It condemns the vicious
terrorist attack on Aden airport, which was intended to prevent the Government
from performing its historic mission within Yemen.
Egypt reiterates its deep concern at the alarming findings set out in the
ninth report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) (S/2020/531), issued in June 2020. Those findings relate to the origin of
smuggled weapons seized en route to Yemen, and of the missiles and uncrewed
aerial vehicles used in attacks on vital facilities in Saudi Arabia in 2019. Egypt also
warns of continuing operations targeting vessels and jeopardizing the freedom of
international navigation.
Egypt continues to support all efforts to reach a political settlement in Libya
in order to restore the peace, stability and prosperity that the Libyan people deserve,
and emphasizes the need for Libyans themselves to take the primary responsibility in
that regard. Egypt welcomes the recent appointment of Ján Kubiš as Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General on Libya, wishes him every success in leading United Nations
21-0141065/103

S/2021/91

efforts related to Libya in the future and stands ready to provide all necessary support
for the fulfilment of his mandate. Egypt also stands unequivocally with the Libyan
people and is open to consultation with representatives of all regions of the country
in order to help that people achieve the desired peace and put the Libyan national
interest above the narrow political interests of certain factions. Egypt is following
with interest the outcome of the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum, including the
mechanism for selecting the interim executive authority, and looks forward to a
successful transition period until elections are held in the country in December 2021.
Egypt also supports the recent ceasefire agreement, to which it contributed
through the meeting in Hurghada, which brought together representatives of the
Libyan Joint Military Commission before its meeting in Geneva to approve the
agreement. It looks forward to implementing all the provisions of the agreement,
particularly the departure of all foreign forces and mercenaries from Libya out of
respect for the country’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Lastly, Egypt reiterates the importance of continuing economic reforms in
Libya to preserve the resources of the Libyan people, ensure that the nation’s wealth
is equitably distributed throughout the country and prevent that wealth from being
disbursed in ways it is not supposed to. Egypt is doing its utmost to make those
efforts a success as co-chair of the economic working group established as part of
the Berlin process and is supporting the Libyan Expert Economic Commission to
that end.
As the year begins, we look forward to peace in our region, the realization of
our peoples’ aspirations to live in security, peace and stability, and the channelling
of efforts towards building a better tomorrow for future generations.

66/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

Annex 30
Statement by the Head of Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations, Olof Skoog
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the European
Union (EU).
The European Union remains united in its commitment to achieving a twoState solution that meets Israeli and Palestinian security needs and Palestinian
aspirations to statehood and sovereignty, ends the occupation that began in 1967 and
resolves all permanent-status issues in order to end the conflict.
The EU remains ready to support both parties in efforts to resume meaningful
negotiations on all final-status issues in order to achieve a just and lasting peace.
The EU and its member States will continue to work actively, also on a bilateral
basis, to support all efforts to help resume meaningful negotiations between the
parties, engaging with all relevant stakeholders, including members of the Quartet
and partners in the region, notably Egypt and Jordan, which recently met with France
and Germany in Cairo. The EU welcomes the appointment of Mr. Tor Wennesland
as Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and looks forward to
working with him and supporting him in fulfilling his mandate, including within the
framework of the Middle East Quartet. The EU is grateful to Mr. Nickolay Mladenov
for his tireless efforts as United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process over the past years.
The EU has welcomed the establishment of diplomatic relations between
Israel and a number of countries in recent months. The EU believes that those
developments represent a positive contribution to peace and stability in the region.
Israel’s commitment to suspending plans to unilaterally annex areas of the occupied
Palestinian territory is a positive step. Any unilateral decision that undermines a
lasting, agreed solution should be avoided. The EU reiterates that any annexation
would constitute a serious violation of international law.
The EU strongly opposes all actions that undermine the viability of the twoState solution and urges both sides to demonstrate, through policies and actions, a
genuine commitment to a two-State solution in order to rebuild trust and create a
path back to meaningful negotiations.
The EU reiterates its strong opposition to Israel’s settlement policy, which is
illegal under international law, and actions taken in that context such as demolitions
and confiscations, including of humanitarian structures and EU-funded projects,
evictions and forced transfers. The EU calls on Israel to halt continued settlement
expansion and demolitions in the occupied territories, including East Jerusalem,
especially in sensitive areas such as Har Homa, Givat Hamatos and the E-1 zone,
which seriously threaten the two-State solution. Settlement activity in East Jerusalem
seriously jeopardizes the possibility of Jerusalem serving as the future capital of
both States.
The violence and loss of human lives in the occupied Palestinian territory
and Israel remain of deep concern to the EU. The Palestinian population continues
to face repeated human rights violations and abuses. The EU recalls the importance
of unhindered work of civil society organizations, both in Israel and in the occupied
Palestinian territory.
The worsening humanitarian and human rights situation in the Gaza Strip
remains of grave concern, and the EU calls for an end to the closure; the full opening
of the crossing points while addressing Israel’s security concerns; and unimpeded
access for humanitarian actors.
21-0141067/103

S/2021/91

The EU firmly condemns the rocket, incendiary balloon and other attacks from
the Gaza Strip targeting civilians in Israel, as well as terrorist attacks and any other
form of violence, including a continued upward trend of settler-related incidents, and
incitement on all sides. While recalling Israel’s right to defend its legitimate security
interests, the EU expects the Israeli authorities to fully meet their obligations under
international human rights law and international humanitarian law, not least in these
difficult times of the coronavirus pandemic and including with regard to Palestinian
detainees in Israeli prisons.
The Palestinian Legislative Council was dissolved in December 2018. Strong,
inclusive, accountable and functioning democratic Palestinian institutions based on
respect for the rule of law and human rights are vital to the two-State solution.
In that context, the EU welcomes the recent decree-law by President Abbas on
holding legislative, presidential and Palestinian National Council elections in the
coming months, starting with legislative elections on 22 May. That is an important
development, as participative, representative and accountable democratic institutions
are key to Palestinian self-determination and State-building. The EU calls upon all
Palestinian factions to unequivocally commit to democratic principles prior to the
elections. The EU stands ready to engage with the relevant actors to support the
electoral process. The EU also calls on the Israeli authorities to facilitate the holding
of elections across all the Palestinian territory.
The EU recalls that a lasting solution to the conflict must be achieved on
the basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions and the internationally agreed
parameters, with the State of Israel and an independent, democratic, contiguous,
sovereign and viable State of Palestine, living side by side in peace and security and
mutual recognition, with Jerusalem as the capital of both States. The EU reiterates its
fundamental commitment to the security of Israel, including with regard to current
and emerging threats in the region.
The EU reiterates its deep and genuine appreciation for the work of United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
and for its dedicated staff, who are working in an extremely difficult and challenging
context. UNRWA is an essential provider of vital services to millions of Palestine
refugees and a stabilizing force in the region. Until a just, fair, agreed and realistic
solution to the Palestinian refugee issue in accordance with international law is
found, UNRWA remains crucial to providing the necessary protection and essential
services for Palestinian refugees, and we will continue to support UNRWA in all its
fields of operation, including in East Jerusalem. The EU welcomes the additional
financial support from other and new donors and calls upon all partners to increase
their contributions to UNRWA.
Allow me to turn to the situation in Syria.
After a decade of conflict, the violence and instability in Syria continue to
cause enormous suffering, and millions are still displaced. Violations of international
law, including abuses of human rights and international humanitarian law, by all
parties, particularly by the Syrian regime and its allies, remain persistent.
The crisis continues to have profound repercussions for the overall stability
of the entire region. The human devastation of the country endures. The strain of
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic adds to the gravity of the situation.
In the north-west, the situation remains fragile. The EU reiterates its call on
all parties to uphold the present ceasefire to guarantee the protection of civilians on
the ground and from air strikes.

68/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

The EU continues to call upon the Syrian regime and its allies to fully respect
international humanitarian law and in particular to permanently cease indiscriminate
air strikes and shelling on civilians and humanitarian workers. The EU also notes
with concern the ongoing insecurity in the north-east of Syria and reiterates its call
for the implementation of a nationwide ceasefire, in line with resolution 2254 (2015).
The EU insists further that the Syrian regime must fully cooperate with
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), including its
investigations of the use of chemical weapons in the conflict, and deplores the lack
of cooperation of the Syrian regime as shown by the report of the OPCW DirectorGeneral released on 14 October 2020 following the July 2020 Executive Council
decision. As set out in that decision, it will now be the duty of the Conference of the
States Parties to decide on a further course of action. We welcome the draft decision
entitled “Addressing the Possession and Use of Chemical Weapons by the Syrian
Arab Republic” and call on all States parties to fulfil their responsibility and uphold
the credibility of the Chemical Weapons Convention. Respect for international
humanitarian law must be ensured at all times and in all circumstances. We reiterate
that the use of chemical weapons is a violation of international law and unacceptable
anywhere, at any time and under any circumstances, and that impunity for the use of
chemical weapons must not and will not be tolerated.
While the EU welcomed the decision taken by the Security Council on 11 July
2020 to extend the authorization for cross-border humanitarian assistance to people
in need in Syria for a further 12 months (resolution 2533 (2020)), the authorization
of only one crossing point, in the north-west, is disappointing. The renewal of the
decision by the Security Council on the authorization for cross-border assistance
in July 2021 will be vital. The EU continues to demand that all parties in conflict,
in particular the Syrian regime, allow safe, unimpeded and sustained access for
humanitarian convoys and humanitarian actors to the Syrian population in need in
all parts of Syria.
Turkey is a key partner of the European Union and a critically important
actor in the Syrian crisis and the region. Turkey’s security concerns in north-east
Syria should be addressed through political and diplomatic means, not with military
action, and in accordance with international humanitarian law.
The EU remains committed to the unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the Syrian State and recalls that any sustainable solution to the conflict requires a
genuine political transition in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex), negotiated by the Syrian parties within the United
Nations-led Geneva process.
All those responsible for breaches of international law and human rights law,
some of which may constitute war crimes and crimes against humanity, must be held
accountable. The EU reiterates its call to have the situation in Syria referred to the
International Criminal Court. In the absence of avenues for international justice, the
prosecution of war crimes under national jurisdiction where possible, as for example
in Germany, and the initiative of the Netherlands to invoke Syria’s responsibility
for human rights violations represent an important contribution towards securing
justice. Moreover, we will continue to support efforts to gather evidence with a view
to future legal action, including by the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism for Syria. The EU further welcomes the report of the Commission of
Inquiry and expresses its concern about the report’s findings.
The EU fully supports the efforts of UN Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and
has welcomed the establishment of the Syrian-led Constitutional Committee under
United Nations auspices. A fourth round of talks took place in December last year
21-0141069/103

S/2021/91

despite the challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic. The EU is encouraged by
the fact that the parties agreed to meet this week for a fifth round. The EU urges the
Syrian regime to engage in the Committee’s work in good faith and with the aim of
making urgent and concrete progress on constitutional reform. The EU reiterates
that all elements of resolution 2254 (2015) must be implemented, including the
issue of detainees and missing persons and the establishment of a safe and neutral
environment in order for free and fair elections to be held under United Nations
supervision.
Regarding the situation of refugees and of internally displaced persons, the
EU continues to voice strong concern about reports of social and demographic
engineering in all areas throughout Syria and mass waves of displacement, inter alia
in parts of the north-west and north-east. The EU insists that their return to their
places of origin can be encouraged only if it can take place in a safe, voluntary and
dignified manner, in line with the parameters defined by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and in accordance with international law.
The underlying causes of the refugee and displacement crisis must be addressed
through the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015).
The EU, in line with EU Council conclusions, will be ready to assist in the
reconstruction of Syria only when a comprehensive, genuine and inclusive political
transition, in the framework of resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva process, is
firmly under way.

70/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

Annex 31
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the
United Nations, Dian Triansyah Djani
Let me begin by congratulating His Excellency Mr. Tor Wennesland on his
appointment as Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process. I wish him
every success in accomplishing his mission and assure him of our support. I would
like to also express my appreciation to the Special Coordinator and the SecretaryGeneral of the League of Arab States for their briefings. Unfortunately, through
their briefings, we continue to hear appalling reports from the ground. I would like
to touch on three pertinent points.
First, all forms of violence, provocation and the expansion of illegal settlements
in the occupied Palestinian territory must stop. My delegation is appalled at the
continuing provocative actions and violence towards Palestinian civilians as well
as forced evictions and the demolition of houses, schools and livelihood-related
infrastructure by the occupying Power. Indonesia condemns violence of all kinds
and urges that that vicious circle of violence and provocation be brought to an end.
Moreover, again the Israeli authorities have continued on their path of
violations and complete disregard of international law by approving yet another illegal
settlement expansion. We demand that the Israeli authorities reverse such decisions
and immediately cease all their illegal settlement activities. We also continue to
urge the international community to reaffirm the illegality of the settlements. Those
settlements are illegal and in flagrant violation of international law and the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016).
Secondly, there is a need to provide the coronavirus disease vaccine to the
Palestinian population. We urge the Israeli authorities to stop their discriminatory
and unequal distribution of the vaccines, which has excluded millions of Palestinians
from access thereto. We demand that Israel, as the occupying Power, fulfil its
obligation under international law to protect the lives and safety of the Palestinian
population by providing that much-needed vaccine.
We also urge the international community, including through the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
and the World Health Organization, to continue to extend its support to the
Palestinians and to leave no one behind. In that regard, Indonesia once again appeals
to the international community to extend its full support to UNRWA’s vital work on
the front lines of the crisis in providing education, health and social services.
Thirdly and finally, let me touch on our support for successful elections.
Indonesia welcomes the presidential decree recently issued by President Mahmoud
Abbas on the holding of legislative, presidential and Palestinian National Council
elections starting in May this year.
We extend our support to the efforts to ensure successful elections and share
the Secretary-General’s view that those elections will be a crucial step towards
Palestinian unity and giving renewed legitimacy to national institutions, including a
democratically elected Parliament and Government in Palestine.
We remain hopeful with respect to the continued intra-Palestinian
reconciliation talks and stress the importance of unity within Palestine to create a
conducive and inclusive environment for the peace process.
In conclusion, we once again urge the occupying Power to adhere to
international law, particularly international humanitarian law, and the related
Security Council resolutions. We call upon the international community to demand
21-0141071/103

S/2021/91

accountability and ensure that any violations by the occupying Power will have
consequences. Indonesia’s support for the Palestinian cause has been consistent and
an integral part of its foreign policy. We affirm the Palestinian struggle to achieve a
contiguous independent State within the pre-1967 borders and with East Jerusalem
as its capital.
Let me once again assure Council members that Indonesia will remain
steadfast and unyielding in its support of the Palestinian cause.

72/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

Annex 32
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran to the United Nations, Majid Takht Ravanchi
The Palestinians ended the year 2020 while the occupation of their lands
and the brutalities of the occupying Power persisted. The killing of more than 70
Palestinians, including nearly 20 children and women, wounding more than 6,740
others, including a large number of women and children, and demolishing or
seizing over 590 Palestinian structures, as well as displacing nearly 690 people,
were only the tip of the submerged iceberg of the oppressions of the Israeli forces
against the Palestinians in the year 2020. The occupying Power also continued its
illegal settlement activities and declared its illegal policy to annex further parts of
Palestine, as well as maintaining the inhumane blockade of the Gaza Strip.
In 2020, the plight and suffering of the Palestinians have become manifold and
were further exacerbated as a result of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
The Israeli regime also continued its military adventurism and destabilizing practices
in the region, including by invading some regional countries, particularly Syria.
It also continued its sabre-rattling and openly and repeatedly threatened regional
States. In addition, the occupying Power started the year 2021 with a new round of
brutalities against Palestinians, including hampering the access of Palestinians to
COVID-19 vaccines, as well as its subversive and disruptive activities in the region.
All such policies and practices are in contravention of the basic principles
and norms of international law and a gross violation of the purposes and principles
of the United Nations. Despite the fact that, as the world’s longest crisis, the
Palestinian question has been at the top on the agendas of the General Assembly
and the Security Council since the creation of the United Nations, during the past 75
years, the Security Council has been unable to end the decades-long occupation of
Palestine, protect the very basic rights of millions of oppressed Palestinians at home
and abroad or confront an occupying regime that has shamelessly committed all four
core international crimes, not once but several times.
Needless to say, the reason behind the Council’s failure to fulfil its duties
is the complete and systematic shielding of the Israeli regime by the United States
in violation of international law and the principles of humanity and morality. The
decades-long inaction by the Security Council has seriously emboldened the Israeli
regime to brazenly continue all its unlawful acts and inhumane practices with total
impunity, an example of which is the killing of about 100,000 Palestinians and Arabs
since 1948 until this day, as recently announced by the President of the Palestinian
Central Bureau of Statistics.
Similarly, during the same period, the Israeli regime has pursued systematic
ethnic cleansing and racial discrimination against Palestinians, the intensive and
systematic Judaization of Palestine, particularly by changing the demographic
composition and Islamic and Arabic identity of Al-Quds Al-Sharif, the systematic
confiscation of land and the demolition of Palestinian homes. The list goes on and on.
The inaction of the United Nations, particularly the Security Council, which
is responsible for the maintenance of international peace and security, has seriously
eroded the trust and confidence in the Council and resulted in the credibility and
legitimacy crisis of this body. That inaction cannot continue indefinitely and must
therefore come to an end. The Security Council has a special responsibility in that
regard and must act decisively in resolving the question of Palestine in accordance
with the principles of justice and international law.

21-0141073/103

S/2021/91

The international community must also do everything in its power to address
this crisis and prevent its further deterioration and its negative consequences for
regional and international peace and security. To that end, the United States must
be compelled to put an end to its irresponsible policy of unreservedly supporting
the unlawful acts of the Israeli regime and the complete and systematic shielding of
Israel against the Security Council’s criticism.
Furthermore, the Israeli regime must be compelled to end the occupation of
all Palestinian territories, the occupied Syrian Golan and parts of Lebanon and to
stop all its destabilizing activities in the region, including the systematic violation
of the sovereignty of Syria and Lebanon. The Israeli regime must also be forced to
put an end to its continued construction and expansion of settlements, as well as the
inhumane blockade of the Gaza Strip.
I would like to reiterate that the Islamic Republic of Iran continues to
support the just cause of the Palestinian people and the full realization of all
their inalienable rights, including their inherent right to self-determination and to
establish an independent Palestinian State throughout Palestine, with Al-Quds AlSharif as its capital.
Today, the representative of the Israeli regime made unsubstantiated claims
about Iran’s nuclear programme and, through certain fabrications, desperately
attempted to portray its peaceful nuclear activities as a threat. That is only to divert
attention away from the development by Israel of hundreds of nuclear weapons,
which continue to threaten the peace and security of the region and beyond.
Likewise, we recall that, during the past five years, the Israeli regime, in clear
violation of resolution 2231 (2015), has spared no effort and missed no opportunity
to destroy the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. Deception and playing the victim
are inspired elements of Israel’s foreign policy, which are pursued to cover up its
oppression and crimes against Palestinians, as well as its destabilizing policies in
the region. The Security Council must therefore be vigilant about the ill intent and
disinformation campaign of the Israeli regime.
At the same time, we reserve our inherent right to self-defence and to
vigorously respond to any threat, including those made today by the Israeli regime’s
representative, in clear violation of Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter of the
United Nations, requiring the Security Council to hold that regime accountable for
such threats.

74/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

Annex 33
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations, Ishikane Kimihiro
I would like to begin by congratulating Mr. Mladenov on the completion of
his duty as the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process. Japan had the
privilege to work closely with him and highly appreciated his dedication to realizing
peace in the region. I would also like to welcome the appointment of Mr. Wennesland
as the new Special Coordinator, and I look forward to working with him.
First and foremost, I would like to reaffirm Japan’s commitment to
supporting a two-State solution based on the relevant Security Council resolutions
and internationally agreed parameters. While there are some positive signs, such
as the resumption of financial cooperation between the two sides, the situation on
the ground remains worrisome. The Government of Israel continues its settlement
activities, including the issuance of the settlement tender for about 1,200 housing
units in East Jerusalem last November and the decision in January to advance plans
for some 800 settlement units that are mostly located deep inside the occupied West
Bank. The Government of Japan deeply deplores the continued settlement activities
by the Government of Israel despite repeated calls from the international community,
including Japan, for a freezing of such activities. Settlement activities are in
violation of international law and undermine the viability of a two-State solution.
Japan reiterates its call on the Government of Israel to fully freeze those activities.
Intra-Palestinian reconciliation is another imperative to realizing a two-State
solution. In that respect, Japan welcomes the presidential decree of 15 January to hold
a series of elections in Palestine. Japan believes the realization of those elections will
mark an important step towards establishing a future democratic and independent
Palestinian State. The positive engagement of all the parties concerned, including
the Palestinian factions as well as the Israeli Government, is essential for the success
of the elections. Japan strongly hopes that free, fair and inclusive elections that
include voting by Palestinian residents of the Gaza Strip and East Jerusalem will be
held. Japan continues to support Palestine as it seeks to achieve unity through those
elections, and we will continue to engage constructively in the realization of peace
in the Middle East.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic continues to pose serious risks
to human security, threatening people’s survival, livelihoods and dignity around the
world. Palestine is no exception, and the pandemic is adding more difficulties for the
Palestinian people on top of the existing ones. Japan highly values the irreplaceable
work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) in support of the Palestinian people and commends its work
to mitigate the negative impacts of COVID-19. We have therefore made additional
contributions to UNRWA since the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic and Japan’s
total contribution in 2020 amounted to more than $30 million.
Most recently, Japan decided to make an additional contribution of $1.5 million
in December for humanitarian assistance, such as the provision of food and winter
clothing kits, as well as assistance in the areas of water, sanitation and hygiene.
One example to which I wish to make particular reference is the Your Health with
UNRWA mobile application, developed with Japan’s contribution and launched last
October. The application allows all registered Palestinians to access their health
records and relevant health-care materials online. Japan hope that the project will
be conducive to leaving no one’s health behind towards achieving universal health
coverage in Palestine.

21-0141075/103

S/2021/91

Recognizing the Palestinians’ long-standing aspirations for statehood,
Japan will continue to help the parties build confidence and provide assistance for
Palestinians’ State-building efforts. To that end, we will continue to promote our
own initiatives, such as the Corridor for Peace and Prosperity and the Conference on
Cooperation among East Asian countries for Palestinian Development.
Once again, I would like to urge both sides to resume direct negotiations,
seizing all possible opportunities, and I strongly hope that this year we see new
progress towards the realization of peace in the Middle East.

76/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

Annex 34
Statement by the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Expatriates of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan,
Ayman Safadi
[Original: Arabic]
I would like to congratulate His Excellency Mr. Othman Jerandi on the
assumption by the Republic of Tunisia of the presidency of the Security Council this
month. I also congratulate the five new non-permanent members of the Council for
the period 2021–2022, namely, India, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico and Norway.
I extend my utmost appreciation and respect to the five members whose terms
have just ended for their efforts to maintain international peace and security.
I also thank Nickolay Mladenov for his sincere efforts as United Nations
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and look forward to working
with Tor Wennesland to create real prospects for just and lasting peace in the region.
The Council is meeting to discuss the situation in the Middle East, at a time
when more effort is needed to protect the peace process and the right of the peoples
of the entire region to live in peace and security. A just and lasting peace based on
international law is the only way of achieving the two-State solution. It is a strategic
Arab choice, a regional and international necessity, and a right for all the peoples of
the region.
Jordan will continue to make every effort to bring about a just and
comprehensive peace, which must be reflected in an independent and sovereign
Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital on the basis of the borders of 4
June 1967 in accordance with the two-State solution and international law, living in
peace and security alongside Israel.
However, the chances of achieving the two-State solution — and, therefore,
a comprehensive and lasting peace — are receding every day as a result of ongoing
illegitimate Israeli actions that undermine that solution and the land for peace
principle, which underpins the peace process.
The continued construction and expansion of settlements violates international
law and undermines the chances of peace, and the international community must
take a clear stand against it. The continued violations in and around the Aqsa Mosque
and the Haram al-Sharif are also a breach of the legal obligations of Israel as the
occupying Power and a provocation liable to result in escalation. Effective steps
must be taken to end the violations in order to protect the right to peace.
A genuine, effective effort is needed to relaunch serious negotiations to
establish the political prospect of restoring confidence in the peace process and make
the necessary progress towards the two-State solution. No lasting, comprehensive
peace can be achieved without an end to the occupation on the basis of the twoState solution and the Arab Peace Initiative, which remains the most comprehensive
proposal to put an end to the conflict and uphold the right of the region and its
peoples to genuine peace. That peace would allow all energies to be directed towards
development and a future filled with opportunities and achievements rather than
oppression and conflicts. The Quartet must play its essential role in these efforts.
The continued impasse in efforts to resolve the Palestinian-Israeli conflict
is a threat that must be confronted through collective action that restores hope for
the viability of the peace process and prevents the entrenchment of despair and the
aggravation of the conflict. Jordan will remain a force for just peace and will work
21-0141077/103

S/2021/91

with our sisters, brothers and friends, with all of you, to achieve it. Jordan will also
continue to protect the Islamic and Christian holy sites in Jerusalem and preserve
their Arab Islamic or Christian identity and their legal and historical status, a priority
to which the Kingdom is wholeheartedly devoted, under the direct guidance and
monitoring of the sites’ custodian, His Majesty King Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein.
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) must continue to provide its services to refugees, pending a
settlement that would uphold their right of return and compensation in accordance
with internationally recognized resolutions, particularly General Assembly resolution
194 (III), as part of a comprehensive settlement of the dispute on the basis of the
two-State solution that would bring an end to the occupation that began in 1967.
Jordan will continue to cooperate with its partners in the international community
and make every possible effort to garner international political and financial support
for UNRWA so that the Agency can continue to fulfil its functions, in accordance
with its United Nations mandate, for more than 5.5 million Palestine refugees.
In October 2020, Jordan, together with Sweden, hosted a meeting of the
Stockholm Group for strategic dialogue on UNRWA to discuss ways of supporting
the Agency sustainably. We hope that all States will honour their commitments as
soon as possible, and increase them if possible, in order to ensure that UNRWA can
continue to provide its services and perform its tasks, including by meeting urgent
needs related to the coronavirus disease pandemic.
The challenges are tremendous but will inevitably become even more serious if
the process remains paralysed, with efforts to reach a just solution to the Palestinian
question blocked by Israeli actions. Peace will not be achieved by perpetuating the
occupation, destroying hope and demolishing houses. Let us work together to change
this situation by creating conditions that will ensure a return to negotiations as soon
as possible, in order to achieve a just peace.

78/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

Annex 35
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Kuwait

to

the

[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I would like to congratulate the delegation of Tunisia on the
success of its presidency of the Security Council this month, and on it wise and
competent management of the Council’s business. I wish it and all the members of the
Council success in their tasks and responsibilities at the start of the Christian year.
I would also like to congratulate Tor Wennesland on his appointment as United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process. We support him
and all efforts to calm the situation and restore stability in the light of the ongoing
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic in Palestine and the world at large. I
must also express our thanks and appreciation to Nickolay Mladenov for his tireless
efforts throughout his time as Special Coordinator. We wish him every success in
his next post.
As 2021 begins, we are holding our first meeting of the year on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question, amid growing concern in
the international community about the continuing deterioration in conditions in
the occupied Palestinian territory. At a time when the Palestinian authorities are
attempting to contain the spread of COVID-19 and overcome the acute shortage of
medical equipment, medicines and vaccines as a result of restrictions imposed by
Israel, the occupying Power, we note with regret the recent United Nations reports
confirming the unprecedented rise in violence against the Palestinian people,
the number of arrest campaigns and the demolitions of Palestinian buildings and
property, which have reached record levels in the past year.
There is no doubt that lack of accountability and impunity will lead —
anywhere, at any time — to the commission of more crimes. That is the case in the
occupied Palestinian territories, whose people suffer from crime on a daily basis.
The international community must demand that the perpetrators of those crimes and
violations be held to account and that Israel fulfil its legal obligations.
It is regrettable that we are starting this year where we finished in 2020;
Israel, the occupying Power, continues to disregard international resolutions and
grant more approvals for the construction of thousands of housing units in illegal
settlements in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem. The Secretary-General
and the international community have condemned those approvals and activities on
the grounds that they undermine the two-State solution and flout resolution 2334
(2016), international law, human rights and the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War. The Israeli authorities announced
last week that they had authorized the construction of 800 additional housing units
in illegal settlements in the West Bank, after allowing the construction of thousands
of units this month. The situation constitutes a flagrant violation of the resolution.
The illegal Israeli practices must come to an end and all relevant Council resolutions
must be implemented.
In contrast to the Israeli practices, the Palestinian Authority began 2021
with the issuance by the President of the State of Palestine, Mahmoud Abbas, of a
decree on the holding of presidential and legislative elections, and elections to the
Palestinian National Council. We wish the Palestinian people success and enduring
unity, and hope that they can take that important step on the path to Palestinian
reconciliation.
21-0141079/103

S/2021/91

The State of Kuwait, which has long defended the rights of the Palestinian
people, renews its commitment to the Arab, Islamic and international position,
namely, that the Palestinian cause is central to the Arab world and the Arab identity of
occupied East Jerusalem. We reaffirm our commitment to peace as a strategic choice
and to the settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict in accordance with international
law, the relevant authoritative international resolutions, the Land for Peace principle
and the Arab Peace Initiative of 2002, so that the Palestinian people can enjoy all
their legitimate political rights and establish an independent State on their land, with
Jerusalem as its capital.

80/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

Annex 36
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the
United Nations, Amal Mudallali
We congratulate Tunisia on assuming the presidency of the Council this month
and thank South Africa for its productive presidency in the month of December.
We take this opportunity to congratulate the incoming members of the
Security Council and wish them success during their term. We pay tribute to the
outgoing members and thank them for their contribution to the Council and towards
the maintenance of peace and Security.
Lebanon cannot but underline Tunisia’s historic and longstanding commitment
to the Palestinian cause and, in this regard, we welcome the focus of this debate on
the need to mobilize support to achieve a just and peaceful solution for Palestine. It
is the most dearly awaited peace in the world.
A few days ago, we celebrated, in the United States of America, Dr. Martin
Luther King Jr. Day. A champion of equal rights and justice, Dr. King identified the
most important ingredient for peace when he said: “True peace is not merely the
absence of tension; it is the presence of justice”.
For the Palestinians, these past decades have been characterized by the
presence of injustice rather than justice, the latest being the approval by Israeli
authorities of 800 new settlement units, in continuous defiance of international
legality and as part of a continuous effort to deny the Palestinians their inalienable
rights to an independent and viable Palestinian State, within the 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, and to live in peace and dignity.
How could we expect anything different when Israel has been allowed to act
with total impunity?
Time and again, Lebanon has called on the Security Council to compel Israel
to abide by its legal obligations and move beyond mere condemnation of Israel’s
constant violations of international law.
There is renewed hope now for a new and more balanced approach to finding
a solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict, a solution based on international legality
and relevant United Nations resolutions. We are indeed hopeful that the new
Administration in Washington, D.C., which announced its willingness to prioritize
human rights and international legality, will view the Middle East once again through
the prism of these two important principles.
The recent statement on the Palestinian-Israeli conflict by the nominee to
serve as secretary of state of the United States of America, Mr. Anthony Blinken,
and his affirmation that the Palestinians are entitled to their State through the socalled two-State solution, as the only way to fulfil the aspirations of the two sides,
are a step in the right direction. He stressed the importance of making “sure that
neither party takes steps” that make it more difficult to achieve this goal. This is
very encouraging.
The recent convening of the Cairo Ministerial Meeting on the Middle
East Peace Process, gathering Egypt, Jordan, France and Germany, was another
important step in the right direction. The final communiqué truly captured the
essence of comprehensive peace in the region by recalling that “the resolution
of the Palestinian-Israeli conf lict on the basis of the two-State solution is an
indispensable requirement”.

21-0141081/103

S/2021/91

Lebanon also welcomes the recent announcement by the Palestinian President,
Mahmoud Abbas, that presidential and parliamentary elections would be held in May
and July, respectively, and considers it another step in the right direction towards
much-needed Palestinian unity.
As we celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of our United
Nations, the role of the United Nations and the Security Council is more important
than ever in upholding international law and standing by its historic commitments
towards the Palestinian people and their rights. It is just as important to impress
upon Israel its obligations as occupying Power towards the Palestinian people in
every field, including public health and vaccination.
We also wish to congratulate Mr. Tor Wennesland of Norway upon his recent
appointment as new Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and to
wish him the best of luck in his new endeavour. We also salute the work of his
predecessor Mr. Nikolay Mladenov.
Time is of essence if the international community is to preserve what is left
of the basis of a just and comprehensive solution based on two States and the landfor-peace formula. The parameters of a solution are well known, and their basis is
still the same as in resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1978) and other relevant resolutions,
especially resolution 2334 (2016), and the Arab Peace Initiative.
In the middle of this terrible pandemic and the pain and loss that people around
the world are going through, the Lebanese people are suffering another fate. Daily,
Israeli fighter jets fly very low over Beirut and all over Lebanon. The planes fly day
and night, depriving the exhausted Lebanese people, traumatized by the Beirut port
explosion, a pandemic and a debilitating financial situation, from much-needed rest.
The only option Lebanon had to protest against the Israeli violations was
to appeal to the Security Council through several complaints deposited with the
Council. These Israeli violations not only terrorize civilians and endanger the safety
of civilian aviation, but they also violate United Nations resolutions, especially
resolution 1701 (2006).
In 2020, Israeli breaches of our airspace totalled 2,022, of which 216 were by
warplanes and 1,804 by reconnaissance aircraft. That is in addition to 600 territorial
breaches and 520 maritime breaches in the same year. In a most recent and alarming
development, the Israeli army kidnapped a Lebanese shepherd on 12 January and
released him three days later.
It is high time that this august body take Israeli violations seriously and act to
stop them. To ignore Lebanon’s daily suffering is akin to ignoring the principles and
purposes that this Organization and this Council were built upon. This contributes
to neither peace nor security in Lebanon and the region.
The situation in the wider region is no better. People are deprived of their right
to live in peace and security. The many protracted conflicts in the region call for a
renewed momentum to move from crisis-management mode to action.
All these issues are on the Security Council table. It is high time that
permanent solutions be found so that this region may live in peace and security, with
the potential of its peoples realized through a new peaceful space.

82/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

Annex 37
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Malaysia to the
United Nations, Syed Mohamad Hasrin Aidid
At the outset, allow me to thank you, Sir, for convening this important open
debate. Malaysia aligns itself with the statements delivered by the representatives of
the Niger, on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (see annex 14), and
of Azerbaijan, on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (see annex 21).
Permit me to extend my delegation’s heartfelt congratulations to India, Ireland,
Kenya, Mexico and Norway as they begin, this morning, their important journey as
the elected members of the Security Council for the term 2021-2022.
I would also like to congratulate Mr. Tor Wennesland on his appointment
as the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and the Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General to the Palestine Liberation Organization
and the Palestinian Authority. I wish to assure him of Malaysia’s full support as he
takes on these important responsibilities.
Malaysia would also like to take this opportunity to commend Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov for his commitment and contributions during his tenure as Special
Coordinator. We wish him all the very best in his future endeavours.
The situation in Palestine and the Middle East continues to be a matter of
serious concern to the international community. It is most regrettable that Israel
continues its acts of provocation and violence with impunity, further exacerbating
the deteriorating human-rights situation in the occupied Palestinian territory and the
occupied Syrian Golan.
Over the years, we have heard repeated warnings from the Secretary-General
and Special Coordinator on the continued expansion of illegal Israeli settlements.
Year after year, these warnings seem to have fallen on deaf ears, contributing to
the perpetuate Israeli occupation of Palestinian territory. We also condemn acts of
violence by Israeli settlers against Palestinians. The occupying Power must provide
the necessary protection to the Palestinian population and ensure accountability for
such violations.
Malaysia condemns the decision by Israel to advance plans for some 800
settlement units in the occupied West Bank and its invitation for contractors to bid
on the building of 2,527 units, including in the Al-Quds City. Malaysia views these
actions as a threat to peace, further undercutting the peace process working towards
achieving a two-State solution. My delegation reiterates that the construction of
settlements by Israel in the territory occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem,
is completely illegal and constitutes a flagrant violation of international law.
The international community must demand Israel stop all violations and
illegal settlement activities in the occupied territories. Israel must be made to fully
comply with all its obligations as prescribed by relevant Security Council resolutions
including, resolution 2334 (2016), and international law as well as the Charter of the
United Nations.
The international community cannot remain indifferent and allow continued
aggression by Israel against the occupied Palestinian people. The Security Council
must condemn and reject the Israeli annexation plan and must ensure that the plan
is not implemented.
Malaysia’s position on the question of Palestine remains clear. We will continue
to advocate the resolution of the question of Palestine on the basis of an international
21-0141083/103

S/2021/91

framework, against annexation and in support of the rights of the Palestinian people
to self-determination.
Malaysia remains steadfast in voicing its support for the restoration of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including the establishment of an
independent and sovereign State of Palestine based on the pre-1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, as the only viable solution to this long-standing conflict.
Malaysia will continue to support concrete and genuine efforts towards achieving
this just and lasting solution, which we believe will greatly contribute to peace,
justice and stability in the region.
Malaysia welcomes the announcement by President Mahmoud Abbas of the
holding parliamentary and presidential elections, beginning in May and June 2021,
respectively. We hope that the elections in the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, and Gaza will be held in the spirit of Palestinian unity and national
reconciliation. We are confident that the international community will extend the
necessary support for facilitating the holding of the elections.
Malaysia believes that there is no way to achieve sustainable peace without
a negotiated political settlement in the form of a two-State solution. In this context,
Malaysia supports the call by the international community, including by the
Secretary-General, for the Middle East Quartet to find a mutually agreeable path for
the parties to re-engage towards such a negotiated peaceful settlement.
Malaysia also supports the call by President Abbas to convene an international
peace conference with a view to advancing a just and lasting solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict. We hope that such a conference would positively contribute to
bringing about an end to the illegal occupation and achieve freedom and independence
for the Palestinian people.
Malaysia will continue, within our means, to provide assistance to, and
support for, the Palestinian State and the Palestinian people. We reaffirm our total
commitment to unwavering support for, and full solidarity with, the cause of the
Palestinian people in realizing their inalienable rights to self-determination, freedom
and independence. The new year ushers in an opportunity to deliver peace in the
occupied territories. Malaysia will work closely with the international community
and the various stakeholders in finding a peaceful, just, sustainable and lasting
solution to this long-standing question.

84/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

Annex 38
Statement by the Permanent M ission of Morocco to the
United Nations
At the outset, I would like to thank Tunisia for its successful presidency of the
Security Council this month.
I would also like to congratulate the new Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, Mr. Tor Wennesland, and wish him every success in fulfilling
his functions. I pay tribute to his predecessor, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his tireless
efforts over the past years.
On the occasion of today’s meeting, the Kingdom of Morocco reiterates
its unwavering position with regard to the Palestinian question, which is based
on the two-State solution, as internationally agreed, as well as its commitment to
negotiations between the Palestinian and Israeli parties as the only way to achieve a
final, lasting and comprehensive settlement to this conflict.
In his capacity as Chairman of the Al-Quds Committee of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, His Majesty King Mohammed VI continues to strongly
insist on the need to preserve the special status of the city of Al-Quds Al-Sharif,
respect the freedom to practice religious rites for followers of the three monotheistic
religions and safeguard the Muslim character of Al-Quds Al-Sharif and the Al-Aqsa
Mosque. I wish to recall the Al-Quds Call, signed by His Majesty King Mohammed
VI and His Holiness Pope Francis, during His Holiness’s visit to Morocco in March
2019, aimed at promoting and enhancing the specific multi-faith character of the
holy city, its spiritual dimension and its special identity.
My country reiterates its support for the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and its mandate. UNRWA
plays a vital role in supporting education, health and social services for millions of
Palestinian refugees and has continued to do so even in the challenging circumstances
presented by the coronavirus disease pandemic.
For its part, the Bayt Mal Al-Quds Al-Sharif Agency, the executive field arm
of the Al-Quds Committee, continues to support development plans and projects in
Palestine and the holy city in order to promote the economic empowerment of the
Palestinian people. The Bayt Mal Al-Quds Al-Sharif Agency seeks to spend over $7
million for the implementation of the projects scheduled in 2021. In the same context,
the structures of the Bayt Mal Al-Quds Al-Sharif Agency will soon be updated to give
it new impetus and enable it to pursue, under the personal supervision of His Majesty
King Mohammed VI, the implementation of concrete plans and programmes in the
fields of health, education and housing, as well as all forms of social assistance, for
the benefit of the Palestinian inhabitants of Al-Quds.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the need to renew direct negotiations
between the Palestinians and the Israelis so as to find a solution that guarantees the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people and contributes to the establishment of
security, peace and prosperity in the Middle East region.

21-0141085/103

S/2021/91

Annex 39
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Namibia to the
United Nations, Neville Gertze
I would like to congratulate the President of the Security Council on Tunisia’s
assumption of the presidency for the month of January 2021 and thank him for
organizing today’s quarterly debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, former
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his service over the past
five years. During his tenure, Mr. Mladenov ably attempted to bring about a just and
lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian question. In the same vein, I welcome Mr.
Tor Wennesland, the newly appointed Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, and wish him every success. I can assure Mr. Wennesland of Namibia’s
support during his term.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
(annex 21) and that of the Permanent Representative of Senegal, in which he
addresses the Council in his capacity as Chair of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People (annex 25).
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has ravaged the world for
almost a year now. While the pandemic has impacted all corners of the globe, it has
more drastically affected those that were already vulnerable or at risk. Nowhere is that
more visible than in the occupied Palestinian territories. The Palestinian economy,
already fragile before the pandemic, has dived into a deeper crisis. Inequalities have
grown, and the humanitarian situation has worsened.
All the while, at the height of the pandemic, Israel continues its settlementexpansion policy and the destruction of Palestinian homes and structures, displacing
men, women and children. Most recently, the Israeli authorities have advanced plans
for some 800 settlement units, most of which are located deep inside the occupied
West Bank. Namibia expresses its deep concern at this decision.
As the Spokesperson of the Secretary-General recently stated,
“The Secretary-General reiterates that the establishment by Israel of
settlements in the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including East
Jerusalem, has no legal validity and constitutes a flagrant violation under
international law.”
These actions represent a grave obstacle to the two-State solution, and we urge Israel
to halt and reverse such decisions.
Namibia wishes to express its concern at the current vaccine programme
being rolled out by Israeli authorities. The international community should continue
to remind Israel, as an occupying Power, of its obligations under international
law to ensure public health in the occupied territories. There must be an equitable
distribution of COVID-19 vaccines in the occupied territories. As the President of
the General Assembly stated in his presentation of his priorities for 2021 to the
United Nations membership last week, vaccines for all must be a reality.
I would like to express my deep appreciation for the work of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). The
provision of vital services represents a stabilizing element in a region that continues
to be the victim of violence. The essential emergency assistance that the Agency has
provided to help Palestinian refugees confront the COVID-19 pandemic has only
86/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

reinforced UNRWA’s importance. Namibia remains concerned about the financial
challenges that the Agency is confronting, especially during this time of global
pandemic.
Namibia welcomes the 15 January presidential decree issued by President
Abbas on the holding of legislative, presidential and Palestinian National Council
elections later this year, starting in May. These elections will mark a crucial step
towards Palestinian unity. Namibia joins with the Secretary-General in hoping
“that the holding of the elections will contribute to restarting a process
towards a negotiated two-State solution based on the pre-1967 lines, and in
accordance with relevant United Nations resolutions, bilateral agreements and
international law”.
I also wish to reiterate Namibia’s support for the call made by President Abbas for
the holding of an international conference under the auspices of the Middle East
Quartet, with the expanded participation of regional players to help advance the
peace process.
It has been one year since the COVID-19 pandemic began to spread around
the world. At this time, we have seen the best and the worst of humankind. In the
Middle East, we saw glimmers of cooperation between the two sides. As we begin a
new year, with the hope and optimism that the distribution of the various vaccines
brings, let us once again encourage Israelis and Palestinians to return to the tables
of negotiation and achieve a historic agreement leading to Israel and Palestine living
side by side in peace and security along the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as the capital of the State of Palestine. Namibia will continue to stand with the
Palestinian people and advocate their fundamental right to self-determination and
independence in all forums.

21-0141087/103

S/2021/91

Annex 40
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Peru to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
We are grateful for the convening of today’s quarterly open debate on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question. We are also grateful
for Mr. Tor Wennesland’s lucid briefing. Knowing his great qualities, we wish him
every success in managing this delicate task and assure him of our full support. We
also reiterate our appreciation for the always constructive and thoughtful work of his
predecessor, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov.
Peru is closely following the developments related to the Palestinian question,
given its importance for the stability of the Middle East and, by extension, that of the
world. We view with hope the progress made in the intra-Palestinian reconciliation
process, which has led to the announcement of the holding of legislative and
presidential elections in 2021, the first such elections in 15 years. We consider
this to be a fundamental step towards strengthening the legitimacy of Palestinian
institutions, which will lay the foundations for a renewed dialogue with Israel. We
look forward to the Security Council’s necessary full support.
We also welcome the resumption of cooperation between the Israeli
Government and the Palestinian Authority, which has made it possible to normalize
the receipt of tax revenues that Israel collects on the Authority’s behalf, as well as
the restoration of diplomatic relations between Israel and Morocco, the United Arab
Emirates, Bahrain and the Sudan, which we hope will have positive repercussions
for peace and security in the region.
However, we note that these developments, if they are to remain favourable,
must necessarily and urgently be accompanied by an end to the escalating practices
of settlements, property demolitions and evictions in the Palestinian territories
occupied since 1967, which seriously undermine the two-State solution and
contravene the provisions of resolution 2334 (2016). We are particularly concerned
about the settlement-expansion plans in Givat Hamatos, East Jerusalem, and about
the fact that 2020 was the second-highest year in terms of demolition of Palestinian
structures since 2009.
We must also continue to condemn the recurrence of indiscriminate attacks
on civilians by Hamas and other radical Palestinian actors, the disproportionate
Israeli responses, the unflagging confrontational rhetoric and the serious episodes
of settler-related violence in the West Bank. We expect concrete signs of restraint
and commitment to peace from both sides, and it is essential, in the immediate term,
that the parties comply with the comprehensive ceasefire called for by SecretaryGeneral António Guterres.
In these circumstances, we reaffirm our commitment to the only solution that
we consider viable and consistent with international law: that of two States within
internationally recognized and secure borders, to be negotiated directly between
Israel and Palestine on the basis of the borders in force until 1967, and which must
also lead to the determination of the final status of Jerusalem.
We note with dismay the continuing deterioration of humanitarian conditions
in Gaza as a result of its isolation and the lack of opportunity there, a situation
that the coronavirus disease pandemic has only exacerbated. In this regard, we
commend the outstanding work of the United Nations and its agencies in providing
basic medical supplies and transferring patients out of Gaza. We hope that these
efforts will be complemented by non-discriminatory access to vaccination for the
88/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

Palestinian population, in compliance with Israel’s obligations under the Fourth
Geneva Convention. In this regard, we underline the critical state of the finances of
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
and the need to provide the Agency with a stable and predictable flow of resources
so that its crucial assistance work remains uninterrupted.
I would conclude by emphasizing the central role that the Quartet is called
upon to play in efforts to restart a peace process, alongside a number of countries
that have historically been involved in this process. In line with its difficult
responsibility of ensuring international peace and security, the Security Council
must also be able to reach minimum consensus and speak out when the situation on
the ground so warrants.

21-0141089/103

S/2021/91

Annex 41
Statement by the Permanent Representative Qatar to the
United Nations, Alya Ahmed Saif Al-Thani
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, we would like to congratulate you on your efforts during the
Tunisian presidency of the Security Council this month. We thank the United Nations
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Tor Wennesland, for his
briefing, and congratulate him on taking up the position. We wish him every success
in the huge task of making progress in the peace process.
Such progress is a goal to which the international community consistently
aspires and on which it places great emphasis. Today’s meeting is an opportunity
to reaffirm that common goal. Negotiations between the two sides, Palestinian and
Israeli, are the only way to end the conflict, which the Council has had before it for
decades and which has caused immeasurable suffering.
An end to the conflict, through a just, comprehensive and lasting settlement
of the Palestinian question, would serve the interests of both parties and of stability
in the region in general. That requires a settlement that adheres to the principle
of a two-State solution on the basis of international law, the Charter of the United
Nations and United Nations resolutions, and conforms to the Arab Peace Initiative,
by establishing a Palestinian State based on the 1967 borders with East Jerusalem as
its capital living side by side with Israel in security and peace. A settlement would
also require an end to the occupation of Arab territory and illegal settlements, a just
solution to the refugee issue, and refraining from any acts that would undermine
the two-State solution, including attempts to annex lands, seize or destroy property,
violate holy places, implement policies to Judaize the city of Jerusalem, and the rest
of the occupying Power’s practices that violate international law and United Nations
resolutions. As we have stressed on previous occasions, any arrangements not based
on these references will not bring about the desired peace.
The State of Qatar continues to stand firm in support of the legitimate and
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people under international law. The State of
Qatar supports national reconciliation between our Palestinian brothers. It also
continues to provide humanitarian support to the fraternal Palestinian people in
order to alleviate the humanitarian crises and economic difficulties they face and
create an environment conducive to peace. That includes its ongoing support for
improving the situation in the Gaza Strip, which has been deteriorating as a result of
the suffocating blockade.
It has been almost a full decade since the onset of the crisis in Syria. The
fraternal Syrian people have endured, and continue to endure, untold human
suffering and have been subjected to grave violations of international humanitarian
and human rights law. They deserve a chance to overcome these tragedies and fulfil
their legitimate aspirations. We must therefore support the efforts of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General to find a solution to the crisis through a meaningful
political process that brings about a political transition in accordance with the
Geneva Communiqué and implementation of all elements of resolution 2254 (2015),
including preserving the unity, sovereignty and independence of the Syrian Arab
Republic. There can be no doubt that military solutions are in conflict with that goal.
All violations and crimes against humanity must be condemned, and justice and
accountability must be emphasized regardless of who is responsible.
In Libya, recent developments have provided the fraternal Libyan people with
a ray of hope for achieving the peace, security and stability they aspire to and deserve,
90/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

and putting an end to violations, human suffering and difficult economic conditions.
We welcome the steps taken towards implementing the ceasefire agreement, and
the launch of and progress made in the Libyan political dialogue and the Libyan
economic dialogue. We call for the national interest to be put first, the political
process to be activated, elections to be held, and a comprehensive settlement to be
reached that will preserve the unity, sovereignty and independence of Libya. We
commend the efforts of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya in that regard.
We also welcome the appointment of Ján Kubiš as Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral. Qatar will support him fully in his new post.
We have repeatedly stressed the commitment of Qatar to reducing tensions
and approaching crisis resolution through dialogue in accordance with the principles
of peaceful settlement of disputes. We have also highlighted the priority that Qatar
places on the quest to realize unity in the Gulf, the restore the social fabric of the
peoples of the region, and achieve their aspirations for greater solidarity, growth
and stability. In that regard, we are pleased to note that the State of Qatar welcomes
the Ula Statement released on 5 January on the margins of the forty-first Summit
of the Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf, which was attended by
His Highness Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al-Thani, Emir of the State Qatar. That
meeting came at this crucial moment as a continuation of the process of joint action
within the Gulf, Arab and Islamic framework, putting higher interests first in order
to strengthen the bonds of friendship and fraternity among peoples and establish
the principles of good-neighbourliness and mutual respect. The Ula Statement is
complementary to the sincere efforts led by the departed Emir of Kuwait, Sheikh
Sabah al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, whose mantle has passed to His Highness
Sheikh Sheikh Nawaf Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, the current Emir of Kuwait.
Qatar also appreciates the efforts of the United States of America to bring views
closer together.
In conclusion, more than ever before, our region needs to bring an end to
crises and establish frameworks for collective security and fruitful cooperation for
the benefit of its peoples, especially given the persistence of the common challenges
that face all of us without exception, including the global health crisis. For its part,
the State of Qatar will continue to work sincerely towards creating the conditions
conducive to that end for the benefit of its people and the peoples of the region as a
whole.

21-0141091/103

S/2021/91

Annex 42
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Korea to the United Nations, Cho Hyun
My delegation thanks Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, former Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, for his efforts and dedication for over five years to
bring peace and stability to the region and wishes him much success in all his future
endeavours. We also welcome the appointment of Mr. Tor Wennesland as the new
Special Coordinator and reaffirm our full support.
The Republic of Korea encourages the Israeli and Palestinian leaders to
resume meaningful negotiations towards a two-State solution in line with the relevant
Security Council resolutions as well as international law and bilateral agreements.
We further express our support for efforts to resume credible peace talks, including
those of the Middle East Quartet, and join the Secretary-General in calling for
practical steps to enable the parties to re-engage.
We welcome the respective agreements between Israel and the United Arab
Emirates, the Kingdom of Bahrain, the Republic of the Sudan and the Kingdom
of Morocco. We hope those developments will contribute to easing tensions and
enhancing stability in the region.
The Republic of Korea expresses its grave concern about all acts of violence
against civilians, expresses serious concern about the reports of hostilities continuing
over the past few months and joins in the international call for an immediate end to
violence and incitement.
The Republic of Korea emphasizes the importance of respecting resolution
2334 (2016) and international law. My delegation believes that confidence-building
measures are urgently required to create a more favourable environment for dialogue
between the parties to achieve sustainable peace. We encourage Israelis and
Palestinians to intensify efforts to foster dialogue and cooperation.
We welcome the presidential decree issued by President Abbas to hold
legislative, presidential and Palestinian National Council elections and reiterate that
unity and consensus among the Palestinian people are critical to achieving peace and
an independent, sovereign and democratic State.
The Republic of Korea reaffirms our full support for the efforts of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
to improve the humanitarian situation in Palestine, particularly in the light of the
difficult challenges posed by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, and
also recognizes its efforts to improve its own accountability. In 2020, the Republic of
Korea provided $1 million to support UNRWA’s humanitarian activities in the areas
of primary and vocational education, health care and relief services, and around $4
million to support Palestinians, including through in-kind donations of COVID-19
test kits, as well as bilateral development cooperation projects.
The Republic of Korea, a staunch supporter of efforts by the international
community and the Security Council to create peace and stability in the region,
reaffirms its commitment to continuing its constructive role to that end.

92/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

Annex 43
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saudi Arabia to the
United Nations, Abdallah Al-Mouallimi
[Original: Arabic]
Allow me at the outset to congratulate you, Mr. President, for the assumption
by Tunisia of the Presidency of the Security Council for this month and express
my country’s appreciation for your outstanding efforts and constructive role on the
Council. You have brought outstanding and positive enhancements to the work of the
Council, and we wish you all success.
I should also like to take this opportunity to thank the previous United Nations
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Nikolai Mladenov, for his
tireless efforts during his tenure, and to welcome his successor, Tor Wennesland and
with him well in his new post.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is founded on a great legacy of principles
and constant elements that underpin its foreign policy, at the top of which is its
permanent ambition to achieve peaceful solutions to conflicts, while preventing their
escalation by undertaking mediation efforts in order to achieve that noble objective.
The Kingdom affirms its commitment to peace as a strategic choice, its concern for
the territorial integrity, sovereignty and integrity of Arab lands, and its refusal to
accept anything that harms the stability of the region.
The resolution of the Palestinian question is the greatest challenge facing
regional stability, security, prosperity and development. In addition, regional forces
are playing a destructive role that poses a major threat to security and stability.
Those forces are pursuing their expansionist agendas and seeking to extend their
influence without regard to the adverse consequences of their hostile policies on
the States of the region, through the use of armed militias, terrorist groups and
sectarian divisions. Unless these issues are addressed, the region will be unable
to move forward to a better future for its peoples, who are suffering the agonies of
divisions, conflict and war.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia affirms its consistent approach and firmly
established positions with regard to the Palestinian people. That issue is at
the top of the Kingdom’s priorities and concerns. The Kingdom stands with the
Palestinian people in favour of a just and comprehensive solution in accordance
with internationally recognized resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative adopted by
the 2002 Arab Summit Conference, which calls for full withdrawal by Israel from
all Arab territories occupied since 1967 and the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State with Jerusalem as its capital.
My country’s Government condemns Israel’s decision to approve the
construction of 800 new settlement units in the West Bank; it reiterates its
categorical rejection of that measure as a fresh violation of internationally
recognized resolutions, a threat to peace, and a step that undermines the two-State
solution. It is clear from this step that Israel is continuing its aggression against the
Palestinian people with no regard to the suffering being undergone by generation
upon generation of Palestinians, from land appropriation, violation of dignity and
deprivation of freedoms to displacement and ultimately attempt to make these hostile
policies legitimate.
The Kingdom reiterates its call on the international community and the
Security Council to stand firm against these Israeli policies and to move the
peace process forward to reach an agreement that restores the Palestinian people’s
21-0141093/103

S/2021/91

legitimate rights. A just and comprehensive peace is the strategic choice, not policies
of fait accompli and brute force.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia condemns the cowardly terrorist attack on
Aden airport timed to coincide with the arrival of a plane carrying members of
the new Government of Yemen. It also condemns the terrorist attack on Ma'ashiq
Palace. These terrorist acts are aimed not only at the Yemeni Government, but
squarely at the hopes and aspirations of the brotherly Yemeni people. They are
an attempt to undermine the Riyadh Agreement, which Yemenis adopted to unite
ranks, restore normality, security and stability, and reach a comprehensive political
solution in Yemen.
My Government supports the efforts of the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen to reach a full ceasefire and begin a comprehensive political
process to reach the desired resolution based on the three references, which
are the Gulf Initiative and its implementing mechanisms, the outcomes of the
Yemeni National Dialogue, and resolution 2216 (2015). The Iranian-backed Houthi
insurrectionist militia bears responsibility for the repercussions of the Yemeni crisis
and the worsening humanitarian situation in Yemen. The militia favours narrow
political interests over the interests of the Yemeni people and regional security and
stability. It serves the interests of the Iranian regime’s expansionism. We call on the
Security Council to stand firmly against Houthi violations of the relevant Security
Council resolutions and repeated attacks against the territory and population of
Saudi Arabia.
The Kingdom is also continuing its efforts to end the suffering of the brotherly
Yemeni people and support the Yemeni economy. It has put forward numerous
initiatives and measures to support and improve economic and humanitarian
conditions in Yemen. Since the beginning of the crisis, the Kingdom has provided
Yemen with some $17 billion.
By contrast, Iran continues to pose a major threat to stability all over the
region, including in Yemen. Its intervention in Yemen has directly contributed to
the obstruction of United Nations efforts to reach a political solution. It has provided
all kinds of support to the insurrectionist Houthi militia in order to stir up divisions
and undermine the security of the region. Perhaps the best indication of that is its
appointment of a military man who is a member of the Iranian Revolutionary Guard
as its ambassador to the Houthi insurrectionist militia, in a flagrant violation of
resolution 2216 (2015), the relevant international laws and diplomatic norms.
My country’s Government calls for the international community to cooperate
to address the threat posed by the policies of Iran to international peace and security
with a comprehensive approach that includes not only its nuclear programme but
also its expansionist and aggressive activities — including its military and logistical
support to terrorist militias — and brings an end to its activities that threaten the
security and stability in the region in Yemen, Syria, Lebanon and other Arab States.
Failure to confront these activities will encourage Iran to move forward with its
destructive policies. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia believes in the principle of
dialogue and the peaceful resolution of problems and disputes. However, it believes
that the calls for dialogue should be accompanied by a halt to threats and hostile acts
on the ground.
My country’s Government also hopes that the signing of the Ula Statement
will turn over a new leaf for the security and stability of the region and its peoples.
That statement stressed the close and deep-rooted ties among the members of the
Cooperation Council of the Arab States of the Gulf, which are founded on the Islamic
faith and a common destiny.
94/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

Annex 44
Statement by the Permanent Mission of South Africa to the
United Nations
We thank you, Sir, for convening today’s debate.
South Africa is gravely concerned about the recent pronouncements by
the Government of Israel to further advance its settlement plans in the occupied
West Bank. It is widely acknowledged by the United Nations membership and the
Security Council that Israeli settlements have no legal validity and constitute a
f lagrant violation of international law, pursuant to resolution 2334 (2016), adopted
with near unanimity.
Not only are those actions in flagrant violation of adopted General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions and international law, they also pose one of the
gravest impediments to peace between the parties and undermine the possibility of
a two-State solution. They further illustrate blatant disregard by Israel for both the
long-standing peace process and the tireless efforts of the international community
to resolve this decades-long intractable conflict.
We implore the Security Council to take action against this illegal act, and
we call for the full implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) and all previous
resolutions on the question of Palestine. Time and time again we have witnessed
gross double standards with regard to impunity and accountability on this issue and
on other matters related to Israeli violations of Security Council resolutions, such
as the matters of Lebanon and the Golan Heights. This undermines the credibility
of the Council.
We urge the Council to help safeguard the rights of the Palestinian people,
protect their land and property and provide the necessary impartial support in order
to achieve a just and lasting solution to the conflict. This open wound and blight on
the conscience of the Council and the international community has been allowed to
fester, in contrast to progress made in a number of other conflict areas around the
world, with the call by the Secretary-General for a global ceasefire and reprieve
during this challenging time as we confront a global pandemic. Instead, in addition
to the burden of occupation and oppression, the people of Palestine must now also
endure the further adverse impact of coronavirus disease.
South Africa welcomes the decree issued by President Mahmoud Abbas to
hold legislative, presidential and Palestinian National Council elections in Palestine
later this year. This demonstrates the will of the Palestinians people to endure as a
democracy despite the inordinate challenges it faces. We furthermore welcome the
progress made in the reconciliation talks between the various political formations
in Palestine and firmly believe that those important steps illustrate Palestinians’
commitment to peace and statehood.
In conclusion, we urge the Security Council and the international community
to support efforts aimed at the establishment of a viable Palestinian State, existing
side by side in peace with Israel, within internationally recognized borders and based
on 4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in line with all relevant
United Nations resolutions, international law and internationally agreed parameters.

21-0141095/103

S/2021/91

Annex 45
Statement by the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Expatriates of Syria, Bashar Al-Ja’afari
[Original: Arabic]
Allow me once again to express our great pleasure at the assumption by
our sister State Tunisia of the presidency of the Security Council and our great
appreciation for your successful and distinguished management of the Council’s
business for this month.
I also congratulate Tor Wennesland on his appointment as United Nations
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and wish him success in this
extremely sensitive and important task.
Some 54 years have passed since Israel occupied Palestinian territory, the
occupied Syrian Golan and the Shaba’a Farmlands in southern Lebanon. Despite
horrendous suffering in the course of those long decades, the Israeli occupation
and the threat it poses to peace and security in the Middle East and the world as a
whole persist to this very day. That is a clear indication that the Security Council has
failed to carry out its responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security by compelling Israel to respect its resolutions, comply with the will of the
international community and end its occupation, which is the principal factor that
perpetuates tension and conflicts in our region.
For 54 years and counting, the Security Council has failed to call the Israeli
occupation authorities to account for their hostile acts, violations of international
law and the Charter of the United Nations, and systematic and repressive criminal
practices against our people in occupied Arab territories. That is due to the protective
umbrella provided to Israel by certain Western States that are permanent members
of the Security Council, in particular the United States of America, which has
shirked its obligations and responsibilities, which include upholding the Charter
and maintaining international peace and security, and turned its membership into
a platform for protecting and prolonging the Israeli occupation and shielding its
representatives from any accountability or punishment for their war crimes, crimes
against humanity and gross violations of human rights.
That is not all. We saw an unprecedented bias on the part of the previous
United States Administration towards the Israeli occupation and its various schemes.
It approved provocative and illegal unilateral measures intended to alter the political
and legal status quo in occupied Arab territories. However, those United States
actions and decisions have been met with ringing condemnation from the Syrian
Arab Republic and the overwhelming majority of Member States. Trump’s decisions
on Jerusalem and the Golan are nothing more than unilateral acts coming from a
party that has neither the status nor the political, legal or moral capacity to decide
the fates of peoples or dispose of lands that are an integral part of the territories of
the Syrian Arab Republic and occupied Palestine.
The contempt of the Israeli occupation authorities for international law and
internationally recognized resolutions has grown to an unprecedented pitch. The
Israeli occupation authorities continue to intensify their attacks on the territory
of the Syrian Arab Republic, in flagrant violation of resolution 350 (1974), on the
Separation of Forces Agreement between the two sides. Recent days have seen an
increase in the frequency of Israeli attacks on my country. The most recent occurred
on Friday, 22 January 2021, when Israel perpetrated a fresh attack near the city
of Hama, resulting in the deaths of a father, a mother and two children, injury to
96/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

four other citizens of the same family and the destruction of a number of homes of
innocent civilians.
This criminal aggression is just one more in a string of over 50 Israeli attacks
in less than a year that resulted in loss of life among a large number of civilians and
destruction of property. At the same time, the Israeli occupation authorities continue
to practice their escalating State terrorism. They have stepped up their systematic
and gross violations of human rights and international humanitarian law in the
Syrian Golan, which has been occupied since 1967, with the aim of entrenching their
control and imposing their will. Their crimes include settlement building, racial
discrimination, arbitrary arrest, torture, displacement, demographic alteration, theft
of the Golan’s natural resources and attempts to impose Israeli citizenship through
threats and blackmail, including by pressuring Syrian students coming from their
studies in Europe to spend their holidays in the occupied Syrian Golan to accept
Israeli citizenship by threatening to prevent them from returning to Europe to
complete their studies if they refuse.
In that same vein, the occupation authorities recently set up facilities in the
so-called “Trump Plateau” settlement, located on land belonging to the village
of Qunaytirah in the occupied Syrian Golan. During December last year and the
current month, preparations were made to move 20 Israeli settler families into the
new settlement as part of a policy of settlement expansion coupled with erasing
the identity of the Syrian Arab Golan. We would also be remiss not to mention the
appropriation by the occupation authorities of our people’s land and property in the
occupied Syrian Golan for giant wind turbines. Our people, who are suffering under
the occupation, opposed that scheme through a large-scale popular movement that
the occupying forces have met with unprecedented violence that has already resulted
in a number of injuries and arrests.
The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic calls on the international
community to pressure Israel, the occupying Power, to immediately and without delay
reopen the Qunaytirah crossing, which is the artery that connects our people in the
occupied Syrian Golan to their motherland and the lung through which they breathe.
The Israeli occupation forces’ policy of arbitrary arrest and sham trials is an
integral part of a catalogue of Israeli crimes and human rights violations against
Syrian civilian citizens in the occupied Syrian Golan stretching back over the more
than five decades that Israel has occupied the Syrian Golan. Syria reiterates that it
rejects the arbitrary and unjust ruling issued by the Israeli occupation forces on 10
June 2020 handing down a sentence of three years’ imprisonment to the patriotic
activist Nihal Suleiman Al-Maqt, sister of the released prisoner Sidqi Al-Maqt, who
is from the town of Majdal Shams in the occupied Syrian Golan. We note that the
occupation forces recently demanded that Ms. Al-Maqt pay a sizable monetary fine.
They also changed her prison sentence to include long daily hours of hard labour.
The Israeli occupation authorities sent a patrol to arrest Ms. Al-Maqt and take her to
the location where the hard labour was to be served.
Last August, Ms. Al-Maqt was forcibly transferred to a place that effectively
constituted her prison inside occupied Palestine, away from her native occupied
Syrian Golan, with the aim of separating her from her land and her family. The
Israeli occupation authorities are also subjecting Ms. Al-Maqt to arbitrary and
brutal practices aimed at pressuring her, breaking her will and subjugating her to
the occupying Power. The same thing happened to her brother the released prisoner
Sidqi Al-Maqt, the Syrian Mandela, whom the Israeli occupation authorities held in
the bowels of their prisons for 30 years.

21-0141097/103

S/2021/91

On 12 January 2021, on behalf of my country’s Government, I wrote to His
Excellency the Secretary-General of the United Nations to enlist his good offices to
help free Ms. Nihal Suleiman Al-Maqt and enable her to return to her family and
land in the village of Majdal Shams in the occupied Syrian Golan. I sent a similar
letter to Mr. Tor Wennesland, United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process. We look forward to receiving their responses.
In that regard, the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic reiterates its
call on the Security Council to take urgent action to ensure the implementation
of resolution 497 (1981) and compel the Israeli occupation entity to end its illegal
settlement practices and repressive measures against our people in the occupied
Syrian Golan and withdraw from the entire occupied Golan to the line of 4 June 1967.
The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic repeatedly expressed its strong
protests against the biased and non-objective approach taken by Nickolay Mladenov,
the previous United Nations Special Coordinator for the Peace Process, in his
periodic briefings to the Security Council. He insisted on ignoring the situation in
the occupied Syrian Golan, the latest aggressive criminal practices being engaged
in by the Israeli occupation authorities and the illegal decisions of the United States
Administration.
Allow me to take this opportunity to invite Mr. Wennesland, the new United
Nations Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, to acknowledge the mistakes
of his predecessor, correct his course and stick impartially, professionally and
transparently to his mandate. We hope that he will make the situation in the occupied
Syrian Golan and the escalating Israeli practices against our people there a priority
of his mandate and efforts.
In conclusion, the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic reaffirms that,
in order to ensure stability in the Middle East and preserve the credibility of the
United Nations, measures must be taken to implement all international resolutions
aimed at ending the Israeli occupation of Arab territories, including the Syrian Arab
Golan, and compelling Israel to withdraw to the line of 4 June 1967, in accordance
with the relevant United Nations resolutions, including in particular resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973), 497 (1981) and 2334 (2016). Syria also reiterates that the Golan
is an integral part of Syrian territory and that it will work to recover it by all means
guaranteed by international law and practice, because its right to do so is eternal and
cannot be extinguished by the passage of time.
My country’s Government underlines its support for the right of the Palestinian
people to determine their own destiny and establish an independent State on all their
national soil, with Jerusalem as its capital, while guaranteeing the right of refugees
to return to their homes, in accordance with resolution 194 (III) of 1948. My country
also stresses that any decisions, measures or deals that are inconsistent with the
relevant United Nations resolutions or fail to safeguard the established rights of the
Palestinians are not remotely viable and should be rejected in form and substance.
My Government renews its call to grant the State of Palestine full membership in the
United Nations.

98/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

Annex 46
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the United
Nations, Feridun Sinirlioğlu
At the outset, I would like to congratulate Mr. Tor Wennesland on the
assumption of his role as the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and the Secretary-General’s Personal Representative to the Palestine Liberation
Organization and the Palestinian Authority. We trust that, with his extensive
experience on this file, Mr. Wennesland will make a valuable contribution to
efforts towards reaching a negotiated two-State solution. Turkey will support Mr.
Wennesland in his endeavours to that end.
Unfortunately, recent developments on the ground do not bode well for the
prospects for ending half a century of occupation. Last year was marked not only by
the devastating impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak, with dire
consequences for Palestinians, but also by record levels of violations of resolution
2334 (2016), rendering countless Palestinians homeless through the systematic
demolitions of their homes. The number of structures demolished in the occupied
territories and the number of Palestinians displaced as a result have reached their
highest level of the past four years. At a time when we most need solidarity, the
unabated continuation of such oppressive policies is disheartening.
The ability of the Palestinians to fight the pandemic has been undermined
by Israel’s continued disregard for its commitments to halt demolitions and cease
targeting critical facilities during the COVID-19 crisis. We are also gravely
concerned about reports of international human rights organizations that Israel does
not provide COVID-19 vaccines to Palestinians in the occupied territories. We would
like to remind Israel that, as the occupying Power, it is responsible for the health of
the Palestinian population in those territories.
As documented in United Nations reports, Israel stepped up its unilateral
actions in the occupied Palestinian territories at unprecedented levels, including
through the expansion of the illegal settlements. In 2020 alone, Israel approved
or made plans for more than 12,000 housing units. Facts on the ground speak for
themselves — Israel clearly did not abandon its annexation plans after the so-called
normalization agreements.
The latest example of Israel’s illegal steps as the occupying Power, in complete
disregard for international law and relevant United Nations resolutions, was the
approval of nearly 800 new illegal settlements in the West Bank. This worrisome
development was denounced by the Secretary-General and the European Union.
Soon after, Israel announced tenders for the construction of new illegal settlements
consisting of over 2,500 housing units — once again blatantly disregarding the
international community.
This series of actions amounts to a methodical plan of making a future
contiguous Palestinian State physically impossible, effectively obliterating the twoState vision. Israel also continues its attempts to change the status of Jerusalem, in
violation of international law and relevant United Nations resolutions. These actions
undermine the international parameters for a viable solution.
In order to find a just solution to the Israel-Palestine conflict on the basis
of internationally recognized parameters, it is incumbent upon the Council to stop
Israel from further expanding its illegal settlements. The international community
must clearly demonstrate that Israel’s illegal actions will not be tolerated. Israel has
been operating a largely cost-free occupation for 53 years. If impunity continues to

21-0141099/103

S/2021/91

be indulged, it is unrealistic to expect anything other than the expansion of illegal
settlements for a future de jure annexation claim.
Turkey supports a two-State solution that would lead to the establishment
of an independent, sovereign and contiguous Palestinian State based on the 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. The United Nations needs to take action
for the resumption of negotiations with a view to revitalizing the peace process. We
support the call of President Abbas to the Secretary-General for the holding of an
international conference to launch a genuine peace process.
Achieving intra-Palestinian reconciliation is an urgent necessity for a
negotiated two-State solution. We therefore appreciate the progress made in the intraPalestinian reconciliation process and the will to implement the agreement reached
during the negotiations that we hosted in Istanbul with regard to the holding of
elections. We are pleased to see that President Abbas has issued a presidential decree
on legislative, presidential and Palestinian National Council elections in Palestine.
That is a crucial step towards Palestinian unity. We urge the United Nations and the
international community to support Palestinian reconciliation and the elections.
Measures taken by Israel to consolidate its unlawful annexation of Jerusalem
and its surroundings threaten the legal status of the city, as well as its demographic
composition and its historically multicultural and multireligious character. The
international community should refrain from taking steps that are tantamount
to condoning those illegal actions. We are concerned about the intention of third
countries to open an embassy in Jerusalem or relocate their embassies from Tel Aviv
to Jerusalem.
The final status of Jerusalem will be part and parcel of the comprehensive
solution to the conflict. Opening an embassy in Jerusalem constitutes a clear violation
of international law, including United Nations resolutions. We note that resolution
478 (1980) calls for the withdrawal of all diplomatic missions from Jerusalem, and
that General Assembly resolution ES-10/19 demands, in its paragraphs 2 and 1,
respectively,
“that all States comply with Security Council resolutions regarding the Holy
City of Jerusalem, and not recognize any actions or measures contrary to
those resolutions”
and
“calls upon all States to refrain from the establishment of diplomatic missions
in the Holy City of Jerusalem, pursuant to Council resolution 478 (1980)”.
The situation in Gaza continues to be a stain on humankind. The illegal
Israeli blockade of the Gaza Strip has entered its thirteenth year. The latest report
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development on the cost of the
blockade (see A/75/310) reveals staggering economic losses. The cumulative cost
of the blockade, together with the military operations, amounts to $16.7 billion —
equivalent to six times the gross domestic product of Gaza. Today Gaza has the
world’s highest unemployment rate, with half of its population living below the
poverty line. This devastating economic downturn is compounded by a colossal
43 per cent growth in both population and population density. Gaza’s population
density, dilapidated infrastructure and chronic shortage of medical supplies and
hospital beds significantly increase the risk of a major COVID-19 outbreak there.
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) continues to operate in extremely difficult circumstances, and
the challenges it faces have further increased due to COVID-19. As a result of the
funding shortfall, the Agency was forced to curtail critical vaccination campaigns
100/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

and withhold staff salaries. Since the income forecast for UNRWA has not improved
in 2021, there is a growing risk of more drastic measures to prevent a financial
collapse of the Agency. UNRWA is indispensable for providing vital health, relief
and emergency assistance to millions. During COVID-19, the services provided by
UNRWA have become a matter of survival for many Palestinians. It is our collective
and moral duty to step up our support to the Agency.
Revitalizing the Middle East peace process is essential if we are to fulfil
our long-overdue promise to the Palestinian people — life with dignity. It is also
critical for the stability of our region. The international community has a key role
to play. We must collectively help revitalize negotiations for a two-State solution in
accordance with international law and relevant United Nations resolutions.

21-01410101/103

S/2021/91

Annex 47
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the United Arab Emirates
to the United Nations
[Original: English and Arabic]
The United Arab Emirates is pleased to submit this statement to the United
Nations on behalf of the Group of Arab States.
The Arab Group welcomes the new Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, Mr. Tor Wennesland, and wishes him success in his new position.
Additionally, the Arab Group expresses its appreciation to Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
former Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his tireless efforts
over the years.
The Arab Group values the efforts of the Republic of Tunisia, President of
the Security Council for this month, in seeking to make today’s discussion different
from previous debates by focusing on mobilizing international support to achieve a
peaceful and just solution to the Palestinian question.
Despite the international community’s efforts, over decades, to support the
parties in reaching a peaceful, just and comprehensive solution to the Palestinian
question, those efforts have repeatedly faltered, causing greater suffering for
civilians and escalating tensions and violence. Moreover, prospects to make progress
towards a two-State solution based on the 1967 borders are dim.
In that connection, we recall the signing of the Oslo Accords, the establishment
of the Middle East Quartet, the launching of the Arab Peace Initiative, the adoption
of hundreds of resolutions and the dozens of international summits and conferences
convened.
It is therefore imperative for the international community to seriously consider
how to build new international momentum to break the deadlock in the political process
and how to relaunch a credible peace process based on international resolutions and
internationally agreed terms of reference, which remains indispensable.
In that context, the Arab Group reiterates the need to put an end to the illegal
practices that threaten the achievement of a two-State solution based on the 1967
borders, and to create a suitable environment to return to serious negotiations, within
a specific time frame, in order to end the Israeli occupation and to achieve a just and
comprehensive peace.
That requires the implementation of all relevant Security Council resolutions,
particularly resolution 2334 (2016), and the cessation of illegal measures that impede
the peace process, foremost of which is the unprecedented level of building and
expansion of settlements. It further requires Israel to completely abandon all plans
to annex Palestinian lands due to their destructive impact on the two-State solution.
In that regard, the Arab Group condemns Israel’s recent announcement to move
forward with plans to build thousands of settlement units in the occupied Palestinian
territory. We call for the end of the demolition and confiscation of Palestinian
property, the forcible displacement of the population, the targeting of civilians by
the occupying forces and settlers, the unjust siege of the Gaza Strip, the obstruction
of the movement of Palestinian citizens and the arbitrary arrest of thousands of
Palestinians. The Arab Group rejects Israeli’s unilateral measures to change the
identity of Jerusalem, in violation of international law and relevant Security Council
resolutions. We stress the need to preserve the historical and legal status quo of the
holy sites in Jerusalem, especially the Al-Aqsa Mosque and Al-Haram Al-Sharif.
102/103

21-01410

S/2021/91

Moreover, while stressing the centrality of the Palestine issue to Arab countries
and peoples, the Arab Group reaffirms its support for President Mahmoud Abbas’
initiative and his call on the Secretary-General to work in coordination with the
Middle East Quartet and the Security Council to convene an international conference
that would mobilize the efforts of international stakeholders and the countries of the
region to activate an international multilateral mechanism, under the auspices of the
United Nations, to sponsor the peace process in the Middle East.
In the context of calls for strengthening coordination between the Security
Council and the League of Arab States, the Arab Group supports Mr. Mladenov’s
words during his last briefing to the Council, on 21 December 2020:
“The Middle East Quartet — alongside Arab partners — and Israeli and
Palestinian leaders must work together to return to the path of meaningful
negotiations.” (S/2020/1275, annex I)
We reiterate that the Arab Group is ready to work with the Security Council and the
Middle East Quartet to reach a just and comprehensive solution to the Palestinian
question in keeping with the Arab Peace Initiative.
The Arab Group also expresses its concern about the deteriorating
humanitarian, social and economic conditions in the occupied Palestinian territory,
which have worsened due to the novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
The latest United Nations assessment of humanitarian needs shows that about 47 per
cent of the Palestinian population is currently in need of assistance. Accordingly,
the Arab Group stresses the need to support the Palestinian people in achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals, including by supporting United Nations agencies
such as the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East.
Furthermore, the Arab Group stresses the need to provide COVID-19 vaccines
to the Palestinian people, as well as the necessary medical supplies and equipment to
combat the pandemic. In that context, the Arab Group affirms Israel’s responsibility
as an occupying Power.
Moreover, the Arab Group stresses the importance of finalizing the Palestinian
national reconciliation process and enabling the Palestinian Government to fully
assume its responsibilities in the Gaza Strip fully. In that context, the Arab Group
welcomes the presidential decree, issued by Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas,
to hold legislative and presidential elections, in addition to elections for the National
Council of the Palestine Liberation Organization, this year.
We hope that the United Nations, the Middle East Quartet and the international
community will support those elections by ensuring that Israel will not obstruct
them, especially in East Jerusalem. We further stress the importance of supporting
the political participation of women and youth throughout the electoral process. The
Arab Group also supports Palestine’s full membership in the United Nations in order
to enhance its legal and international standing.
In conclusion, the Arab Group calls on the Security Council to assume its
responsibilities of maintaining international peace and security and ending the
Israeli occupation of all Palestinian and Arab territories. The Arab Group affirms
that there is no alternative to the two-State solution and the independence of a
sovereign Palestinian State based on the 4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital.

21-01410103/103
