S/PV.7698

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7698th meeting

Thursday, 26 May 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Aboulatta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Egypt)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Stehelin
Mr. Akahori
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Taula
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Seck
Mr. De la Calle García
Mr. Vitrenko
Ms. Mulvein
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-14847 (E)
*1614847*

S/PV.7698

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

a democratic State based on the principles of inclusion,
human rights and the rule of law.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance with
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
I invite the representative of Libya to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Prosecutor Bensouda.
Ms. Bensouda: It is a distinct honour to once again
be at the Council’s table to present my Office’s eleventh
report on the situation in Libya pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), unanimously adopted in 2011. This honour
is all the more pronounced given that I address the
Council under your presidency, Sir, having just returned
from a most productive official visit to Cairo, where I
engaged with relevant Government ministries on issues
of mutual concern, including the situation in Libya, its
spillover effects and the threat of Da’esh on Egypt and,
more generally, on the Middle East and North Africa.
I would be remiss if I did not benefit from this
occasion to reiterate my sincere appreciation for the
warm hospitality extended to me and my delegation
in Cairo. I assure you, Mr President, of my Office’s
readiness to continue our constructive dialogue with
the Egyptian authorities and to follow-up on the
matters so helpfully explored in Cairo. I am confident
that my Office’s engagement with Egypt will lead to
positive results.
The past six months have witnessed significant
developments in Libya’s slow and difficult process
towards the establishment of a unity Government. On
17 December 2015, participants in the political dialogue
representing broad segments of Libyan society signed
a United Nations brokered agreement on forming a
Government of national unity. Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon expressed the hope that the signing of the
agreement will put Libya back on the path of building
2/17

26/05/2016

It is equally my Office’s hope that the signing of
the agreement marks the beginning of the end of the
long period of turmoil and conflict in Libya. Justice,
accountability and the deterrent effects of the law
remain critical components for achieving lasting
peace in Libya and my Office stands ready to work
collaboratively with the Government of National
Accord in its efforts to build a secure, peaceful and
prosperous Libya for all Libyan people.
To that end, I encourage the Government of National
Accord to give priority to devising effective plans and
strategies to address atrocity crimes and to invest in
the relevant national institutions responsible for such
critical work. This will demonstrate, in concrete
terms, that justice and accountability constitute key
Government priorities underpinning efforts to ensure
peace and stability in Libya, and that the victims
will have the opportunity to seek redress through the
Libyan courts.
Similarly, over the same period, my Office’s
investigations into the Libya situation have progressed,
albeit at a slower pace than we would have liked due
to a lack of sufficient resources and the prevailing
precarious security situation in the country. Despite
these challenges, our investigations are continuing to
yield positive results, in large part due to the cooperation
of the Libyan Prosecutor-General’s Office, from which
my Office has received numerous documents pursuant
to the memorandum of understanding entered into by
my Office and the Libyan Government in 2013.
Notwithstanding limited resources and the inability
at the present time to conduct in situ investigations in
Libya, my modest Libya team has been able to pursue
leads and other avenues for collecting evidence through
our investigations. My Office is continuing to carefully
analyse and assess the evidence in our possession and
to determine whether the requisite legal standards are
met to request additional arrest warrants. In short,
notwithstanding the numerous challenges that we face,
my Office remains firmly committed to its mandate
vis-à-vis Libya and will continue to be focused and
industrious in the fulfilment of that mandate.
As highlighted in my latest report, the situation
in Libya requires collaboration and coordination
between all relevant actors at the national, regional
and international levels. The support of the Council
16-14847

26/05/2016

The situation in Libya

remains equally crucial. Success in Libya will therefore
depend on the collective determination and will of all
relevant actors to meaningfully contribute to the course
of bringing perpetrators to justice and, by so doing,
help deter the commission of future crimes.
The threat of Da’esh and other groups proclaiming
allegiance to Al-Qaida remains real, and the
consequences are too costly to be ignored. They include
instability and the dire humanitarian situation in Libya,
which in turn result in mass migration and the spread
of terrorism in the country and the region. I reiterate
my previous calls on all national and international law
enforcement agencies that are working on Libya to
contact my Office and join it in its efforts to strengthen
the network of law enforcement agencies that aim to
contribute to bringing an end to civilian suffering and
destruction in Libya.
I remain convinced that increased cooperation
between and among relevant actors, as well as
coordinated investigative activities, are key to tackling
national, transnational and international crimes that
continue to plague Libya and to ensuring that those
responsible for committing these crimes have no safe
haven anywhere. In this regard, I am particularly
pleased by the interest shown and efforts made thus
far by national law enforcement agencies to coordinate
with my Office, with each other and with the Libyan
authorities. The international community has invested
significant capital into restoring security in the country.
While nascent, that growing network is beginning
to take shape as it explores efforts to share essential
information and strategies for tackling criminality in
Libya. Those who finance or encourage the commission
of grave crimes in Libya must understand clearly that
they will be held accountable.
As the Government of National Accord assumes its
duties, we recall that Libya remains under a positive
legal obligation to immediately arrest and surrender
Mr. Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the International
Criminal Court (ICC) — a fact noted by the Council
in resolution 2238 (2015). We urge the Government
of National Accord to prioritize the transfer of
Mr. Al-Qadhafi to its own custody and facilitate his
surrender to the Court. It is also important for the
Government of National Accord to consult with the
Pre-Trial Chamber on issues relating to the surrender
of Mr. Al-Qadhafi and to seek assistance from the
international community, as deemed appropriate, on

S/PV.7698

how best to facilitate the surrender of Mr. Al-Qadhafi
to the Court without further delay.
The unique factual circumstances of this case
and the lack of progress also justify the adoption of
complementary, exceptional and innovative measures.
It bears emphasizing that Libya has submitted to the
Court that “Mr. Al-Qadhafi continues to be in custody
in Zintan and is presently ‘unavailable’ to the Libyan
State”. As such, as part of its ongoing efforts to enhance
prospects for Mr. Al-Qadhafi’s surrender, my Office
recently filed a request with Pre-Trial Chamber I for
an order directing the Registry to transmit the request
for arrest and surrender of Mr. Al-Qadhafi directly to
Mr. Al-’Ajami Al-’Atiri. Mr Al-’Atiri is the commander
of the battalion that is detaining Mr. Al-Qadhafi
in Zintan. The Pre-Trial Chamber is yet to issue its
decision on this request. In the event that the request
is granted, the Office hopes that Mr Al-’Atiri and the
battalion he commands will cooperate and surrender
Mr. Al-Qadhafi to the custody of the Court to be tried.
Should he fail to comply, the Council should consider
adopting appropriate measures to ensure compliance
with the Chamber’s order.
In relation to Mr. Abdullah Al-Senussi, the Office
has received a copy of the written judgment of the
Libyan court in relation to his case and has conducted a
preliminary review of the judgement. At this time, the
Office is not in possession of facts that would satisfy
it that new facts have arisen that negate the basis on
which Pre-Trial Chamber I found Mr. Al-Senussi’s
case inadmissible. The Office will continue to
review its assessment if and when new relevant facts
become available.
20. While the Appeals Chamber has recognized
that, in the context of admissibility proceedings, the
ICC is not primarily called upon to decide whether
domestic proceedings violate certain requirements of
human rights or domestic law, it is incumbent upon
the Government of National Accord to ensure that the
highest standards for investigations and prosecutions
are met. In this context, I am encouraged that arrest
warrants have been issued for those individuals
suspected of committing crimes, including torture, in
Al-Hadba prison. Follow-up actions for their arrest
and prosecution must be undertaken. I will continue to
encourage and follow the Libyan authorities’ efforts to
investigate the allegations of torture at theprison and to
bring those found responsible to justice.

16-148473/17

S/PV.7698

The situation in Libya

My Office remains concerned about ongoing
civilian deaths, with reported executions by Da’esh
accounting for the majority of these, although civilian
deaths continue to also result from the conflict
between Libya Dawn and Libyan National Army.
Moreover, abductions, detentions and ill treatment in
detention centres continue to be reported on all sides
of the conflict.
The Mediterranean-Libya migratory route to
Europe remains a popular option among refugees and
migrants, who are particularly vulnerable to violence,
sexual violence and ill-treatment in Libya. The
detention of thousands of migrants continues to be a
source of financing for many militant groups in Libya.
We as the international community must take a closer
look at who profits from criminal activities in Libya,
and take coordinated steps to prevent further violations.
This must be a priority for all who are affected by the
criminal trafficking of human beings.
For its part, the Office continues to carefully
evaluate how to best utilize its limited resources to
maximize its impact on the present situation in Libya.
While the Office is continuing its investigations into
officials linked to the former reign of Muammar
Al-Qadhafi, it is also focused on ongoing crimes in
Libya. Despite resource constraints, the Office is
assessing the potential to expand its investigations into
those new crimes, including those alleged to have been
committed by Da’esh and Ansar Al-Sharia. However,
the Office recalls and stresses that States have the
primary responsibility to investigate and prosecute
their nationals who have joined the ranks of Da’esh,
Ansar Al-Sharia and other militias operating in Libya.
I must reiterate that, until my team is able to carry
out investigations in Libya and the issue of resources is
resolved, the Office will simply be unable to advance the
investigations as rapidly as desired. We are optimistic,
however, that in the coming months we will be able to
resume our functions in Libya and to accelerate our
efforts to bring to justice those responsible for Rome
Statute crimes, in coordination with key partners in and
outside of Libya.
I would like to acknowledge and commend the
critically important work being carried out by the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL).
I had the pleasure of receiving the Head of UNSMIL
and Special Representative of the Secretary General,
Mr. Martin Kobler, at The Hague earlier this week,
4/17

26/05/2016

and I canvassed the many areas where our respective
offices can enhance cooperation in accordance with our
independent mandates. Mr. Kobler and I both agreed
that accountability for grave crimes under the Rome
Statute was indispensable to stability and sustainable
peace in Libya. That recognition and meeting of the
minds must translate into concrete positive changes on
the ground. We are determined to do just that, in close
collaboration with the Government of National Accord.
I greatly appreciate the efforts of all States that
have engaged and cooperated with the Office in support
of our investigations in Libya, including neighbouring
Tunisia and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan. I also
encourage all States to intensify their efforts to support
investigations and prosecutions of Rome Statute crimes
alleged in Libya. Finally, I call upon all States that
have not responded to requests for assistance to do so
without further delay. State cooperation with the Office
is indispensable for the success of its work in Libya and
for all other situations under investigation.
Libya and the Libyan people deserve peace and
stability on which to secure and build their future.
They deserve the rule of law and by the law, rather
than lawlessness and the current climate of perpetual
insecurity and flux.
In conclusion, we must continue our work, albeit
under difficult circumstances. Where we work together
in an intelligent, reflective and coordinated manner,
we can help make a difference in restoring stability
in Libya. The Security Council and the international
community must stay committed to Libya and help it
emerge triumphant in the face of adversity.
Nations are not built overnight. But to last and to
withstand the challenges of the twenty-first century,
they must be built on strong foundations. Justice will
always serve as a central pillar.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Prosecutor
Bensouda for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of
the Council.
Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Ms. Bensouda for her briefing.
China has been watching closely the developments
in Libya. We support the political transition process
taking place in Libya under the good offices of the United
Nations. We are pleased to see that the Presidential
16-14847

26/05/2016

The situation in Libya

S/PV.7698

Council of the Libyan Government of National Accord
has arrived at the capital and begun its work. That is
important progress in the implementation of the Libyan
Political Agreement by all parties. We hope that all
parties in Libya will remain committed to a political
process that is Libyan-led and open to all parties,
effectively implement the Libyan Political Agreement
and insist on settling differences through negotiation,
with a view to the early restoration of national security
and stability. That is both a precondition and the basis
for achieving judicial justice in Libya.

the goal of a genuine democratic transition and the
establishment of lasting peace and stability.

China’s position with regard to international
judicial institutions remains unchanged.

We are concerned that the Office of the Prosecutor
is forced to deal with budgetary limits in expanding
its investigations into crimes that are currently taking
place in Libya, in particular those being committed by
such terrorist groups as Da’esh and Ansar Al-Sharia.
We therefore support the Prosecutor’s request for the
necessary resources to that end in order that she can
comply with her mandate.

Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome once again the presence here of Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, and we appreciate her detailed tenth briefing on
developments in Libya, presented in accordance with
resolution 1970 (2011).

We trust that the new Libyan authorities will meet
their commitment to provide justice to victims for
the crimes committed and that they will cooperate
with the Court’s Prosecutor to identify perpetrators,
irrespective of who they may be. In particular, we urge
the new Libyan Government to make Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi available to the Court and to provide
Abdullah Al-Senussi and other individuals with trials
that observe all guarantees of fairness.

As this is the first time that this issue is being taken
up since Uruguay became a member of the Security
Council, we would like to emphasize, as we have done
at other forums, our country’s full support for the role
of the International Criminal Court in strengthening
the rule of law at the international level by trying those
responsible for the most serious violations of the rights
that belong to all humankind, as set out in article 5 of
the Rome Statute, wherever they are committed. In that
regard, we call upon the States Members of the United
Nations that have not yet joined the Rome Statute to
accede to it in order to contribute to the universalization
of such an important instrument in combating impunity
and protecting all of the inhabitants of our planet against
atrocious crimes that pose a serious threat to peace and
security for all humankind.

In conclusion, we reiterate our commitment
to the work of the Office of the Prosecutor as it
investigates crimes committed in Libya. That work will
undoubtedly contribute to strengthening the rule of law
and the coalescence of a society in Libya that is more
just and inclusive and where there is full respect for
the rights and protections afforded to all inhabitants,
who for many years have seen their most fundamental
freedoms violated.

There have been significant political developments
in Libya since Ms. Bensouda’s previous report to the
Security Council. The Libyan Political Agreement,
concluded in Morocco in December 2015, and the
establishment, in March, of the Government of National
Accord, whose members are today in the capital,
Tripoli, are by all indications positive news in moving
forward with reuniting and reconciling the country,
averting further bloodshed among the population and
putting an end to the institutional crisis and the military
conflict, which have devastated the country for the past
five years, including as well making progress towards

In referring the situation in Libya to the ICC, the
Security Council intended to act quickly and effectively
to combat impunity in that country. Therefore, when
considering the report, the Council was pleased to note
that despite the instability of the prevailing security
situation in the country, in addition to limited financial
resources, the Office of the Prosecutor is managing
to engage with the Office of the Libyan Prosecutor
General and to effectively implement the memorandum
of understanding signed in November 2013 on the
division of work between the Court and Libyan
authorities. That is the irrefutable proof of a genuine

Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I, too, would
like to thank and congratulate the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) for the presentation
of her eleventh report. I reiterate Senegal’s support for
the Rome Statute, and reaffirm our commitment to
resolution 1970 (2011), which was adopted unanimously
on 26 February 2011.

16-148475/17

S/PV.7698

The situation in Libya

26/05/2016

desire, unquestionable commitment and the effective
determination of the stakeholders.

necessary for the success of the various investigations
initiated by the Office of the Prosecutor.

We therefore encourage the Prosecutor to carry
on this work in the same vein, and we call on the
Libyan judicial authorities to continue working to
build a credible and effective judicial system, while
also continuing efforts to share information and
cooperate with the Office of the Prosecutor. It is
ultimately they — the Libyan authorities — who are
responsible for ensuring respect for the rule of law in
their country. In that regard, the idea of forming an
international contact group on issues related to justice,
a contact group that would facilitate legal and material
support to Libya — which had been suggested in the
past — deserves more of our attention and awareness.

The universal struggle against impunity justifies
our continued commitment to the Court in order to save
lives, restore justice for the numerous victims who seek
it, and to build peaceful and inclusive societies.

We also call on them to employ greater efforts to
create a stable security environment that guarantees
freedom, justice and respect for individual rights.
Moreover, we encourage them to develop and
implement a comprehensive strategy to put an end
to crimes and impunity in the country. During this
decisive phase of its transition, the support of the
international community remains essential and goes
beyond the scope of cooperation between Libya and the
ICC, which remains significant to this process and also
to the success of the mandate entrusted to the Court by
resolution 1970 (2011). As such, it is essential that the
Security Council continue to support the United Nations
mediation efforts led by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, Mr. Martin Kobler. The
Council, convinced that there can only be a political
solution to the Libyan crisis, should reiterate its call
to take the action necessary for the effective and full
operationalization of the Government of national
accord. As the Prosecutor even notes in her report,
“the ICC is, however, not a panacea for the difficulties
facing Libya”.
Let me also take this opportunity to recall that the
ongoing support and actions of the Security Council
with respect to the ICC are required not only to deliver
justice and maintain international peace and security,
but above all to insist once again on the relevance of a
mechanism that would make it possible to evaluate more
effectively the operational monitoring of situations
referred by the Council to the ICC. In that vein, I
would invite States to offer greater support, including
through the allocation of additional resources, which is
6/17

Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank the
Prosecutor for briefing the Council on the efforts of
the International Criminal Court to promote justice for
atrocity crimes in Libya. The abuses that the Prosecutor
has described today, and which have been reported
separately to the Security Council and the Human
Rights Council, emerge from a broader political and
security crisis in Libya. In that context, the United
States welcomes the positive political developments
that have taken place since the Prosecutor last briefed
the Security Council on the situation in Libya last year
(S/PV.7549), including the arrival of the Presidency
Council, led by Prime Minister Al-Sarraj in Tripoli,
and the decision of the Presidency Council to have the
ministers of the Government of national accord begin
work in a caretaker status.
We also echo the unified message of the Joint
Communiqué on Libya issued in Vienna on 16 May
on behalf of 21 of Libya’s partners, three regional
organizations and the United Nations expressing
support for the Government of National Accord and for
its efforts to restore State authority and the rule of law.
Uniting behind the Government of National Accord
represents the only path towards the kind of national
cohesion that will be needed to defeat Da’esh and other
violent extremists. The need for progress in these areas
has never been more urgent, and the human cost of its
absence has been high.
We continue to see deeply worrying reports of
abuses against civilians. In addition, the environment
for those who seek to document or seek justice for those
actions remains hostile as well. An investigation by the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
recently reported disturbing instances of attacks against
and harassment of judicial actors and court facilities, as
well as human rights defenders and journalists. It also
describes sexual violence against women in detention
committed by one armed faction.
The fear of abduction or other abuses has left many
women in Da’esh-controlled areas effectively trapped
in their homes. The United States continues to condemn
the abuses that Da’esh-affiliated groups have committed
16-14847

26/05/2016

The situation in Libya

in Sirte and other areas under Da’esh control, including
killings of civilians and members of the security forces.
As we have made clear, the United States will support
the application of targeted individual sanctions against
those who engage in activities that threaten Libya’s
peace, security and stability, and those involved in
certain serious abuses or violations of human rights.
But ultimately, to halt these abuses, it will be critical
for the Government of national accord to restore
confidence in the rule of law and reverse the collapse
of Libya’s domestic judicial system, which must be
able to investigate and pass judgments without fear of
reprisal, and which must do so in a way that respects
the rights of defendants. That is critical for re-engaging
Libyans in the political process and restoring trust in
democratic institutions.
To promote a culture of accountability in Libya,
we strongly support efforts to promote a reckoning
for the abuses that were committed in the final days
of the Al-Qadhafi regime, including the crimes against
humanity of murder and persecution, for which Saif
Al-Qadhafi is alleged to have been responsible in
the course of helping carrying out a policy to attack
civilians who were holding demonstrations against his
father’s Government. We welcome what the Prosecutor
has continued to describe as a cooperative relationship
between Libya’s prosecutorial authorities and her
Office, and we urge the Government of national accord
to sustain and build upon that relationship, consistent
with the Security Council’s continuing call for Libya
to cooperate with the Prosecutor. We also welcome
the acknowledgement by Libyan authorities that Saif
Al-Qadhafi is not in their custody, and we urge the
Government of national accord to take appropriate
steps to seek Al-Qadhafi’s transfer to the International
Criminal Court.
Ending impunity is only one of several critical
challenges the Government of national accord faces,
although success in that regard will reinforce progress
in others. We appreciate the contribution that Prosecutor
Bensouda and her Office have made in helping to
promote accountability in Libya, which reinforces what
we continue to say: that the Government and the Libyan
people are far from alone as they stand at the beginning
of this new chapter in Libya’s history, and that the
United States and many other partners will stand with
them as they seek to build a just and lasting peace.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I would like to thank
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International

S/PV.7698

Criminal Court, for presenting her eleventh report to
the Security Council in accordance with resolution
1970 (2011).
The arrival of the members of the Presidency
Council of the Government of National Accord in
Tripoli in March has raised hopes for the restoration of
peace and stability in the country. We are encouraged
by the Presidency Council’s ongoing efforts to foster
inclusivity through engagement and dialogue with
partners and stakeholders at the local level. That is the
way forward, by building trust and acceptance among
local communities for the Government of National
Accord. Malaysia believes that an effective and
credible Government will bolster Libya’s commitment
and ability to address impunity, promote and restore the
rule of law and bring all the perpetrators of crimes to
justice. Despite the instability and insecurity across the
country, we are encouraged by the Libyan authorities’
continuing efforts and commitment to complying with
the relevant Security Council resolutions, including
the ongoing cooperation of Libya’s Prosecutor
General’s office. It is therefore crucial to ensure that
the international community supports the Libyan
authorities by providing the assistance they need.
We share the concerns expressed by Council
members about the unacceptably high levels of violence
in Libya, resulting in large numbers of civilian casualties
and attributed mainly to the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant, as well as the reports of abductions, detentions
and ill treatment in detention centres. The precarious
situation of refugees and migrants, who are some of
the most vulnerable segments of society, susceptible to
violence and abuse, is equally distressing.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate how
important it is that the international community provide
full support to the legitimate authorities in Libya. We
remain firmly supportive of the efforts of the United
Nations and the international community in general to
assist Libya in prevailing over its adversities, achieving
a lasting political settlement and stability and restoring
law and order.
Ms. Mulvein (United Kingdom): I am grateful
to the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) for her eleventh report and briefing to the
Security Council. I would like to begin by underscoring
the United Kingdom’s strong support of the Court. I
thank the Prosecutor and her Office for their detailed
work, as set out in the latest report. We fully support her

16-148477/17

S/PV.7698

The situation in Libya

Office’s ongoing investigation efforts, which continue
to play an important part in challenging impunity and
ensuring accountability for those who bear the greatest
responsibility for the most serious crimes in Libya.
Since the last report, there is cause for cautious
optimism about Libya. Following the Libyan Political
Agreement of 17 December, Prime Minister Al-Sarraj
and the Presidency Council have made progress in
establishing a new Government of National Accord.
The recent ministerial meeting in Vienna on 17 May
reaffirmed the breadth of strong international support
for the Government, while highlighting the many
challenges ahead. The backdrop to the long overdue
political settlement in Libya has been one of almost two
years of intense conflict after the collapse of the central
authority and a split in the State institutions in mid2014. The United Kingdom continues to be concerned
about reports that all sides have committed serious
human-rights violations and abuses and violations of
international humanitarian law, some of which may
amount to war crimes. The violence has substantially
reduced the ability of the international community
and the ICC to monitor the situation and has further
weakened the criminal justice system.
The people of Libya deserve peace and security.
Their aspirations will not be fully realized if there
is impunity and those responsible for the horrific
crimes there are not held accountable. Against that
background, the United Kingdom is concerned that the
difficult security situation in Libya has prevented the
Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC from undertaking
investigative activities there. We urge all parties to
implement the Libyan Political Agreement as soon
as possible in order to resolve the security situation.
However, we commend the continued engagement
of the Libyan Prosecutor General and the Libyan
representative to the Court. We urge all parties to assist
the Prosecutor in her investigation and we encourage
States and relevant international organizations to help
the Libyan authorities in their efforts to build the rule
of law in Libya.
The spread of Da’esh is a serious threat to all Libyans
and the wider region. We condemn their barbaric crimes
and call for the perpetrators to be held accountable. We
commend the courage of the Libyans on all sides who
have resisted Da’esh in Benghazi, Derna, Sirte and
elsewhere. We welcome Prime Minister Al-Sarraj’s
call to all Libyans to unite behind the new Government
against Da’esh.
8/17

26/05/2016

We thank the Prosecutor for her briefing on the
cases against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah
Al-Senussi. We are concerned about the fact that Libya
remains unable to surrender Al-Qadhafi to the Court,
due to his unavailability to Libyan State authorities.
The United Kingdom reiterates Libya’s obligation to
cooperate fully with the ICC, including by surrendering
Al-Qadhafi, and notes the Prosecutor’s request to
transmit the arrest warrant to Mr. Al-’Atiri. We continue
to be concerned about Al-Qadhafi’s death sentence
and about reports of torture and inhumane treatment
during Al-Senussi’s detention. We are pleased to hear
that the Libyan authorities are taking action, and we
look forward to getting information on developments in
that regard, including on whether those subject to arrest
warrants have been apprehended. It is crucial to ensure
that the individuals alleged to be responsible do not
become fugitives from justice. We also look forward
to the Prosecutor’s further views on Al-Senussi’s trial
once the full report of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya on the conduct of the trial is available.
The United Kingdom wholly endorses Prime
Minister Al-Sarraj’s commitment to Libya as a stable,
peaceful, non-sectarian country that can contribute to
stability and peace in the region. In order to do that,
Libya needs the support of the international community
in restoring effective Government and building united
and professional armed forces that can protect civilians
and institutions, and fight Da’esh, while complying
with international standards. Reform of the security and
justice sectors is critical to enabling Libya to facilitate
the rebuilding of State institutions and a return to
stability. Along with our international partners, we
will continue to work with Libya to provide it with the
support it needs to meet the challenges it faces.
We fully agree on the importance of cooperation
between national, regional and international lawenforcement agencies.We recognize the financial and
capacity constraints facing the Prosecutor’s Office
and its efforts to achieve efficiency savings in key
areas. We are working for a budget outcome that both
meets the needs of the Court and is sensitive to the
resources available.
In conclusion, the governing leadership in Libya
has given us room for hope. Libya has taken step after
step to move from being a country at war to a country
with a future brighter than many had predicted just
two years ago. The ongoing work of the Prosecutor’s
Office will be marked as an important contribution to
16-14847

26/05/2016

The situation in Libya

ensuring that justice prevails and true stability takes
root in Libya.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The situation in Libya remains extremely
unstable, despite all the efforts to reunify the country.
The Government of National Accord is still only
preparing to become a full-fledged executive body as
it awaits the approval of the legimate Parliament, as
provided for in the Skhirat Agreement. The terrorist
groups being pressed by the Libyan army and receiving
reinforcements from outside are not surrendering.
Criminal activity linked to the smuggling of people
from distressed regions across the Mediterranean is
flourishing. The socioeconomic and humanitarian
problems are getting worse.
In other words, the foreign military intervention
of 2011 has resulted in severe long-term consequences
that can be overcome only by patient collaborative
efforts to cooperate in developing a dialogue within
Libya conducted under United Nations auspices.
Staking everything on quick decisions favouring one or
other of the parties could exacerbate the conflicts even
further and reverse the positive beginnings that have
been made.
On 23 May, the eleventh report of the ICC
Prosecutor was released, but it contains no radically
new information. As in the past, we get the impression
that the Security Council is receiving a report not
from an organ that is responsible for investigating
and prosecuting criminal acts but from some sort of
monitoring mission. Furthermore, as the report does
not disclose the Prosecutor’s response to the procedural
problems that have arisen, the question becomes what
the point of a dialogue with the Security Council is.
We get the impression that the current situation with
regard to the ICC’s consideration of the Libyan case is
akin to the situation in 2011. A few days following the
foreign military intervention, the Prosecutor began a
preliminary investigation into Mr. Al-Qadhafi. But they
did it so quickly that the evidence given was proved to
be unfounded.
For example the former Prosecutor spoke of mass
rape. But that was refuted by the United Nations own
commission on Libya and by many non-governmental
organizations. Many reliable sources doubted the
other acussations made by the ICC at the time — for
instance, with regard to the use of recruits to suppress
demonstrations prior to the foreign military intervention.

S/PV.7698

However, such refutals had no impact on the situation.
ICC legal support for the foreign military intervention
was implemented, and it seemed that the Court believed
that the mission had been accomplished.
Over the past five years, the ICC has not brought
a single new case, although it is very clear that the
Libyan authorities were not the only party that could
have committed acts that fall under the Rome Statute.
In particular, the ICC has commenced no procedure
to investigate information that has come to light on
alleged crimes by the rebels. The Prosecutor has not
considered the victims of NATO air strikes. And there
is also proof, which was submitted to the United Nations
commission investigating the Libyan situation, that
non-military targets were destroyed in the air strikes.
The Commission recommended that this proof be
studied because it had been shown that the information
provided by NATO was not reliable. Access to evidence
of the consequences of the NATO attacks was open.
Nevertheless the Prosecutor limited herself in 2013 to
stating that she was unable to find evidence of actions
that fall under the Rome Statute. However, the material
that she submitted to the Security Council does not
show why she came to such a conclusion.
Finally, this is not the first report of the ICC
Prosecutor to show the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant is having an impact on the situation in Libya.
However, no real efforts has been made to investigate
these things. In addition, with regard to limited
resources and the attempts bring the Libyan situation
to the Security Council within a certain period of
time show that in 2011 the idea of bringing the ICC
investigation on Libya to the Security Council was put
forward by the Prosecutor without considering what
would be required to do that.
In conclusion, we would like to point out the
experience of the ICC on the Libyan situation cannot be
considered successful, neither in terms of implementing
justice and preventing new crimes, nor in terms of
supporting national reconciliation. It just enhances our
doubt as to whether any new matters should be referred
to the ICC.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for the eleventh report presented pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011).
A degenerated security situation, an economic
crisis, a humanitarian disaster, and an institutional and

16-148479/17

S/PV.7698

The situation in Libya

26/05/2016

political stalemate are the main features of the situation
prevailing in Libya. By exploiting the volatile security
situation, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
Ansar Al-Sharia and other violent extremist groups
have expanded their operations in Libya and beyond,
constituting an unprecedented threat to the entire
region.

effective judicial institutions. We renew our support for
the United Nations and the international community
in pursuing efforts with the parties involved towards
the effective implementation of the Libyan National
Accord for the establishment of durable peace and
towards holding accountable all those responsible for
atrocity crimes and human rights violations.

Meanwhile,
the
internationally
recognized
Government of National Accord struggles to gain
legitimacy and extend its control beyond the capital
city, Tripoli. The peaceful arrival and cheerful welcome
to the Presidency Council in Tripoli confirms the
Libyan people’s strong desire for peace, security and
progress and for an end to the institutional and political
divisions that have been the cause of so much damage
in the country. The ICC Prosecutor’s report hints how
the stalemate impedes the application of justice in
Libya. Despite the cooperation between the ICC Office
and the Office of the Libyan Prosecutor General, only
an atmosphere of institutional stability and peace will
permit that cooperation to bear fruit in compliance with
standards set in resolution 1970 (2011).

In closing, as the report of the Prosecutor states,
Libya and the Libyan people deserve peace and stability
on which to secure and build their future. They deserve
the rule of law rather than lawlessness in the current
climate of perpetual insecurity and flux.

The Libyan leadership carries the fundamental
responsibility for moving the Libyan political process
forward in an inclusive manner with determination,
courage and good will. Angola supports and encourages
all efforts of the parties involved in the political
process to unite in order to swiftly overcome the grave
political and security challenges that impede the full
implementation of the Libyan Political Agreement.
Among the many challenges that the authorities
in Libya must address, the most pressing one is to
combat the expansion of extremist and terrorist groups,
the proliferation of weapons and the great number of
armed groups, thugs and political military factions that
indiscriminately attack civilians and perpetrate horrific
crimes, such as abductions, mass executions, torture and
illegal detentions — actions that amount to violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law.
Meanwhile, the Libyan political and social context
does not provide the conditions required to investigate
and prosecute perpetrators of these heinous crimes,
which, according to the Rome Statute that established
the ICC, fall within Libya’s national jurisdiction. We
recognize, as the Prosecutor’s report implies, that the
current conditions in Libya do not allow for due legal
process or fair trials. Only peace and stability will lead
to the establishment of a functional legal system and
10/17

Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
Ms. Bensouda, for her informative briefing.
Ukraine remains concerned about the continued
violations of international humanitarian law and
violations and abuses of human rights in Libya. We
strongly condemn the indiscriminate shelling of
hospitals, abductions and assassinations of civilians,
attacks on Government officials and judges and the
looting of property; these are acts that are regrettably
still taking place across the country. No less concerned
are we about the reports of torture and other forms of
violence in detention centres and strongly condemn
such practices such hostage-taking and incommunicado
detention, including of foreign nationals, carried out
by non-State armed groups, including those claiming
to belong to the legitimate authorities. We call on
the Government of National Accord of Libya to fully
investigate all of these and other crimes and take all the
steps necessary to ensure that those found responsible
are held to account.
We urge the Government of National Accord
to cooperate fully with and provide any necessary
assistance to the International Criminal Court (ICC),
as required under Security Council resolutions 1970
(2011) and 2238 (2015). This would include seeking
opportunities to resolve the issue of the surrender of
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and enabling the ICC to
undertake investigative activities inside Libya.
Finally, we would like to express our support for the
recommendation of the Office of the ICC Prosecutor
for the creation of an international contact group on
justice issues to ensure that the perpetrators of crimes
occurring in or related to the situation in Libya do not
enjoy impunity. Here, we cannot but fully agree with
Ms. Bensouda and Mr. Kobler, Special Representative
16-14847

26/05/2016

The situation in Libya

of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, that “accountability for the
grave crimes under the Rome Statue is indispensable to
stability and sustainable peace in Libya”.
Mr. Taula (New Zealand): The crisis in Libya
over the past five years has exposed its people to
grave violence and violations of their basic human
rights. It has brought chronic instability and conflict,
and left the people at the mercy of armed militias and
violent extremists. The only way that this environment
of chaos and impunity can be brought to an end is
through the establishment of a legitimate, unified and
effective Government.
We welcome developments towards that goal over
the past six months. The conclusion of the Libyan
Political Agreement, the progress in establishing a
Government of National Accord (GNA) and the arrival
of the Presidency Council in Tripoli represent vital steps
forward. It is essential, however, that the international
community, including the Council, stand ready to
swiftly provide necessary support to Libya.
Only by re-establishing Government authority
and strengthening core State institutions will it be
possible to make progress on restoring the rule of
law, protecting basic human rights and achieving
justice for past violations. That is equally true of the
implementation of the Security Council’s referral
of Libya to the International Criminal Court (ICC).
Prosecutor Bensouda’s report illustrates the challenges
of pursuing accountability in Libya. Taking forward the
ICC investigations has required patience, determination
and flexibility.
The security situation continues to make it
impossible for ICC staff to undertake investigations
on the ground. As noted in the Prosecutor’s report,
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi is detained in an area
described as “unavailable” to the Libyan State. In those
circumstances, the Prosecutor’s approach of engaging
directly with those detaining him in order to secure
his surrender to the ICC appears to be the only viable
option. That will also involve practical engagement
with and assistance from the GNA.
We are pleased that the Prosecutor and the Libyan
Prosecutor General’s Office have continued their close
collaboration. We expect that to continue with the
GNA, and look forward to engagement between the
Prosector and the GNA getting under way. We note that
the Prosecutor is likely to apply for additional warrants

S/PV.7698

in the light of newly acquired evidence. We will defer
to the Prosecutor’s independent judgement on this,
but we would join her and other speakers in stressing
that the ICC is not a panacea for all the accountability
challenges facing Libya. The ICC is a court of last
resort. It was never intended to take the place of national
justice systems. Rather, it is complementary to those
systems, whether they be regular courts or transitional
justice mechanisms.
The only effective long-term solution is to
strengthen Libya’s domestic capacity to maintain the
rule of law and address impunity. The international
community and the United Nations system need to be
prepared to respond promptly to the GNA’s requests
for assistance in a range of areas, including the justice
sector. Domestic judicial options are likely to remain
constrained in the short term. We therefore support the
Prosecutor’s suggestion that all involved in Libyan cases
develop a coordinated investigative and prosecutorial
strategy, prioritizing action against those who pose a
threat to Libya’s stability.
Attacks on civilians, particularly by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), continue with
impunity in Libya. We note that the Prosecutor is
currently assessing the potential to expand ICC
investigations to cover such attacks. We would welcome
measures that could achieve accountability for the
horrific crimes committed by ISIL and other extremist
groups. We appreciate the practical challenges that this
presents and look forward to the Prosecutor’s future
reporting on options in that regard.
Finally, when it comes to its relationship with the
ICC, as in all other matters, the Security Council must
follow through on its decisions. That is a basic question
of credibility and means providing the ICC with all
the necessary support for any referrals it makes,
including in relation to findings of non-cooperation.
It requires sustained engagement and political will.
As an ICC State party, New Zealand is well aware
of the substantial costs associated with Security
Council referrals. We therefore have sympathy for the
Prosecutor’s call for additional resources if she is to
take on more investigations in Libya, especially any not
contemplated at the time of the original referral. If the
Council creates new responsibilities for the ICC, then
the United Nations cannot simply wash its hands of the
financial implications. At the very least, the Council
should not obstruct open discussions on the issue but

16-1484711/17

S/PV.7698

The situation in Libya

should defer to the General Assembly, which has the
prerogative and mandate to determine funding issues.
Mr. De la Calle García (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Once again, it is an honour to have the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) present. We thank
her for providing updated information that will help in
the implementation of resolution 1970 (2011).
Spain wishes to reiterate its acknowledgement of
the importance of the work of the Court and particularly
that of its Prosecutor. We are aware that this work often
takes place in conditions that are very difficult for
the members of her Office. We note and welcome the
update on the cases against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
and Abdullah Al-Senussi. We recall that the warrant for
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi has never been executed. The
current complex situation complicates Libya’s ability
to honour its obligations, but we hope that when the
proper conditions prevail, the Government of National
Accord will surrender those individuals without delay.
The responsibility to cooperate fully with the Court
and its Prosecutor remains in effect and now falls on
the shoulders of the Government of National Accord, as
the Council laid out in resolution 2259 (2015).
It is appropriate to acknowledge the dialogue
that the Libyan authorities have maintained and
continue to maintain with the Court, and in particular
the cooperation with the Prosecutor and her Office,
despite the difficulties generated by instability and
insecurity. We are aware of the difficulties that the
limited resources of the Prosecutor’s Office place on
her investigation. The costs of referrals continue to be
supported only by the States parties to the Rome Statute,
and the Relationship Agreement between the Court and
the United Nations continues not to be implemented.
It should be recalled that the first recommendation
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in his
report on the investigations in Libya concern the issue
of supporting the Court, in particular providing the
Prosecutor’s Office with the necessary resources.
The most recent report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(S/2016/452) shows an unacceptable level of violations
of international humanitarian law and abuses of
human rights on the part of all parties. We are very
concerned that armed groups and militias continue to
act unchecked and that Da’esh and its affiliates, as in
Syria and Iraq, are going nowhere and determined to
impose their reign of barbarism and terror.
12/17

26/05/2016

Each and every one of the allegations of extrajudicial
executions, kidnappings, disappearances, torture,
attacks on human rights activists and journalists, and
abuses against immigrants must be investigated and
prosecuted, no matter who is responsible. Impunity
simply cannot be tolerated. In that regard, we see it as
a positive sign that the allegations of torture against
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi are
being investigated and that a determined effort is being
made to deal with those responsible.
We call not only on the Court to pursue its
investigation, including of crimes committed since
2014, but also on the Libyan institutions, particularly
the Prosecutor General, the tribunals and civil society,
which must all participate in the process and resolve
to bring the guilty parties to justice. In that regard, we
cannot fail to commend all the men and women who, at
the risk of their lives, continue to assist in documenting
abuses and raising their voices to denounce them.
The ICC should also enjoy the Security Council’s
support. We recall that resolution 1970 (2011) calls
on all States and international organizations to
cooperate with the Court. Combating impunity is the
responsibility of all. Moreover, with regard to foreign
terrorist fighters enlisted in Da’esh and its affiliates, all
States must honour their obligations under resolution
2238 (2015).
Libya’s situation remains critical, but in recent
months, since the approval of the Libyan Political
Agreement, we have seen progress that allows us a
degree of optimism for the first time. We recognize
the work of the Special Representative and of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya. We call on
all political actors in Libya to join the process being
led by the Presidency Council of the Government of
National Accord in a constructive manner. It is vital
that we pursue our efforts to ensure the implementation
of the Agreement, and in particular to strengthen the
foundation of support for the Government of National
Accord. Consolidating that process and re-establishing
an independent legal system committed to justice is
essential to rebuilding a State based on the rule of law
and respect for human rights.
The end of impunity must be incorporated into the
process of reconstructing the country. We must not
forget that impunity is incompatible with sustainable
and lasting peace. It is only recognizing the facts,
dealing with those who are guilty and providing
16-14847

26/05/2016

The situation in Libya

reparations to the victims that will bring the genuine
reconcilation that will allow Libyan society to look to
the future.
Mr. Stehelen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Prosecutor Bensouda for her eleventh report and her
briefing. I reaffirm the full support of France for
the Prosecutor and the International Criminal Court
(ICC) as a whole, in particular for the successful
implementation of resolution 1970 (2011), referring the
situation in Libya to that high-level legal jurisdiction.
A careful review of the eleventh report highlights
a number of positive developments that we welcome.
Paragraph 12 of the report indicates that cooperation
with the Office of the Libyan General Prosecutor is
producing positive results and that these early results,
including the transmission of evidence by the Libyan
judiciary, coupled with targeted investigations by
Ms. Bensouda’s Office, have significantly enriched
the inquiries and evidence in the file. Clearly, much
remains to do to address the situation in Libya and, in
the words of resolution 2259 (2015) itself,
“to hold to account those responsible for violations
of international humanitarian law and violations
and abuses of human rights, including those
involving sexual violence” (resolution 2259 (2015),
para. 14).
In that regard, France expresses its concern that
the security situation in Libya does not allow the
Prosecutor’s inquiries to unfold as they should. Despite
the road ahead, the progress we have made deserves
our full attention, and France continue’s to support
Ms. Bensouda’s action to that end. Having made these
general remarks, we would like to emphasize three
key elements.
First is support for the Libyan authorities in the field
of justice and rebuilding the rule of law. The Council
has affirmed that the solution to the Libyan crisis can
only be political. The efforts of Special Representative
of the Secretary -General Martin Kobler, and the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) in
general, contribute not only to the objectives of peace
and stability, but also to establishing the rule of law in
Libya. The signing of the Libyan Political Agreement
and the formation of the Presidency Council and the
Government of National Accord represent major
advances. The international community must continue
to give its full support to the Presidency Council and the
Government of National Accord, in line with the Vienna

S/PV.7698

Ministerial Conference of 16 May, in the presence of
Mr. Fayyez Al-Sarraj, Prime Minister of Libya.
Secondly, it is necessary to encourage the Libyan
authorities to deepen their cooperation with the ICC.
France and its partners stand ready to support the
efforts of the Libyan authorities to build strong State
institutions guaranteeing the rule of law. We must also
encourage the Government of Mr. Al-Sarraj to give
every assistance to the ICC, as called for in resolution
2259 (2015). The cooperation of Libya with the ICC is
crucial to ending a long period of impunity in Libya
and to allowing the Court to carry out the mandate
entrusted to it by the Statute and the Council. It also
contributes to building a judicial system that respects
the rule of law in Libya.
The Court has jurisdiction to try Mr. Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and has requested that he be returned.
France reiterates that Libya must comply with the
judges’ decision, as the Pre-Trial Chamber recalled in
its decision of 10 December 2014. France urges Libya
to pursue consultations with the ICC so as to remove all
obstacles to the execution of the decision to surrender
Al-Qadhafi to the Court.
Regarding the case against Mr. Al-Senussi, the
Prosecutor feels that she is not be able to say with
certainty that new facts have emerged that could
overturn the Trial Chamber’s reasons for concluding
the inadmissibility of the case against Mr. Al-Senussi.
We note that the Prosecutor is continuing her work
of gathering information and that an appeal is also
under way.
Thirdly, good cooperation requires a more
integrated and coherent approach to justice matters
on the part of the different States and institutions
concerned. France recalls the importance it attaches to
the obligation of States to cooperate, as provided for in
article 86 of the Rome Statute, which addresses judicial
cooperation with the Court in its investigations and
prosecutions of crimes under its juridication.
France also shares the Prosecutor’s desire for
an integrated approach at the national, regional and
international levels that is firmly anchored in the
principle of complementarity. As Prosecutor Bensouda
recalled in her briefing, with respect to the principle
of complementarity, it falls first and foremost to States
to investigate and prosecute their own nationals who
are implicated in the commission of crimes under
the Rome Statute committed on their territory and/

16-1484713/17

S/PV.7698

The situation in Libya

or by their nationals. Such an approach can provide
leverage at the national level and strengthen capacitybuilding, without which no stability is possible. My
country is particularly committed to this approach, and
the Prosecutor’s conclusion that the implementation
of the 2013 memorandum on the division of labour
concerning investigations in Libya helped facilitated
her work confirms us in that general direction. This
more integrated approach to justice issues at all levels
is at the heart of a rebuilt judiciary that can serve as the
foundation of sustainable stability.
The terms of the Prosecutor’s report and her
requests to that end are futher appeals that we must
pursue with resolve. France reiterates its full support
in that regard.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela welcomes the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, and
thanks for her introduction of her eleventh report on the
investigation on the situation in Libya, in accordance
with resolution 1970 ( 2011). In that regard, we consider
these exchanges among members of the Security
Council and representatives of the Court to be relevant
and timely. We reiterate to Ms. Bensouda our support in
helping her management contribute to the fight against
impunity in pursuit of the noble objectives of achieving
full international justice.
Venezuela has been a State party to the Rome
Statute since its inception in 2002, and therefore fully
supports the strengthening of its institutions and the
effective functioning of the International Criminal
Court. In this respect, we urge those countries that are
not parties to the Rome Statute to accede to it in order
to achieve its universalization.
The fight against impunity for the most serious
international crimes is based on international
cooperation, which is an essential element in achieving
the objectives of the Court and requires the commitment
of all States to implementing its decisions and winning
support for its work, as the Security Council has done
on multiple occasions. Strengthening the international
criminal justice system established after the creation of
the International Criminal Court requires States parties
to take no measure that may weaken its important role
in combating impunity. In this context, it is necessary
to maintain the independence and impartiality of the
Court, free of individual interests that may undermine
14/17

26/05/2016

its credibility and the effectiveness of its operations.
The consistent nature of the Court does not allow double
standards or ambiguous signals in reference affairs by
the Security Council.
The political instability resulting from institutional
collapse of the Libyan State caused by the military
intervention of NATO in 2011 — which is recognized
today as having been a major error on the part of several
Heads of State — has severely affected the rule of law
in that Arab nation, in particular its judicial system,
whose repercussions can still be felt today. Regrettably,
it has left the country dismembered and prey to terrorist
groups and left the people thirsting for peace and
tranquillity. The absence of strong institutions and the
confrontations among factions that are fighting over
control of the country are impeding the functioning of
the State.
In the light of this situation, we cannot say that
Libya has a strong judicial system that guarantees due
process and the human rights of people suspected of
committing the most serious international crimes.
Libya is a country that has been plunged into profound
chaos and widespread violence, which has been
exploited by terrorists of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham, Al-Qaida and Ansar Al-Sharia in order to
expand their criminal agenda throughout the country
and neighbouring nations. Those crimes should be the
subject of investigations by the International Criminal
Court in accordance with the Rome Statute.
The Government of Venezuela and its people
support Libya’s efforts to realize, build and strengthen
the Government of National Accord. We commend
that effort and express our firm support. We should
continue to work decisively with a view to help promote
and protect the human rights of Libyan citizens. In
that regard, we encourage them to strengthen their
cooperation with the International Criminal Court
in order to facilitate the surrender of Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi so that he may have an impartial trial, in
accordance with due process and in compliance with
resolution 1970 (2011), which facilitates the transfer of
Al-Qadhafi to the Court.
The evidence of torture of Al-Qadhafi family
members and former members of the Government
of President Muammar Al-Qadhafi, as well as the
disappearance and persecution of human rights activists,
reveal the institutional weakness of the country’s legal
system, the absence of due process, and human rights
16-14847

26/05/2016

The situation in Libya

violations. The Libyan Government of National Accord
should take all the necessary measures, under the rule of
law, to guarantee the human rights of Saadi Al-Qadhafi
and Abdullah Al-Senussi. Similarly, all actions that
violate the human rights of the mentioned citizens
and the rest of those affected should be investigated
and punished.
Venezuela rejects the July 2015 decision of the Tripoli
Court of Assize, by which Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
was sentenced to the death in absentia, because that trial
lacked the minimum due process to ensure a fair trial.
The verdict has been rejected internationally by various
organizations, including the Human Rights Council. For
that reason, we call on the Libyan authorities of the new
Government of National Accord to fully cooperate with
the International Criminal Court in order to transfer
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to The Hague to stand trial
in accordance with due process and with full respect
for his human rights.
Paragraph 5 of resolution 1970 (2011) urges Libya
and States and regional and international organizations
to fully cooperate with the International Criminal Court
and with its Prosecutor. That call has been affirmed in
resolutions 2174 (2014), 2213 (2015) and 2238 (2015),
which reiterate Libya’s obligation to fully cooperate
with the Court and the Office of the Prosecutor in
order to surrender Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the
immediate custody of the International Criminal Court
for prosecution.
We welcome the cooperation of the Office of
Libya’s Prosecutor General, which is reflected in the
report of the Prosector of the International Criminal
Court. However, we urge the authorities of that Arab
nation to coordinate with the Office of the Prosecutor
and to carry out the necessary consultations to address
issues pertaining to the surrender of Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi, who is currently being held by a militia
group in Zintan.
In conclusion, we believe that, although significant
efforts have been made, which resulted in the Agreement
of 17 December 2015, the Government of National
Accord should continue making progress in building a
State grounded in the rule of law, with strong judicial
institutions, through which human rights are promoted
and respected, including the international principles of
due process, the right to defence and the presumption
of innocence, as basic legal guarantees that must be
respected. Those elements are more important than

S/PV.7698

ever to the process of reconciliation and national unity
needed to rebuild the country and achieve peace and
stability for the brotherly Libyan people.
Mr. Akahori (Japan): I would like to join the
previous speakers in thanking Prosecutor Bensouda for
presenting of her eleventh report on Libya.
Japan is committed to the establishment of the
rule of law in the international community and is
convinced of the importance of accountability. That is
why Japan has consistently supported the activities of
the International Criminal Court (ICC). I would like
to assure the Prosecutor of Japan’s full support for the
work of her Office.
The Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 1970 (2011) and referred the situation in
Libya to the Prosecutor of the ICC. The Council decided
that the Libyan authorities shall cooperate fully with
the ICC and put them under the obligation to do so. It is
encouraging that Libya has been cooperative with the
ICC on many occasions to achieve justice in Libya. We
hope that this cooperation will be enhanced. We also
value and appreciate the cooperation extended to the
ICC by the relevant States, such as Jordan and Tunisia.
Cooperation is a vital element for the ICC to function
effectively and produce a successful outcome.
They security situation in Libya continues to be
unstable. It is therefore not hard to imagine the serious
difficulties faced by the Office of the Prosecutor in
conducting investigations. However, it is unfortunate to
learn from the briefing that, despite the tireless efforts
by the Prosecutor, little progress has been made on
the cases. Mr. Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi still remains
out of the ICC’s custody even though the Pre-Trial
Chamber decided on December 2014 that refusing to
surrender Mr. Al-Qadhafi to the ICC was an act of
non-compliance by Libya. We encourage the relevant
authorities of the countries concerned, including the
Government of National Accord in Libya, to make
further efforts to cooperate with the ICC on this matter.
We are also disturbed by reports of continuing
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights law in Libya. In the light of the importance of
achieving accountability in the political process,
we cannot simply let such crimes and violations
remain unpunished. As the Council called for in the
relevant resolutions, those perpetrators must be held
accountable. In that connection, we note that the
Office of the Prosecutor has been assessing the crimes

16-1484715/17

S/PV.7698

The situation in Libya

allegedly committed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant/Da’esh and will possibly open an investigation.
We look forward to a further update on that.
Given the challenges that Libya faces, it is of
paramount importance to support the Government of
National Accord and conclude the political process in
a peaceful and inclusive manner. In that regard, the
Government of Japan reiterates its support to Mr. Martin
Kobler, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya, on his efforts to conclude a United Nationsfacilitated and Libyan-led political process that seeks
to secure peace, stability and prosperity for the people
of Libya.
Japan is fully committed to the ICC, including the
Office of the Prosecutor. As a member of the Security
Council, we would like to work to strengthen the
relationship between the Council and the ICC.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make a
statement in my capacity as the representative of Egypt.
At the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for presenting her eleventh report to the
Security Council pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).
The report notes several challenges and includes many
important observations with regard to the functioning
of the Court and the situation in Libya. I would like to
make the following comments in that regard.
Firs, the Libyan Government must cooperate with
the International Criminal Court and surrender Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the Court, and all manner of
assistance must be given to the Libyan Government to
ensure that it is in a position to honour its commitments
with regard to the Court in that regard.
Secondly, there is a need to stop all crimes of torture
and inhumane acts being committed in Libya. The
international community must help the Government of
National Accord to design a global strategy to address
the vicious crimes that have been committed in Libya.
The Libyan authorities must be assisted so that they
can be in a position to deliver justice to the victims.
Therefore, the Government must be given the necessary
tools and the Security Council’s resolutions, particularly
resolution 2214 (2015), must be implemented.
Egypt notes that the Office of the Prosecutor
intends to broaden investigations to cover the crimes
committed by Da’esh and Ansar Al-Sharia. States must
16/17

26/05/2016

assume the primary responsibility to investigate their
citizens who have joined terrorist militias in Libya,
including Da’esh, and to bring them to justice. The
International Criminal Court must respect international
norms and the principle of complementarity between
the competence of national jurisdiction and that of the
ICC. The Court’s efforts must be seen in the context
of the broader framework required by the international
community to bring terrorists to justice and to ensure
that there is no impunity for the horrendous crimes that
they are perpetrating.
We welcome the cooperation and assistance that
the Office of the Libyan Prosecutor General is giving
to the Prosecutor of the ICC, particularly with regard
to the submission of information and evidence, as well
as the ongoing implementation of the memorandum
of understanding, concluded in November 2013, on
burden-sharing in investigations into the former
members of the Al-Qadhafi Government and bringing
them to justice.
In conclusion, we welcome the extensive measures
that Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the ICC, and her
Office have taken to ensure justice and end impunity.
We will continue our cooperation with her in this area.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I am pleased to see you, Sir, a representative of
a friendly country, presiding over the Security Council.
I congratulate you and the members of your delegation
on assuming the presidency. I also thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for her important briefing today.
I take this opportunity to reaffirm Libya’s full
determination to ensure that the work of its national
judiciary and the ICC complement one another in
delivering justice and fighting impunity for crimes
that fall under the Rome Statute. I again stress that
the Libyan judicial authorities are determined to meet
their obligations pursuant to national and international
laws, despite the challenges and pressures facing them,
particularly the Office of the Prosecutor General, in the
absence of a law enforcement agency under Government
control. The Libyan Government is currently unable
to ensure the independence of the judiciary or the
issuance of fair sentences when courts operate in areas
not subject to its authority. However, it will strive to
16-14847

26/05/2016

The situation in Libya

ensure accountability, fight impunity and promote the
rule of law, and spare no effort to investigate all crimes
committed, including those of torture, abduction and
any other violation of human rights. We will punish all
perpetrators when circumstances allow.
Despite these factors, we must note that no Libyan
Government can protect human rights or deliver justice
when its judges, officials and the Office of the Prosecutor
General feel that their lives are at risk because the
Government has no control over the security situation
and is not functioning in a safe environment. All
prisons will remain beyond State control so long as the
Security Council continues to marginalize the Libyan
Army and to prevent its units and battalions, as well
as the Libyan Security Forces, from receiving weapons
despite the Libyan Army’s achievements in fighting
Da’esh, Al-Qaida and Ansar Al-Sharia militias.
Despite the dire need for concerted international
efforts to fight Da’esh in Libya, we must take extreme
care about who we are supplying weapons and equipment
to. We were greatly concerned to learn that a senior
military official of an important country has affirmed
his country’s plan to train and supply militias, which
are to declare their allegiance to Mr. Fayyez Al-Sarraj,
Chair of the Presidency Council of the Government of
National Accord, under the pretext of fighting Da’esh.
We believe that this would simply lead to keeping power
split between the Army and the militias and to further
chaos and instability in the country. It will prevent
the Government of National Accord from having any
control of the security situation.
Prosecutor Bensouda notes in her report that her
Office, in line with its effort to ensure the surrender
of Saif Al-Qadhafi to the ICC, filed a request to the
Pre-Trial Chamber for an order directing the Registry
to transmit the request for arrest and surrender of
Mr. Al-Qadhafi directly to Mr. Al-’Ajami Al-’ATiri.
In that regard, I wish to clarify that neither the ICC
nor any other foreign entity has the right to directly
address a Libyan citizen without first going through the
appropriate Libyan Government channels. The Court,
it if were to take such a path, would violate Libyan law
and interfere in the internal affairs of Libya.
Mr. Al-’Ajami Al-’ATiri is a commander in the
Libyan Army, and has no right to have any direct
dealings with a foreign entity or to directly decide
the fate of another Libyan. If he should attempt to
do so, he would violate Libyan law and be subject to
prosecution when circumstances allow. Whatever

S/PV.7698

the circumstances, the decision of whether or not to
surrender Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the ICC is the
sole purview of the Libyan Government and judiciary.
The Government of National Accord does not currently
oversee any prisons; therefore, we cannot discuss any
decision about Al-Qadhafi or any other prisoner at
this stage.
I would be remiss if I failed to welcome the
ongoing constructive cooperation between the Office
of the Prosecutor of the ICC and Libya’s Office of the
Prosecutor. We reiterate our appreciation for all the
efforts made by her Office and underscore the need to
provide all the necessary resources so that it can continue
and expand its investigations into crimes committed in
Libya. The Prosecutor and her colleagues are always
welcome in Libya to continue their investigations, once
the security conditions allow for that.
There can be no justice in the absence of security,
and there can be no security in the absence of the army
and the police and in the presence of militias. The
militias will never disappear as long as they continue
to receive salaries from the State coffers — very high
salaries and much more than police and army officers
earn. They also receive unchecked financial support
from the Ministry of Defence, while army officers and
soldiers do not even receive their meagre salaries on
time. I therefore emphasize that those who care about
the well-being of the Libyan people and genuinely want
to help them to overcome this crisis and establish justice
must help us to reconstitute the Libyan army and build
its capacities, as it is the only guarantor of the unity of
the country and its recovery.
There is also a need to support the Government as
safeguard the country’s sovereignty. The international
community must be resolute in adhering precisely
to the Libyan Political Agreement while following a
specific timetable, not overlooking any violations and
rejecting any pre-emptive acts that could make this
political situation even more complex. We must begin
by implementing the security measures and providing
weapons to the police force. That is the real role that
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Libya must
play at this stage. Anything short of that will be of little
value — in fact, it could serve to undermine the Political
Agreement, which remains the single glimmer of hope
for the Libyan people, in spite of its shortcomings.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

16-1484717/17
