United Nations

A /ES-11/PV.14

General Assembly

Official Records

Eleventh Emergency Special session

14

th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 12 October 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 5 (continued)
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the
Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2014/136)
Draft resolution (A/ES-11/L.5)
Mr. Rae (Canada): We meet again in this resumed
emergency special session for one reason and one
reason only, and that is because the Russian Federation
continues to violate international law, specifically
Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter of the United Nations.
Through its illegal actions in Ukraine, Russia is showing
us that it is not a partner interested in peace or justice,
in Ukraine or elsewhere. Once again, as it has in recent
months, it falls upon us, the members of the General
Assembly, to defend the Charter and everything the
United Nations stands for.
Draft resolution A/ES-11/L.5 before us is submitted
in response to Russia’s attempts to illegally and forcibly
annex more of Ukraine’s territory. The draft resolution
reaffirms the principle that borders and boundaries
cannot be changed without consent that is freely given.
It reaffirms the principle that might does not make
right. We call upon every member of the Assembly to
vote in favour of the draft resolution.
Canada unequivocally condemns the so-called
referendums held by the Russian Federation in the
illegally occupied regions of Donetsk, Luhansk,

Kherson and Zaporizhzhya, in Ukraine. Those are yet
another blatant violation of international law by the
Russian Federation. Millions have been either killed or
wounded or forcibly displaced by this war of Russian
aggression. The latest barrage of missile attacks against
civilian infrastructure in Kyiv and cities that Russia now
claims as its own through its sham referendums allow
all of us to see. It is apparent. The true nature of this
war is there. This is not a “special military operation”.
It is a war to punish and ultimately to destroy Ukraine.
We all know in our heart of hearts that an election
that is held at the barrel of a gun can be neither free nor
fair. We know that. We know that when someone points
a gun at another’s head and tells them they must vote,
it is not free or fair. Yet President Putin has claimed
that these so-called referendums reflect the “will of the
people” in those illegally occupied territories. He has
claimed that the referendums somehow miraculously,
two days after being called, were being carried out in
line with democratic standards. He has alleged that
they are somehow consistent with the United Nations
Charter, as if the Charter means nothing. The reality
is that nothing could be further from the truth. This is
an illegal invasion, an illegal occupation and an illegal
annexation, all at gunpoint. It is not democracy.
(spoke in French)
The actions of the Russian Federation clearly violate
the Charter of the United Nations and the customary
principle of international law that no acquisition
of territory by the threat or use of force shall be
recognized as lawful. Those fundamental principles, to

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-62623 (E)
*2262623*

A/ES-11/PV.14

which we all adhere — namely, the sovereign equality
of all Member States, the settlement of disputes by
peaceful means and abstention from the threat or use
of force — have never been as threatened as they are
today. Here, in the halls of the United Nations, we
often talk about precedent. We must not allow another
tyrannical precedent of invasion, occupation and
annexation to override our commitment to the rule of
law. We cannot allow the Security Council, to which
we have entrusted the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, to be
entirely paralysed by a permanent member who clearly
and publicly aspires to subjugate another State.
We are convinced that the majority of the countries
represented in the Assembly are of the same opinion. It
is not just the eastern countries; it is countries around
the world. This afternoon, we are going to see the extent
to which the countries of the world reject President
Putin’s declared policy. The latest attempt by President
Putin to grab land in Ukraine is on a scale not seen
since the Second World War. The territory illegally
annexed by the Russian Federation covers an area of
109,000 square kilometres. That area is larger than the
territory of three Canadian provinces — and Canada
is quite large. That territory is larger than that which
nearly half of the Members of the Organization possess
within their internationally recognized borders. It is
about the same size as the three Baltic countries illegally
annexed by Stalin in 1940. We must remember that
point because after the occupation of the three Baltic
countries by the Soviet army, the rate of participation
in the “elections” of the new constituent assemblies
reached a staggering 99.6 per cent in 1940 following
the invasion and annexation by Stalin’s Government.
Ironically and oddly, that figure of over 99 per cent
resembles the results of the so-called referendums held
in the four illegally occupied regions of Ukraine that
Russia has just attempted to annex.
Imperial habits die hard. President Putin seeks
to revive Russia’s imperial past through invasion,
occupation, annexation and subjugation. If his actions
are not enough to convince us, his words are crystal
clear. Those words should be read because President
Putin speaks publicly about his desire to rebuild
the former Russian Empire by any means necessary
and to forever absorb into it the citizens of the free,
independent and sovereign States of the former Soviet
Union — whether they like it or not.
2/20

12/10/2022

Yet President Putin and the representatives of
the Russian Federation in this Hall have the audacity
to tell us that they are acting in accordance with the
Charter and international law. They say that this is a
“decolonizing” project. No, it absolutely is not. On the
contrary, the reality and the truth are clear. Russia’s war
of aggression runs counter to the principles that are at
the heart of the United Nations Charter. Let us read the
words of the Charter. I have it here in my hand. Article
2 states:
(spoke in English)
“The Organization is based on the principle of
the sovereign equality of all its Members.
“All Members, in order to ensure to all of them
the rights and benefits resulting from membership,
shall fulfil in good faith the obligations assumed by
them in accordance with the present Charter.
“All Members shall settle their international
disputes by peaceful means in such a manner that
international peace and security, and justice, are
not endangered.”
President Putin would also have us believe that
there is a conspiracy against the Russian Federation.
That concept was recycled late this morning by the
representative of another country. He would have us
believe that somehow, something called the “West” is
seeking to violate Russia’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity. The West did not create the Charter. The
Soviet Union signed the Charter. China signed the
Charter. It was not created by the West. It was created by
the Member States at that time. We need to understand
that there is no grand conspiracy against Russia. The
international community is not anti-Russian. Russia
is facing the consequences of its own actions, that is,
launching an illegal and disastrous further invasion
of Ukraine on the basis of President Putin’s desire for
an empire that is long since gone. As I said in French,
apparently, imperial habits die a very hard death. Russia
makes claims of Russophobia, sort of like the kid who
kills his parents and then goes to the Court and says,
“Help me out, I am an orphan”. There is no Russophobia.
Its own soldiers, artillery, tanks, warplanes and
missiles are flattening Russian-speaking cities and
towns and abusing Russian-speaking populations in
eastern Ukraine.
No country is seeking to violate Russia’s
sovereignty or its territorial integrity. The International
Court of Justice has said there was no evidence to
22-62623

12/10/2022

support that allegation by the Russian Federation.
Instead, it is Russia that has twice violated Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity since 2014. Russia
has similarly violated the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of both Georgia and Moldova. Russia says that
it is speaking the language of sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence, and it claims to
be a friend of the Charter. The reality is that there is
no greater threat today to the purposes and principles
of the United Nations Charter than Russia’s war of
aggression against Ukraine and the annexation that has
taken place over the past few days.
No one is bent on Russia’s destruction. The
Ukrainian people are valiantly defending themselves to
secure their freedom and survival from Russia’s war
of aggression. Together with many of our allies and
partners, we in Canada are taking what we believe to be
proportional and necessary steps in response, including
supporting Ukraine with the means to defend itself
from Russia’s aggression and to reclaim its territory. It
can be argued and shown that Article 51 of the Charter
in fact anticipates a situation just like this, because it
says very explicitly that
“[n]othing in the present Charter shall impair
the inherent right of individual or collective
self-defense if an armed attack occurs against a
Member of the United Nations, until the Security
Council has taken measures necessary to maintain
international peace and security”.
We do not seek Russia’s destruction. What we
seek is for the Russian Federation to live up to its
commitments under the United Nations Charter and
international law; to behave as a responsible member of
the international community, like Ukraine and like so
many other members of the Assembly; and to act as a
steward of the Charter and as a steward of peace in the
world. That was clearly anticipated in the creation of
the status of permanent members whose mission in life
it would be to preserve territorial integrity and global
security. That is exactly the opposite of what Russia is
now doing.
The Russian Federation has the power to end this
war. It has the power to end the untold misery that it
has caused. The impacts have been felt most severely
in Ukraine and by the many Ukrainians who have
died due to the mindless and systematic destruction
of infrastructure and the necessary means of life. But
we also have to remember — and every representative
here knows this — that the inequality of the world

A/ES-11/PV.14

has historically been our greatest challenge, as has
the security of the world. Then came the coronavirus
disease. Climate change remains with us. And now
comes this aggression, which has had a devastating
impact, not merely on the people, economy and society
of Ukraine, but also on the economies of each and every
country that is represented here at the United Nations.
The Secretary-General has said that we are facing
a winter of discontent. The International Monetary
Fund reported yesterday that we are heading for an
unprecedented global recession. Let us imagine how
much better it would be if, instead of debating this
motion — which we simply have to debate because the
Security Council is not capable of doing its job because
Russia has a veto —we were debating in this Hall
how we could rebuild and how we could remake the
economies and societies that have been so devastated
by the impact of the cascading crises that we have
been facing over the past decade. Instead of that, we
are being forced to go back to square one and say “let
us call it what it is” — an illegal aggression and an
illegal annexation. If Russia would refrain from any
further unlawful threat or use of force, and if it would
completely and unconditionally withdraw its military
forces from the territory of Ukraine that it has illegally
occupied, we would see an end to this terrible tragedy
and we could start to rebuild — not rebuild just Ukraine
but rebuild the economies of the world, including
Russia’s.
We have twice now demanded that as an Assembly.
We are doing it now for the third time in response to
the sham referendums and the desperate attempts to
prolong what can only be described as a truly senseless,
cruel and brutal war of aggression. The Charter calls on
us all to “unite our strength” to maintain international
peace and security. I want to suggest that we must, all
of us, rise to that call today to defend the Charter and
with it, yes, Ukraine’s sovereignty, territorial integrity
and political independence. But in fact, it is not just the
sovereignty of Ukraine, but the sovereignty of each and
every Member State here; it is not just the territorial
integrity of Ukraine, but the territorial integrity of
each and every country that is represented here; and
it is not just the political independence of Ukraine, but
the independence of all of us self-governing nations
represented here.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French):
Today’s debate is simple. It can be summed up in one
question: Do we want to defend the principles of the

22-626233/20

A/ES-11/PV.14

Charter of the United Nations? That question concerns
us all because the Charter is the cement of the United
Nations. It is the guarantee of peaceful coexistence
among sovereign States.
By attacking Ukraine, Russia not only unleashed
an atrocious war with global repercussions, in terms
of food, energy, economics and nuclear power; it
also deliberately violated the most basic principles of
international law. The International Court of Justice
said as much unambiguously on 16 March, when it
ordered the suspension of Russian military operations
in Ukraine. It is clear that Russia has in no way complied
with that decision.
The acquisition of territory by force should be a
matter of concern to every State member of the General
Assembly. By invading its neighbour, Russia has
decided to pave the way for other wars of annexation.
What is happening today in Europe may happen
tomorrow elsewhere, in Asia, Africa or Latin America.
We must be aware of that.
As long as Russia continues to intentionally
and indiscriminately bombard cities and civilian
infrastructure and to commit an ever-greater number
of abuses that clearly constitute war crimes, France
will never come resign itself to accepting a world in
which force trumps right. France will never recognize
either the sham referendums or the illegal annexation
of entire swaths of Ukrainian territory. It will continue
to support Ukraine, its sovereignty and its territorial
integrity for as long as necessary. That is why France
worked, with its partners, in a transparent and inclusive
process, to draft a text that everyone should be able to
support. The text is concise. It condemns the annexation
of territories conquered by force.
Essentially, we are faced with a simple
choice — condone war or defend peace. It is a question
not of choosing a side, but of preserving the international
order and its values. Abstaining is not an option. France
therefore encourages all Members of the United Nations
to defend the Charter and its universal principles.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
It has been nearly eight months since the crisis in
Ukraine broke out. As we speak, the conflict rages
on. The flames and the fighting are spreading, and the
prospect of a peaceful settlement is not yet in sight. The
crisis is becoming increasingly protracted, widespread
and complicated, and its spillover effects are further
4/20

12/10/2022

penetrating and affecting economies and people’s
livelihoods, bringing more instability and uncertainty
to an already turbulent world and causing deep concern.
During the recently concluded general debate
of the General Assembly, State leaders from around
the world expressed their views and propositions on
the crisis in Ukraine. Despite differences in view, a
common thread is that most countries called on the
parties to the conflict to cease fighting as soon as
possible and to resolve the crisis peacefully through
dialogue. They called for greater humanitarian relief
for the people of Ukraine, who have been deeply
affected by the crisis. They called for joint international
efforts to mitigate the spillover impact, especially on
developing countries. And they all called for unity to
avoid bloc confrontations triggered by the crisis and the
start of a new Cold War. Those appeals and demands
should be the focus of our attention and the goal of this
emergency special session. In that regard, China wishes
to emphasize the following.
First, we stress the need for dialogue and
engagement for a political settlement to the crisis in
Ukraine. China is deeply worried about the recent
intensification of the ground conflict and deplores the
civilian casualties and damage to civilian facilities
caused thereby. What is urgent now is to guide the
parties concerned to exercise restraint, avoid the
escalation of conflict, prevent the confrontation from
spinning out of control and de-escalate the situation. In
the final analysis, the Ukraine crisis must be resolved
peacefully. However daunting the difficulties and
challenges may be, the door to political settlement
shall not be closed, diplomatic negotiations shall not
be stalled and efforts to stop hostilities and promote
peace talks shall not be slackened. The international
community must encourage the parties concerned to
relaunch peace talks as soon as possible, incorporate
reasonable concerns into negotiations, put feasible
options on the table and create conditions and space for
the cessation of hostilities and settlement of the crisis.
Secondly, there must be increased efforts to
provide humanitarian relief and alleviate the plight of
the civilians affected. The humanitarian situation in
Ukraine has deteriorated since the outbreak of the crisis
and the coming long winter will further aggravate their
difficulties. China commends Ukraine’s neighbouring
countries for hosting millions of refugees and supports
the United Nations and international humanitarian
agencies in assisting Ukraine and helping to share the
22-62623

12/10/2022

burden of its neighbours, based on the principles of
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence.
The parties to the conflict should strictly observe
international humanitarian law, refrain from harming
innocent civilians, give priority to the protection of
women, children and other vulnerable groups, and
facilitate evacuation and cooperation on the ground
with regard to humanitarian aid. China calls on the
international community to increase humanitarian
assistance to Ukraine and its neighbouring countries
and to ensure a proper resettlement of the people
affected by the conflict. The safety and security of
nuclear facilities cannot be compromised, not even by
the smallest margin. We call on all parties concerned
to exercise restraint and prevent an irreparable
humanitarian disaster.
Thirdly, we must strengthen solidarity and
cooperation to minimize the spillover effects of the
conflict. The interwoven impact of the coronavirus
disease pandemic and the crisis in Ukraine has exposed
all countries in the world, developing countries in
particular, to a myriad of challenges, including food
security, energy security and financial security, making
it all the more difficult to realize the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. All-out and indiscriminate
sanctions will not help solve the problem. Instead,
they will only disrupt the stability of global supply and
industrial chains, amplify the spillover effect of the
crisis and affect the normal life of peoples worldwide.
The conclusion and implementation of the Black Sea
Grain Initiative has played a positive role in stabilizing
global food prices and improving food supply in
developing countries. We encourage more such efforts
and look forward to other, similar arrangements. We
call on the international community, the United Nations
in particular, to keep development high on the
international agenda, diffuse the spillover effects of the
crisis in Ukraine, help developing countries overcome
difficulties and prevent hard-won development gains
from going down the drain.
Fourthly, we must abandon the Cold War mentality
and prevent the world from falling into division. The
crisis in Ukraine shows once again that clinging to the
Cold War mentality and bloc politics, creating bloc
confrontation and pursuing absolute security will not
bring peace but lead only to conflicts that serve the
interests of no one. At a time when the world needs
unity and cooperation to overcome difficulties, it is
irresponsible and dangerous to focus on ideological

A/ES-11/PV.14

differences, intimidate and force other countries to
take sides, create isolation, exert pressure and engage
in decoupling and chain-cutting. We must draw lessons
from history, reject division and confrontation, uphold
solidarity and cooperation, practice multilateralism
and jointly safeguard the international system, with the
United Nations at its core, and the international order
based on international law, with a view to promoting
world peace and development.
As the most representative organ of the United
Nations, the General Assembly should play an active
and constructive role in the issue of Ukraine by
bridging differences and forming consensus, garnering
the greatest synergy for peace talks and finding the
greatest common factor among Member States. We have
always believed that any action taken by the General
Assembly should be conducive to the de-escalation of
the situation, the early resumption of dialogue and the
promotion of a political solution to this crisis.
The draft resolution (A/ES-11/L.5) submitted for
adoption at this emergency special session will not
help achieve the objectives mentioned. Therefore, the
Chinese delegation will abstain in the voting. Moreover,
the Chinese delegation wishes to point out that the work
of the General Assembly should be conducted in full
accordance with the rules of procedure and reflect
fairness and impartiality. With regard to procedural
issues, the views of all Member States should be fully
expressed and their motions must be given equal weight.
On the question of Ukraine, China has always
maintained that the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of all countries should be respected, that the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
should be observed, that the reasonable security
concerns of all countries should be taken seriously, and
that support should be given to all the efforts aimed at
peaceful solutions. As a responsible country, China will
always stand on the side of peace. We will work with the
international community and play a constructive role
in de-escalating the situation and seeking a political
solution to the crisis.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I speak to all those who dedicate themselves
to the noble mission of this institution. Soon, we
will vote on draft resolution A/ES-11/L.5, which is
important not just for the future of Ukraine and the
future of Europe, but for the very foundations of this
institution. After all, the United Nations was built on

22-626235/20

A/ES-11/PV.14

an idea that never again would one country be allowed
to take another country’s territory by force. In the wake
of the Second World War, that important idea, despite
all of our differences, brought us together. Now, we are
called upon to defend that idea and the Charter of the
United Nations that embodies it.
The facts are clear. A United Nations Member
State — one with a permanent seat on the Security
Council — has attempted to annex territory from its
neighbour by force. That United Nations Member State
has not only put its neighbour in its crosshairs but has
also put a bullseye on this institution’s core principle
that one country cannot take the territory of another by
force. Eight years ago, the General Assembly was asked
to respond to this same United Nations Member State’s
attempted annexation of Crimea. Back then, the General
Assembly defended the United Nations Charter. We
overwhelmingly adopted resolution 68/262, affirming
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. We must
do the same today.
As in 2014, Russia is testing the resolve of the
world to stand up for the core principles of international
law. How else do we explain the flagrant disregard
of the values of sovereignty, territorial integrity,
and peace and security? How else do we explain the
horrific attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure
that we have seen this week? How else do we explain
the sabre-rattling from Putin and his veiled threats to
deploy nuclear force? Those are threats against this
institution. They are threats against all of us. We have
heard countries underscore the need to pursue solutions
that lead to dialogue and peace. Believe me, there is
nothing we would like to see more than peace. We would
like to stop seeing craters in Ukrainian playgrounds
where swings used to be. We would like to stop seeing
dangerous attacks on the city of Zaporizhzhya that
threaten civilians. We would like to stop seeing Russia
commit war crimes.
The path to peace does not run through placations.
The path to peace does not involve turning the other
way in the face of those flagrant violations. Peace does
not and has never come from silence. The only way
to bring peace is to stop this aggression, to demand
accountability, to stand together with conviction and to
show what we will not tolerate. So let us send a clear
message today. The United Nations will not tolerate
attempts at illegal annexation. We will never recognize
it. The United Nations will not tolerate seizing a
6/20

12/10/2022

neighbour’s land by force. We will stand up to it. The
United Nations will not tolerate the destruction of the
United Nations Charter. We will defend it.
As the Secretary-General has said, Russia’s actions
have no place in our modern world. That is why the draft
resolution before us calls for peace and de-escalation.
But it also makes clear that we reject Russia’s attempted
annexations and that we reject this affront to territorial
integrity, to national sovereignty, to peace and security.
We reject it because we believe in the United Nations.
We believe that the fundamental guardrails of the
international system protect us all. Today it is Russia
invading Ukraine, but tomorrow it could be another
nation whose territory is violated. It could be anyone.
Any country could be next. What should that country
expect from this Hall? Our message is loud and clear. It
does not matter if a nation is big or small, rich or poor,
old or new; if a nation is a United Nations Member State,
its borders are its own and protected by international
law. They cannot be redrawn by anyone else by force.
That is why all of us, together, built this institution.
And that is why we must defend it, here and now.
Today the United States will proudly vote in favour
of the draft resolution, and we urge every country to
do the same. They should do so not because we are
asking them to do it, but because they know that it is the
right thing to do. Let us condemn Russia for its illegal
attempted annexations. Let us affirm the borders of
every United Nations Member State as they stand. And
with the eyes of a worried world upon us, let us renew
our promise, as the United Nations Charter says, to be
good neighbours in the pursuit of a peaceful world.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the Holy See.
Archbishop Caccia (Holy See): We have heard
many words over these past hours. The Holy See is
taking the floor with a succinct and heartfelt plea to end
the madness of this conflict, which with every ongoing
hour takes innocent lives and deepens the wounds
among peoples, destroying the mutual trust upon which
the international order depends.
Just a few days ago, Pope Francis made this
heartfelt appeal:
“In the name of God and in the name of the
sense of humanity that dwells in every heart, I
renew my call for an immediate ceasefire. May
the weapons be silenced and may conditions be
22-62623

12/10/2022

sought for the start of negotiations that will lead
to solutions that are not imposed by force, but are
consensual, just and stable.”
His Holiness clearly indicated that solutions must be
based on respect for the sacrosanct value of human life,
as well as on the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
each country.
Having addressed a direct appeal to the Presidents
of the Russian Federation and Ukraine, as well as
to all the protagonists of international life and the
political leaders of nations, Pope Francis stressed that
we gathered here in this Hall have a role to play and
must do everything possible to bring an end to the war,
without allowing ourselves to be drawn into dangerous
escalations, and to promote and support initiatives for
dialogue. Those words take on greater weight with
the added threat of nuclear escalation and make even
more urgent the transformation of the hearts of those
who hold the outcome of the war in their hands, so
that the hurricane of violence may cease and peaceful
coexistence, in justice, may be rebuilt.
The affirmation of the clear principles of
international law that are underlined by draft resolution
A/ES-11/L.5 before us and that are clearly enshrined
in the United Nations Charter should be understood as
opening a path to a just and peaceful solution, and not
as a way to aggravate the conflict, which has already
claimed too many victims. From this Hall, may the
clarion call of Pope Paul VI sound out again.
(spoke in French)
No more war!
(spoke in English)
No more war!
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the Sovereign Order of Malta.
Mr. Beresford-Hill (Sovereign Order of Malta):
We are now at the conclusion of a strong and dramatic
debate driven by conflict and suffering, aggrandizement
and force. But, unlike with other historical precedents,
particularly those involving Europe, which were
oftentimes conducted in the aftermath of battle, all
of this week and over the past three quarters of a year
we have been deliberating in the heat of it. And yet
the words of this salvific Assembly, uttered amid the
burning rage that consumes two sovereign nations,
seem to have little effect. And in the midst of that

A/ES-11/PV.14

burning rage, it is the poor, the sick and those who
have nowhere to go who suffer the most. All of our
histories are intertwined. The commonality of human
motivation and desire is all too evident. Technology and
the integration of economies, whether we like it or not,
have made all of us more than bystanders. No nation
can allow this conflict to spiral out of control because
the consequences, as we all know, are too terrible to
contemplate and, no matter how far away and isolated
we feel we might be, the detritus of burning rage will
consume us.
The Sovereign Order of Malta is unique in its sui
generis status, as both a sovereign entity and a Catholic
religious order, as it seeks to embrace its citizens with
charity and love. Those citizens are those who are left
behind. They are the forgotten people of our world,
often stateless, homeless, the trafficked, the migrant
and refugees, the suffering humankind that is so often
left without support and hope. Few States are too proud
to refuse our help on behalf of those who are in need.
Fewer still are unwilling to augment their own services
with the apolitical and neutral aid that we offer, without
consideration of religion or politics. Yet today in
Ukraine, despite recent missile attacks on Lviv, our
staff and volunteers continue their mission throughout
the country in the same spirit as that of the heroic
employees of Caritas who were so tragically killed in
Mariupol in April.
We recognize that this debate will shortly close, but
we wish to appeal for a cessation of hostilities on behalf
of those millions of innocent civilians suffering through
no fault of their own: a father crying over a wife killed
during a missile attack, an elderly woman crippled and
confined to bed while gunfire rages outside her flat, a
mother laying to rest her only son, a soldier killed in
battle, a child bereft of parents and alone. When these
vignettes become the norm and when the innocent
see no way out of their pain, then we fail the Charter
of the United Nations. That is a beacon of light that
brings us all together. Let is not allow the Charter to be
consumed by burning rage. Collectively, we are better
than that — much better than that.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution A/ES-11/L.5. Before giving the floor for explanations of vote before the voting, may I remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.

22-626237/20

A/ES-11/PV.14

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the meeting on 10 October (see A/ES-11/
PV.12) we talked about the reasons and goals for holding
referendums in the Donetsk and Luhansk Republics,
as well as in the Kherson and Zaporizhzhya regions.
On 28 September, the final results of the referendums
were tallied and the vast majority of those who
voted — 99 per cent in the Donetsk People’s Republic,
98 per cent in the Luhansk People’s Republic, 93 per
cent in Zaporizhzhya and 87 per cent in the Kherson
region — supported the idea of those regions becoming
a part of Russia. Despite the difficult security situation
and the provocations of the Kyiv regime, the vast
majority of voters decided to cast their vote, ranging
from 76 per cent in the Kherson region to 97 per cent in
the Donetsk People’s Republic.
The results of the vote speak for themselves. The
populations of those regions do not want to return to
Ukraine and have made an informed and free choice
in favour of our country. The referendums were held
in full accordance with the norms and principles of
international law, no matter how hard our Western
opponents or even the Secretary-General, who
suddenly decided to speak for the entire United Nations
without a mandate, may try to prove otherwise. More
than 100 international observers from Italy, Germany,
Venezuela, Latvia and other countries who observed the
referendum also recognized its outcome as legitimate.
Today, however, the General Assembly has been
presented with a politicized and openly provocative
document that not only ignores all of those facts but
also contains a confrontational charge that could
destroy any and all efforts in favour of a diplomatic
solution to the crisis in Ukraine. Despite its title, it
has nothing to do with the protection of international
law and the principles of the United Nations Charter.
By introducing draft resolution A/ES-11/L.5, Western
States are pursuing their own geopolitical goals and are
once again trying to use the members of the General
Assembly as bit players. The expressions of commitment
to the protection of international law that the Assembly
heard today from representatives of the United States
and other NATO member States are a vivid example of
hypocrisy and double standards. It is telling that they
have temporarily even stopped using their pet phrase,
“rules-based order”.
Let us recall the situation in Kosovo. Today’s
loudest critics of the referendums were at the forefront
of supporters of Kosovo’s independence. They insisted
8/20

12/10/2022

that Kosovo had the right to secede from the State in
the event of a real threat of serious violations of the
population’s rights. That was the official Western legal
position presented to the International Court of Justice
when it prepared an advisory opinion at the request of
the General Assembly in 2008. Yet by 2008 nothing had
threatened the Kosovo Albanians for quite some time.
Yugoslavia was no longer on the map and Serbia, which
had been bombed and crushed by NATO countries,
had a foreign contingent stationed as peacekeepers. No
referendums were held in Kosovo. There was simply a
declaration of independence adopted by interim selfgoverning authorities, which had clearly exceeded
their remit. Yet that alone was enough for the West
to recognize the independence of Kosovo. Back then,
our opponents argued that international law does not
prohibit a declaration of independence. And what do we
hear from them today? That Kosovo was different. In
other words, NATO members were prepared to protect
the Kosovo Albanians from threats that did not even
exist at the time, whereas the populations of Donbas,
Kherson and Zaporizhzhya are, in their view, secondclass citizens whose extermination by the Kyiv regime
does not worry the civilized West one bit because they
support Russia.
Another example is Washington, which today is the
loudest to criticize us and cry out about the territorial
integrity of Ukraine. Recently, Washington declared its
readiness to use force to protect Taiwan, which is an
integral part of the People’s Republic of China. It is clear
that no sanctity of the principle of territorial integrity
exists for the United States and NATO member States.
They support it only when it suits their interests.
Today’s draft resolution is simply chock full of
these ugly double standards imposed by the West,
and now its authors are trying to force the General
Assembly to endorse them. The Secretary-General has
been cited even though no such practice exists in the
preparation of General Assembly resolutions because
the statements of the Secretary-General do not represent
the views of Member States. But even leaving that
aside, we have never seen our Western colleagues pay
the same attention to other statements of the SecretaryGeneral, such as when he calls for the resolution of
conflicts in other parts of the world, including those
unleashed at the behest of Western States, in which
women and children are killed and the economy is
damaged. In particular, they stubbornly ignore his call
to end illegal unilateral economic sanctions. The West
22-62623

12/10/2022

is completely deaf to the problems of the global South
and to calls to finally address them. All efforts are
thrown at promoting the Ukrainian narrative, but not
for the sake of the country’s well-being — only in an
attempt to harm Russia.
Today’s draft resolution selectively cites the
1970 Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations (resolution 2625 (XXV)). Not a word is said
about the rights of peoples to self-determination,
which paved the way for decolonization and made it
possible for many States represented in this Hall today
to gain a seat in the General Assembly. Today they are
trying to make members forget that the West opposed
that process with all its might while the Soviet Union
contributed to it.
In recent days, we have all witnessed how the
West, driven by neocolonial instincts, has unleashed
an unprecedented campaign of blackmail and armtwisting among developing States, seeking by any
means to force them to support the anti-Russian draft
resolution. We know that this campaign has been led
from Washington and that the capitals of members of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries have literally
been besieged by United States political emissaries and
their allies, who have directly threatened punishment
and consequences for disobedience. This was even
written about in leading Western media. Politico
magazine quotes United States State Department
officials whose words clearly show how Washington
and other Western capitals truly feel about the voices of
developing countries. Those officials said that when it
comes to voting on the anti-Russian draft in the General
Assembly, “every Fiji counts. Every Palau counts”. I
wonder if the representatives of Fiji and Palau enjoy
hearing such quotes.
These are all classic methods used by slave owners
and colonizers who are used to seeing the world through
a colonial prism. I will not conceal the fact that in
recent days, a number of colleagues from countries of
the global South have approached us to tell us about the
economic blackmail and direct threats that they have had
to endure from the United States and European States.
It is clear that in this situation, the votes that we will
see on our monitors should be viewed precisely through
the prism of the Western blackmail campaign, which is
unprecedented in the General Assembly. Such methods
do not and cannot have a place in the United Nations.

A/ES-11/PV.14

Today we are all attending a truly historic meeting.
Before our very eyes, the United States and its satellites
are teaching us a lesson in “de-sovereignization” live
on the air. We regret that the unscrupulous Western
blackmailers who have been trying to wrestle the
votes they need from developing States were aided
by the President of the General Assembly, whose
procedural manoeuvering on 10 October, on the first
day of the resumed special session, not only deprived
United Nations Members of the opportunity to vote
without coercion through secret ballot but also gave
the blackmailers additional time to carry out their
blackmail. I hope that despite all this, there will be
enough States present in this Hall today that are
prepared to stand up to the Western dictate and to vote
independently, without fear of surveillance from Big
Brother. We call on United Nations Member States to
take an unbiased look at the current situation and to
vote against the draft resolution before us.
Mr. Pérez Ayestarán (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We are participating
in today’s meeting as a result of the activation of the
mechanism established in resolution 76/262, which
requires us to meet. However, we are not obliged to
consider, much less to adopt, a draft resolution on which
consultations have never been held and no efforts have
been made to take the views and proposals of all Member
States into account, which demonstrates the clear lack
of interest of its proponents in forging a consensus on
the text. We are convinced that this method of work will
hardly bring us closer to the goal that should bring us
together equally — that of achieving peace.
Just over seven months ago, when we first met
in this very Hall on this issue (see A/ES-11/PV.1), we
alerted the international community to the existence
of a three-tiered crisis in the Eastern European region
which, if not addressed in a balanced and cautious
manner, would lead to a dangerous phase of overheating
between nuclear Powers, which, seeing their strategic
and security balances altered, could unleash a conflict
of global proportions. Today we regret that our
warnings have been ignored and that, far from having
been used in recent months to build a path that would
put a stop to the escalation of tensions and bring us
closer to a peaceful resolution of the conflict, we now
find ourselves in a moment of greater confrontation,
greater tensions and greater divisions.
However, as a country that believes that peace
is the only way, we cannot but continue to insist that
our role today must be to correct course and create

22-626239/20

A/ES-11/PV.14

a firewall between the three levels of the crisis in
Ukraine in order to prevent a chain reaction that will
lead us, like sleepwalkers, into the abyss. In a way
that is unprecedented in the past 60 years, we are
approaching a point of no return that has the serious
potential to compromise the survival of present and
future generations. We must therefore recognize that
today the prospects of an outbreak of a conflict with
nuclear dimensions seem to be getting closer. We note
with great concern an increase in actions and policies
that seem to only seek to create a clash of civilizations
in the false illusion of a definitive unipolar victory — a
clash that would cause a global conflict between nuclear
Powers that would destroy humankind as we know
it today.
This is not the time to instrumentalize the General
Assembly or to entrench a new Cold War mentality,
with its bloc confrontation politics, which could
result in serious miscalculations with unimaginable
consequences for humankind as a whole. We must make
a collective effort to turn down the heated rhetoric,
bearing in mind that, as the facts show, discursive
excesses are precursors to violent actions that, on the
one hand, encourage a dangerous illusion of control
over events and, on the other, deliberately lead us away
from the path of peace. In that context, we cannot allow
persistent attempts to normalize the language of war,
much less to convince entire nations of the idea that a
nuclear war would have winners and losers, when the
reality is that it would generate only death, destruction,
pain and suffering for everyone. It is mutually assured
destruction. The path of incendiary speeches and
reckless actions is not only the wrong path, but also
an irresponsible one that only places humankind at
greater risk.
It is for all the aforementioned reasons that
we believe that the draft resolution contained in
document A/ES-11/L.5 will in no way contribute to the
objective of achieving a lasting peace through political
dialogue and diplomatic negotiation. That is why we
call on the responsible members of the international
community to vote against the text. Quite the contrary,
our Organization must play its central role in the
preservation of humankind at this historic and decisive
moment by facilitating a constructive and good-faith
environment that would foster dialogue, negotiation
and the achievement of a peaceful solution.
10/20

12/10/2022

In conclusion, from this rostrum we call for
the reduction of tensions and the cessation of war
propaganda and the discourse of intolerance, guided
by hateful ideologies. We also emphasize that it is only
through diplomacy, dialogue and self-restraint, without
pressure or sanctions, that we will be able to avoid
being deliberately pushed towards a more acute phase
of the conflict, towards a longer and more obdurate
phase, and towards a phase that only prolongs the crisis
over time and generates consequences that will take
generations to overcome.
Mr. Rai (Nepal): My delegation is deeply distressed
by the protracted violence and conflict in Ukraine. It
has posed a serious threat to international peace and
security. Nepal’s position on Ukraine remains clear. The
principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity, political
independence and non-aggression, as enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations, are inviolable and must
be fully respected by all Member States at all times.
There cannot be any ifs, ands or buts. The United
Nations Charter clearly stipulates that all Members
must settle their international disputes by peaceful
means in such a manner that international peace and
security and justice are not endangered. Peaceful
coexistence, non-aggression, non-interference, respect
for sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence are fundamentals of Nepal’s foreign
policy. Those principles are the foundations of peace,
security and stability in the world. Nepal reiterates its
call for the cessation of hostilities in Ukraine to create
conditions for dialogue and diplomacy, which are the
only pathway to resolve conflicts and find a lasting
political solution.
Based on Nepal’s long-standing principled position
on the inviolability of the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of all States and
its unwavering respect for international law, the rulesbased international system, the United Nations Charter
and the values of world peace, my delegation will vote in
favour of draft resolution A/ES-11/L.5 before us today.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines will vote in favour
of draft resolution A/ES-11/L.5 before us and wishes to
offer an explanation of its vote before the voting.
The recent referendums and subsequent signing of
treaties to annex several regions are deeply disturbing
developments in the ongoing conflict in Ukraine. We do
not consider that the manner in which the referendums
22-62623

12/10/2022

were conducted was in accordance with the tenets of
international law. As such, they constitute violations
of Ukraine’s sovereignty, political independence and
territorial integrity.
Our vote in favour of the draft resolution serves
to firmly underscore that the bedrock principles of
sovereignty, political independence and territorial
integrity must be respected and strictly adhered to by
all. Those principles are sacrosanct, and they should
be applied consistently and upheld in the international
community as universal truths.
The conflict in Ukraine has, tragically, resulted in
great loss of life and the destruction of critical civilian
infrastructure. Additionally, its global repercussions
have had catastrophic impacts on countries located far
beyond its borders. We therefore reiterate the resounding
call for an immediate cessation of hostilities and for the
exercise of restraint in all actions.
The only path towards peace is through diplomatic
engagement that prioritizes constructive dialogue and
good-faith negotiations that take into consideration the
legitimate security concerns of all parties. Provocative
rhetoric, unproductive diplomatic posturing and actions
that exacerbate tensions and intensify the existing
high-alert postures, which bring us increasingly
closer to nuclear catastrophe, are unhelpful and
wholly objectionable. A responsible international
community should therefore seek to encourage the
type of engagement that prevents further polarization
and facilitates a prompt diplomatic resolution to this
conflict. The incessant talk on all sides of total victory,
whatever that means, opens the door to a nuclear
Armageddon. Let us give mature diplomacy a chance
to achieve peace. Peace is the legitimate aspiration of
all peoples. The world cannot countenance, nor can it
afford, another catastrophic conflict.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.
Before proceeding to take a decision on draft
resolution A/ES-11/L.5, I wish to address the question
concerning the majority required for the adoption of the
draft resolution. In the light of paragraphs 2 and 3 of
Article 18 of the Charter of the United Nations, is there
any objection to taking action on draft resolution A/ES11/L.5 by a two-thirds majority of the members present
and voting?
It was so decided.

A/ES-11/PV.14

The President: A two-thirds majority of members
present and voting is therefore required for the adoption
of draft resolution A/ES-11/L.5.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/ES-11/L.5, entitled “Territorial integrity
of Ukraine: defending the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations”. For members’ information, the
draft resolution has closed for e-sponsorship.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft
resolution A/ES-11/L.5, and in addition to the
delegations listed in the document, the following
countries have become sponsors of the draft resolution:
Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Belize,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Chile, Comoros, Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Fiji, Guyana, Jamaica, Marshall Islands, the
Federated States of Micronesia, Monaco, Myanmar,
New Zealand, North Macedonia, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Samoa, San Marino, Singapore, Suriname,
Switzerland, Tonga, the United Kingdom, the United
States of America and Uruguay.
The President: At its twelfth plenary meeting of
the emergency special session (see A/ES-11/PV.12),
the General Assembly decided to take action on draft
resolution A/ES-11/L.5 by recorded vote. We shall now
begin the voting process.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Canada, Chad, Chile,
Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Denmark, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland,
Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Latvia,

22-6262311/20

A/ES-11/PV.14

12/10/2022

Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar,
Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger,
Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
Timor-Leste, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Türkiye, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay,
Vanuatu, Yemen, Zambia

have friendly relations with all parties and are convinced
that the best way to avoid any negative repercussions is
to settle the crisis through dialogue and diplomacy, in a
way that caters to the interests of all parties concerned.
Therefore, the GCC States urge all parties to exercise
restraint, avoid further escalation and adopt peaceful
means of resolving the dispute.

Against:
Belarus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Syrian Arab
Republic

Ms. Ferreira (Angola): The Republic of Angola
voted in favour of resolution ES-11/4, in accordance
with its convictions concerning the well-founded,
sacrosanct principle of territorial integrity enshrined in
its own Constitution, which defines Angola as a unitary
and indivisible State whose territory is inviolable
and unalienable. Our position is also in line with the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and
the Constitutive Act of the African Union. Indeed, the
predecessor organization of the African Union, the
Organization of African Unity, laid down the basis for
the same principle when the founding fathers wisely
decided, in 1964, to maintain the principle of the
intangibility of the borders inherited from colonialism.

Abstaining:
Algeria, Armenia, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Burundi, Central African Republic, China,
Congo, Cuba, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Guinea,
Honduras, India, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Mali,
Mongolia, Mozambique, Namibia, Pakistan, South
Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Togo, Uganda, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Zimbabwe
Draft resolution A/ES-11/L.5 was adopted by 143
votes to 5, with 35 abstentions (resolution ES-11/4).
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote after the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by representatives from
their seats.
Mr. Alwasil (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): It
gives me pleasure to deliver this statement on behalf
of the States members of the Gulf Cooperation
Council (GCC).
The GCC States have been following the situation
in Ukraine with extreme concern since the start of the
conflict. We would like to stress that the GCC States
12/20

The voting of the GCC States in favour of
resolution ES-11/4 is in line with our commitment to
the firm principles of international law and the Charter
of the United Nations. We stress the need to respect
the sovereignty of States, uphold the principle of goodneighbourly relations, abstain from the threat or use of
force and settle disputes peacefully.
In conclusion, the GCC States would like to
express their hope that efforts will continue until a
solution satisfactory to all parties is reached, in order
to avoid any negative humanitarian, political and
economic ramifications.

Since the 1960s, the Russian people have always
shown their friendship and solidarity with the Angolan
people, having played a decisive role in our liberation
struggle against colonialism and the invasion of
Angolan territory by the army of the apartheid regime
of South Africa. Today we have a close relationship of
friendship and cooperation with the Russian Federation
in several areas of common interest. With Ukraine,
the Republic of Angola also enjoys good diplomatic
relations and cooperation. Those relations constitute
one of the reasons for the deep concern constantly
expressed by the Republic of Angola about the war
between the Russian Federation and Ukraine, which,
in addition to causing countless human casualties, has
generated thousands of displaced people and refugees at
a level not seen since the Second World war, as well as
22-62623

12/10/2022

the destruction of important infrastructures of Ukraine.
The same war has also had serious consequences on
world peace and security, as well as on the economy of
all countries in general.
The Republic of Angola therefore reiterates its
appeal to the parties to cease hostilities and to strive for
a peaceful resolution of the conflict through dialogue,
in full respect for international law. The call of the
Republic of Angola for a peaceful resolution is in line
with the African Union principle of non-indifference,
as well as with the efforts of His Excellency Mr. João
Manuel Gonçalves Lourenço, President of the Republic
of Angola, to promote peace and security in Africa
in his capacity as Champion of the African Union for
Peace and Reconciliation in Africa.
Mr. Larbaoui (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic):
Algeria would like to express its grave concern over
the deterioration of the situation in Ukraine and the
exacerbation of polarization, which has contributed
significantly to the escalation of the crisis and its
repercussions on international peace and security.
Algeria also wishes to express its grave concern at the
consequences the crisis has had on the food and energy
sectors, as well as its destructive effects on all States.
The crisis adds to the major challenges that countries
of the world are already facing, particularly developing
countries, which continue to work hard to overcome
the effects of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. In that regard, based on our principled
positions and our profound belief in the values of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, Algeria
once again confirms that we are firmly committed to
the basic rules of international law and the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
particularly respect for the sovereignty of States and the
total rejection of the annexation of territories, which is
considered a breach of international law.
Algeria calls on the international community and the
United Nations to discharge their basic responsibilities
and to fully abandon the approach of double standards.
We call on them to end all forms of occupation and
annexation of territories by force that have been on
their agenda for decades, particularly in Palestine, the
occupied Syrian Golan and Western Sahara. Moreover,
Algeria stresses that multilateral international efforts
require the strengthening of dialogue and cooperation
and the intensification of meaningful international
diplomatic efforts to find a solution to the crisis and
prevent a collapse of diplomatic norms. That would

A/ES-11/PV.14

allow the identification of a consensual political
solution that would ultimately guarantee the prevalence
of international peace and security.
Ms. Joyini (South Africa): South Africa is deeply
concerned by the ongoing war in Ukraine, the increased
loss of life and the deteriorating humanitarian situation.
The detrimental effects of the war are also being felt
all over the world. We urge the parties to the conflict
to fully respect international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. Civilians, humanitarian
personnel and vulnerable persons, including women
and children, must be fully protected.
Speaking in the Assembly in March (see A/ES-11/
PV.9), we said that wars have no winners and that the
real heroes are those who work for peace. It is therefore
regrettable that, in the case of Ukraine, peace remains
elusive. Instead, we see steps being taken to encourage
a continuation of the war. All parties are reminded that
they must comply with the laws of war as contained in
the Geneva Conventions, in particular those relating to
the targeting of civilians. The principle of distinction
is clear that all parties should take responsibility to
ensure that civilians are not targeted.
South Africa considers the territorial integrity of
States, and that of Ukraine, to be sacrosanct and we reject
all actions that undermine the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and international
law. We have noted the statement of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. António Guterres, that any annexation of
a State’s territory by another resulting from the threat
or the use of force is a violation of the principles of the
United Nations Charter and international law.
We abstained in the voting on resolution ES-11/4
because we believe that the objective of the General
Assembly, in keeping with its mandate, must always be
to contribute to a constructive outcome that is conducive
to the creation of sustainable peace in Ukraine.
Unfortunately, some elements of the resolution do not
address that. In the context of the heightened tensions
of recent days, all efforts should be geared towards a
ceasefire and a political solution.
The General Assembly must stand together in
seeking peace and unanimously call for an immediate
end to the war. That should be our immediate focus.
We therefore expected that any additional resolutions
would focus on concrete proposals to end the war,
which is exacting such a heavy toll on the people of
Ukraine. South Africa remains steadfast in its belief

22-6262313/20

A/ES-11/PV.14

that dialogue, mediation and diplomacy are the
only path that will lead to a peaceful resolution of
the conflict. We reiterate our call for a cessation of
hostilities as a matter of urgency. That would create the
environment required for a political process leading to
sustainable peace, taking into account the concerns of
all affected States.
We were encouraged by the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral to finalize an agreement for the export of
grain and fertilizer to countries in need. We had hoped
that this important example could be the basis for an
agreement leading to a diplomatic resolution of the
conflict. We therefore call on the Secretary-General to
use his good offices to mediate in pursuit of finding a
sustainable solution and on us, as Member States, to
facilitate an enabling environment for dialogue and a
negotiated solution to the conflict.
South Africa stands ready to work with all Member
States to contribute to the creation of that conducive
environment. We urge the Security Council to play a
constructive role in the resolution of this conflict, in line
with its mandate for the maintenance of international
peace and security. The Council cannot abandon its
responsibility at this time. And to the women and
children of Ukraine, we wish them strength.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Pakistan abstained in the
voting on resolution ES-11/4. Pakistan fully supports
the resolution’s call for respect for the principle of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States — a
principle that applies as much to Ukraine as it does to
other Member States. States cannot be torn apart by the
use of force. Those principles must be consistently and
universally respected.
In the case of the referendums mentioned in the
resolution, we acknowledge Ukraine’s complex history
and the provisions of the Minsk agreements. However,
under international law, the right of self-determination
applies to peoples who are under foreign or colonial
domination and to those who have not yet exercised the
right to self-determination, as in the case of Jammu and
Kashmir. We look forward to seeing similar concern
about and condemnation of the attempts by India to
formalize its illegal annexation of the internationally
recognized disputed territory of Jammu and Kashmir,
illegally occupied by India in complete violation
of international law and relevant resolutions of the
Security Council on Jammu and Kashmir.
14/20

12/10/2022

Moreover, the exercise of the right to selfdetermination should be conducted in an environment
that is free of military occupation and under impartial
auspices, preferably under the supervision of the
United Nations. Pakistan therefore endorses the basic
principle, reflected in the resolution, that referendums
conducted for peoples in regions that are part of a
sovereign State and in an environment that is not free
and not under impartial auspices are ultra vires and
legally unacceptable.
Unfortunately, the resolution contains several
provisions that go beyond declaring the referendums
null and void and includes provisions that my delegation
has been unable to endorse. The first is in the third
preambular paragraph. There, the resolution recalls
resolution 68/262 and resolution ES-11/2, of 24 March,
all of which Pakistan abstained on. Secondly, the
sponsors of the draft resolution have not accepted
proposals for an immediate, peaceful resolution of the
conflict. My delegation believes that, irrespective of
the origin of the conflict, the highest priority at this
moment is the immediate cessation of hostilities and
the resumption of a peaceful dialogue through direct
negotiations, mediation or other peaceful means to
resolve the causes of the conflict and restore peace
and security in Ukraine. Unless we halt the conflict,
there is every likelihood that it will escalate further,
with consequences that could be devastating for the
entire world.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
delegation of Egypt voted in favour of resolution
ES-11/4 in accordance with its position of principle,
namely, adherence to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, rejection of the threat
or use of force in international relations, adoption of
peaceful methods of dispute settlement, and respect
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States.
Egypt, a founding country of the United Nations,
has adhered to those principles for seven decades
without deviating from or denying them at any stage.
Egypt reiterates its call on the parties to the RussianUkrainian conflict and on all those with influence to
reach a negotiated solution that addresses the concerns
of all parties without exception and ends the fighting,
the destruction and the negative impacts of the conflict
on civilians in order to ensure the interests of both
parties in an equal manner and to achieve international
stability and security.
22-62623

12/10/2022

The current situation should prompt the international
community to wonder whether it was possible to
avoid a crisis and whether reason and dialogue could
have prevailed. What if each party had listened to the
concerns of others and a settlement satisfactory to all
parties had been reached? Would we not be in a better
position for the sake of our world, our countries and our
peoples, who suffer and deserve better?
We stress the need to stop using double standards
and cherry-picking among interests and principles in
addressing international issues. If that persists, our
contemporary international order will experience more
exacerbated crises and will be unable to address them in
an effective manner, ultimately leading to the creation
of an order that is unable to positively interact with the
parties’ demands.
We also must note that the current crisis in Ukraine
is impacting the entire world while negatively affecting
its economy. Developing countries, including Egypt,
are the most affected when it comes to energy and
food security and the supply of goods and grain, which
is an essential nutrient for our peoples. The crisis is
also increasing budget deficits in those countries by
generating fewer employment opportunities and higher
unemployment rates. Nobody listens to their problems
or cares to address them.
From this international rostrum, Egypt calls for
reason and dialogue. We call on the parties to refrain
from taking any action that could exacerbate the current
crisis. We call for international efforts to address
the crisis before it reaches the point of no return and
imposes tremendous losses on all countries and costs
them resources that should have been directed towards
development and progress of all parties.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): India is deeply concerned
at the escalation of the conflict in Ukraine, including
the targeting of civilian infrastructure and the deaths
of civilians. We have consistently advocated that no
solution can ever be found at the cost of human lives.
The escalation of hostilities and violence is in no one’s
interest. We have urged that all efforts be made for an
immediate cessation of hostilities and an urgent return
to the path of dialogue and diplomacy. We believe that
the global order that we all subscribe to is based on
international law, the Charter of the United Nations
and respect for the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of all States. Those principles must be upheld without
exception. Dialogue is the only answer to settling

A/ES-11/PV.14

differences and disputes, however daunting that may
appear at this moment. The path to peace requires us
to keep all channels of diplomacy open. We therefore
sincerely hope for an early resumption of peace talks to
bring about an immediate ceasefire and resolution of the
conflict. India stands ready to support all such efforts
aimed at de-escalation.
It is also unfortunate that as the trajectory of the
Ukrainian conflict unfolds, the entire global South has
suffered substantial collateral damage. As developing
countries face the brunt of the conflict’s consequences
on food, fuel and fertilizer supplies, it is critical that the
voice of the global South be heard and their legitimate
concerns duly addressed. We must therefore not
initiate measures that further complicate a struggling
global economy.
There are other pressing issues at play, some of
which have not been adequately addressed in resolution
ES-11/4, adopted today. Our decision to abstain is
consistent with our well-thought-out national position. I
would also quote from the address of my Minister for
External Affairs to the Assembly last month:
“India is on the side of peace and will remain firmly
there. We are on the side that respects the United
Nations Charter and its founding principles. We are
on the side that calls for dialogue and diplomacy as
the only way out of conflict. We are on the side of
those struggling to make ends meet, even as they
stare at escalating costs of food, fuel and fertilizers.
It is therefore in our collective interest to work
constructively, both within the United Nations and
outside it, to find an early resolution to this conflict.”
(A/77/PV.12, p. 52)
My Prime Minister has said unequivocally that this
cannot be an era of war. With that firm resolve to strive
for a peaceful solution through dialogue and diplomacy,
India decided to abstain.
I wish to make one final point before I conclude.
We have witnessed, unsurprisingly, yet again an attempt
by one delegation to misuse this forum and make
frivolous and pointless remarks against my country.
Such statements deserve our collective contempt and
sympathy for a mindset that repeatedly utters falsehoods.
It is important, however, to set the record straight. The
entire territory of Jammu and Kashmir is and will always
be an integral and inalienable part of India, irrespective
of what the representative of Pakistan believes or covets.
We call on Pakistan to stop cross-border terrorism so
that our citizens can enjoy their right to life and liberty.

22-6262315/20

A/ES-11/PV.14

Mr. Muhith (Bangladesh): Bangladesh voted
in favour of resolution ES-11/4, entitled “Territorial
integrity of Ukraine: defending the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations”. We did so because
we strongly believe that the purposes and principles
of the United Nations Charter regarding respect for
sovereignty and territorial integrity and the peaceful
settlement of all disputes must be complied with
universally by everyone, everywhere, under all
circumstances and without any exception. We also
believe that the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of any country, within its internationally recognized
borders, should be respected. In that connection, we
especially underscore the need for the international
community to take a similar, uniform stand against
the annexations of Palestinian and other Arab lands
by Israel.
Bangladesh remains deeply concerned by the
continuation of the conflict in Ukraine and its
global socioeconomic implications. We believe
that antagonism, like war, economic sanctions or
countersanctions cannot bring good to any nation.
Dialogue, discussion and mediation are the best ways
to resolve crises and disputes. As a firm believer in
multilateralism, we will continue to stand with the
United Nations and the Office of the Secretary-General
and to support them in every way we can. We urge that
in order to gain the trust and confidence of the people
at all levels, the United Nations and the Office of the
Secretary-General must lead from the front and work
to fulfil the expectations of all. Bangladesh therefore
urges all parties to the conflict to play a constructive
role for de-escalation, to resume immediate diplomatic
dialogue in order to settle all disputes by peaceful
means, and to refrain from taking any action that may
endanger international peace and security. We should
work towards ending war and stopping the arms race
for the good of humankind. As States Members of the
United Nations, we must continue to work together to
promote peace and development.
Mr. Chindawongse (Thailand): As a small,
sovereign nation, Thailand holds sacred the Charter
of the United Nations and international law, as
they are our first and last line of defence. We are
unequivocally committed to the principle of respect
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States,
as enshrined in the United Nations Charter. It has long
been Thailand’s long-standing and consistent policy
to be opposed to the threat or use of force against the
16/20

12/10/2022

territorial integrity of any State and to the unprovoked
acquisition of the territory of another State by force.
However, Thailand chose to abstain in the voting
on resolution ES-11/4 because it takes place in an
extremely volatile and emotionally charged atmosphere
and situation and thus marginalizes the chance for
crisis diplomacy to bring about a peaceful and practical
negotiated resolution to the conflict, which may push
the world towards the brink of nuclear war and global
economic collapse. We are genuinely concerned about
the increased politicization of international principles,
which has become counterproductive, as the means
and guidance to end the war. Condemnation provokes
intransigence and thereby greatly reduces the chance
for constructive engagement.
Thailand bemoans the physical, social and
humanitarian destruction of Ukraine and the extreme
hardship endured by Ukrainians. We therefore
emphasize the need for all stakeholders in this absolute
tragedy in Ukraine to de-escalate the conflict and
violence and to try to find a peaceful means to settle
differences by addressing the pragmatic reality and
concerns of all involved. Human security and the right
to life are important pillars of article 3 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, and to date Ukrainians
and many millions of people around the world have
been deprived of that right. It is the ultimate duty and
responsibility of this Organization to restore peace and
normalcy of life to the Ukrainians, not through violent
means but by diplomatic mechanisms that can only
bring practical and lasting peace.
Mr. Nayeck (Mauritius): Mauritius voted in favour
of resolution ES-11/4 because Mauritius firmly believes
in respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
all nations, big or small. We are also firm supporters of
the principle of non-interference in the internal matters
of any State unless mandated under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations.
Mauritius is concerned about the worsening
situation in Europe and its consequences on developing
States, especially those that depend on food, fuel and
fertilizer imports. We welcome the initiative of the
international community to ensure that international
law prevails and that the principles and values of the
United Nations Charter are respected by all countries.
However, we must emphasize that such action must
be taken in an indiscriminate manner, just as much
as international law must apply indiscriminately. The
credibility of our Organization suffers when double
22-62623

12/10/2022

standards are applied in other cases where there is illegal
occupation and where international law continues to
be flouted.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Brazil voted in
favour of resolution ES-11/4. As we recently stated in
the Security Council (see S/PV.9143), Brazil does not
believe that populations in areas of conflict are able to
freely express their opinion by means of referendums.
The results thereof do not constitute a valid expression
of their will and cannot be considered legitimate. We
voted in favour also because we stand by the principle
of the territorial integrity of Ukraine, as well as that
of all Member States. International law and the United
Nations Charter must be respected and preserved.
Inasmuch as the facilitators have shown flexibility,
we are disappointed that our proposal to include a clear
message urging the parties to cease hostilities and
engage in peace negotiations was not included in the
draft. Our role is to make room for a peaceful resolution
of the conflict to emerge through diplomacy and political
dialogue. To that end, we must unite in de-escalating
tensions instead of fostering antagonizing views. We
must avoid the crystallization of positions and fuelling
disputes, to the detriment of civilian populations on
the ground.
Last but very importantly, Brazil is deeply concerned
about all implicit or explicit threats involving the use
of nuclear weapons in connection with the conflict.
Any use of nuclear weapons is unacceptable and
would have catastrophic humanitarian consequences.
Opening avenues for dialogue is our only option out of
the conflict.
Mr. Pedroso Cuesta (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
International relations are taking a very dangerous
path. Threats, extortion and economic and
political-diplomatic coercion are being used openly
against the countries of the South in order to subject
them to an order based on the capricious policies of
a group of powerful States. That, together with the
expansion of NATO and its increasingly aggressive
doctrine, and the development of fifth-generation
unconventional warfare, inevitably leads to a climate
of tension and conflict, the consequences of which are
today unpredictable. Double standards, selectivity,
incoherence and political manipulation harm the cause
of international peace and security. There is a long list
of States members of the Assembly that have suffered
the terrible consequences of invasions, military

A/ES-11/PV.14

aggression and unilateral sanctions that flagrantly
violate the Charter of the United Nations. In an act of
supreme hypocrisy, some of those primarily responsible
for those violations now proclaim themselves defenders
of the principles of the Charter.
Cuba defends the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States and the self-determination
of peoples. The Charter of the United Nations and
international law must be respected by all Member
States, without exception and in all circumstances.
Cuba opposes the threat or use of force and supports
the peaceful resolution of conflicts. In that context,
it advocates a serious, constructive and realistic
diplomatic solution to the current crisis in Ukraine,
by peaceful means and in unrestricted adherence to
the norms of international law, which guarantees the
security and sovereignty of all, as well as peace and
regional and international security.
Several months have passed since the conflict in
Ukraine began. The General Assembly and the Security
Council have considered this issue in multiple meetings.
However, the loss of innocent lives continues, material
damage persists and the causes that gave rise to the
conflict remain unchanged. In Cuba’s opinion, the
text presented to us, prepared by some members of the
Security Council, does nothing to alter that scenario.
On the contrary, it follows the same pattern of previous
resolutions, characterized by the absence of a true will
to de-escalate the crisis and protect human lives, which
should be the main and priority objective of all. It is our
responsibility to reduce tensions, not to stir them up. It
is also our responsibility to achieve a ceasefire and help
resolve the conflict, not to exacerbate it. We will not
achieve peace by compounding the differences between
the parties or by promoting confrontation. Achieving
peace is totally inimical to the promotion of initiatives
that sharpen inconsistencies and confrontation.
Regarding the multiple votes of a procedural nature
that took place on Monday, 10 October (see A/ES-11/
PV.12), we call on Member States to preserve and to
respect the integrity of the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly. All initiatives put forward with the
sincere intent to promote dialogue and negotiation,
with the participation of all the parties involved, and to
reach a genuine peace settlement can count on Cuba’s
support. Resolution ES-11/4, which was adopted today,
does not meet those requirements. For the reasons
stated, the Cuban delegation abstained in the voting on
the resolution.

22-6262317/20

A/ES-11/PV.14

12/10/2022

Mr. Pary Rodríguez (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I take the floor to express
the principled positions of Bolivia with regard to this or
any other conflict on the agenda of the United Nations.

Bolivia abstained in the voting because it is our
view that the decisions of the General Assembly must
address substantive solutions and promote genuine
spaces for dialogue and peace.

In strict adherence with our Constitution and
the principles of diplomacy of peoples that guide our
international relations, we categorically reject any act
of aggression used to resolve conflicts and disputes
between States. Likewise, we reject any weakening
of the Charter of the United Nations and international
law, including annexations and occupations, which
also contravene the agreed rules upon which we have
built multilateralism over more than 70 years. We
reiterate the proposal we made in the general debate
of the seventy-seventh session to work as a community
of nations to declare the world a zone of peace (see
A/77/PV.5). Our commitment is to peace, dialogue,
mediation, negotiation, conciliation, arbitration and
preventive diplomacy, in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
which have been circumvented on many occasions in
recent decades.

The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting.

In that regard, we express our deep concern over the
escalation of violence in the military conflict between
two countries in Eastern Europe. The effects of the crisis
have affected the lives of millions of people in regions
throughout the world. It has generated economic,
energy, food and humanitarian insecurity that affects us
all. The double standards deployed in the conflict only
exacerbate the situation. Many speak about defending
peace while they continue to supply weapons and
promote measures that accelerate the violence. And,
curiously, many of the serious humanitarian crises that
affect the Middle East and Africa have not been at the
core of the Organization’s debates.
We must now find solutions and proactive measures
that will, above all, curb the conflict and promote
conditions that make peace and international security
for all possible. The United Nations has a fundamental
role to play in that task, in particular in reducing tension
and making progress towards committed dialogue that
will ensure a political and diplomatic solution to the
conflict. To that effect, we call for the establishment of
a high-level commission, led by the Secretary-General,
together with recognized guarantor States that are
accepted by the parties to the conflict, with a view to
intensifying dialogue, negotiations and peacemaking.
18/20

Several delegations have asked to speak in
exercise of the right of reply. May I remind members
that statements in the exercise of the right of reply are
limited to ten minutes for the first intervention and to
five minutes for the second intervention and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Kayinamura (Rwanda): We apologize for
taking the floor. It was not our intention. However, we
are compelled to take the floor to reply to the comments
made by the representative of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (see A/ES-11/PV.13).
We are not surprised that the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo chose to misuse
this platform. The continued misuse by the Democratic
Republic of the Congo of various platforms to engage in
baseless and malicious propaganda against neighbouring
countries, including my own, Rwanda, is not new. It
has been the tactic used to run away from its internal
responsibilities to address the root causes of conflict in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Rwanda stresses
that the blame game will not address the problems in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. That country
has the key and padlock to solve and to unlock the
problems that exist there. Externalizing the domestic
problems of the Democratic Republic of the Congo will
not solve them. That will only serve a short-term goal.
Rwanda is fully committed to working with
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and other
neighbouring countries, through existing frameworks,
to address the root causes of the problems in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, including the
dignified return of Congolese refugees who have
stayed in neighbouring countries, including in Rwanda,
for too long. Political leaders have falsely accused the
neighbouring countries with unfounded allegations.
The grievances with respect to the internal concerns
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo must be
addressed internally.
We recall that in March, the United Nations
human rights body issued a report on hate speech in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The incitement
22-62623

12/10/2022

of violence, including among leaders, was implicated.
In May and December 2020, the same body released
a report showing that hateful messages were being
entrenched within the communities and that the tribes
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo were being
pitted against one another. In 2022, the international
community was alarmed by the escalation of hate speech
and incitement to discrimination, hostile violence
nationwide and specifically against Kinyarwanda
speakers in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In a
statement issued by the High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the Special Adviser on the Prevention
of Genocide, both were disturbed by the increase in
violence and hate speech, noting that “hate speech
fuels the conflict by exacerbating mistrust between the
communities”. Those are very serious concerns that
must be addressed by the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The blame game will not solve the problem.
What the Democratic Republic of the Congo is not
telling this house is that it is home to over 130 armed
groups, combining both foreign and local armed groups,
including the Forces démocratiques de libération du
Rwanda, which is a genocide force that left Rwanda
after committing the genocide in 1994. To this day, it has
been a thorn in the side of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Security Council because they cannot
address the problem. The existing frameworks — the
Nairobi framework, the Rwandan framework, as well
as other existing agreements — need to be implemented
by the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Rwanda,
like any other regional country, rejects the propaganda
narrative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
according to which the countries of the region want to
invade or have invaded. Those are absurd statements
without basis that are intended to divert attention from
complex internal issues.
Finally, Rwanda believes that the regional approach
recommended by the second Heads of State Conclave
in Nairobi and the Luanda road map in Angola are
essential and must be implemented in good faith. The
existing frameworks also need to be implemented by
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and several
other armed groups. In that regard, the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo should
acknowledge its own obligations rather than come
into these forums and say that neighbouring countries
intend to invade them.

A/ES-11/PV.14

Mr. Sarwani (Pakistan): My delegation is
exercising its right of reply in response to the comments
made by the representative of India.
Disinformation and falsehood define India’s
diplomacy today. The biggest falsehood that we have
just heard is that Jammu and Kashmir is a part of
India. Jammu and Kashmir is not a so-called part of
India, nor is it India’s internal matter. India remains
in occupation of an internationally recognized disputed
territory whose final disposition needs to be decided in
accordance with the democratic principle of a free and
impartial plebiscite under the auspices of the United
Nations, as provided for under numerous Security
Council resolutions. India has accepted that decision
and is bound to comply with it in accordance with
Article 25 of the Charter of the United Nations.
The maps of the United Nations also show Kashmir
as a disputed territory. In Kashmir, the oldest United
Nations peacekeeping force is deployed at present along
the line of control. Above all, the report that is under
consideration by the Security Council itself considers
Kashmir to be a disputed territory. If India has any
respect for international law and moral courage, it will
end its reign of terror, withdraw its troops and let the
Kashmiris freely decide their future in accordance with
Security Council resolutions.
In order to divert attention from the ever-increasing
international condemnation of India’s widespread and
escalating immoral abuses in Jammu and Kashmir,
illegally occupied by India, India continues to level
baseless allegations against others. History bears
testimony to the undeniable reality that aggressors,
colonizers and occupiers often attempt to justify
the suppression of legitimate struggles for selfdetermination and freedom by reporting them as
terrorism. As for comments regarding terrorism, the
Indian delegation would do well to reflect on the deeply
troubling trajectory their State is embarked upon, rather
than indulging in blatant falsehoods about Pakistan.
India is resorting to State terrorism to suppress the
people of Jammu and Kashmir, illegally occupied by
India, where since 1990 India’s terrorist occupation
forces have martyred over 100,000 innocent Kashmiris.
More than 220,000 women have been widowed, and
more than 180,000 children have been orphaned.
In contravention of international law and relevant
Security Council resolutions, India has resorted to
illegally and unilaterally changing the internationally

22-6262319/20

A/ES-11/PV.14

recognized status of Jammu and Kashmir. Today
India is being guided by the Hindutva ideology, which
has mainstreamed Islamophobia and bigotry against
minorities, particularly Muslims, in its political
discourse. In today’s incredibly intolerant India, 200
Muslim minorities face frequent lynching by vigilantes,
pogroms by the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh with
official complicity, discriminatory citizenship laws
to disenfranchise Muslims and a concerted campaign
to destroy mosques and the rich Muslim heritage of
India. Pakistan has been highlighting and will continue
to highlight those issues and India’s State terrorism
against the people of Jammu and Kashmir, illegally
occupied by India.
Mr. Nzongola-Ntalaja (Democratic Republic of
the Congo): I thank you, Mr. President, for giving me the
chance to reply to the representative of Rwanda. What
he is saying is simply total nonsense. Everybody knows
that Rwanda occupied the Congo from 1998 to 2003,
committed many atrocities and plundered our economy.
Today Rwanda is a major exporter of gold and coltan
from the Congo and many other resources. They even
take chimpanzees and gorillas from Congolese forests
to Rwanda.
All of that is well known. The Human Rights
Council published a very important report some 10 years
ago. I cannot recall the name of the report, but I will
remember it shortly. The report points to many crimes
committed in the Congo by some of our neighbours,
particularly Rwanda. There is no denying the fact
that Rwanda has been in the Congo since 1996, when
President Laurent Kabila brought it into my country
and even named a Rwandan military officer as Chief
of Staff of the Congolese Armed Forces. That, again,
was imposed on him by Rwanda, which had helped him
to take power by kicking Mr. Mobutu out and taking
over the country. However, after one year Kabila saw
that he was really a stooge of Rwanda and Uganda and
then asked them to leave the country. What did they do?
They came back to invade the country one week later.
That is well known and well documented. I do not think
I have to say too much about that.
We deplore the fact that the international community
places so much emphasis on the crisis taking place in
Europe while basically ignoring the crisis taking place
in Africa. While they are sending billions and billions
of dollars in arms to Ukraine to defend itself, which

20/20

12/10/2022

I think is good, they do not do the same for us. They
even place restrictions on what we can buy in terms
of armaments. That is the policy of double standards
that I was asking about. It is a policy that should be
ended. The international community ought to condemn
and take action against any invasion of a country, any
occupation of a country by another country.
Mr. Kayinamura (Rwanda): I will make sure to
respect the rules. In my culture, it is very hard to argue
with one’s elder and so I will respond respectfully.
I think the point that I was trying to make is that
since colonial times the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has had a difficult past. There are constant
allegations. Every time there is no flowing water, it is
Rwanda. If there is no electricity, it is Rwanda. If there
is no road, it is Rwanda. If there is no this or that, it
is Rwanda or its colonial masters. I think we need to
move beyond that. We need to move beyond that kind
of mentality, look for homegrown solutions and address
the problems in our countries. We cannot outsource a
solution. We cannot. We cannot outsource a solution
here. We have to deal with the issues we face locally
and find sustainable solutions.
I say the following respectfully. We have heard
these excuses. Every time there are elections, Rwanda
is supposedly going to come to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Perhaps we may not hear about Rwanda
again after the 2023 elections. We look forward to the
conclusion of the elections. The reason the representative
could not recall the report he referred to is because the
allegations and attempted reports were dismissed and
thrown out of the Human Rights Council. Perhaps he
can give us a United Nations symbol for that report. I
can even bet money that there is no such report.
With all due respect, what I was getting at is that as
a region, as neighbours, Rwanda is not going to move,
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo is not going
to move. We need to find solutions to address the real
causes of the problems in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
The President: In accordance with the terms of
paragraph 8 of resolution ES-11/4 just adopted, the
eleventh emergency special session of the General
Assembly is temporarily adjourned.
The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

22-62623
