30

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

Having received and examined the report of the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations of 13 November 1972,22
Noting with appreciation the agreement arrived at
by the Special Committee concerning the election of a
new Chairman and two additional Vice-Chairmen and
the enlargement of the Committee's Working Group,
Noting with regret that the mandate entrusted to the
Special Committee has not yet been fulfüled,
Conscious, nevertheless, that the problems with which
the Special Committee has been faced are of a fundamental nature and require clase and thorough consideration to which any Member State may usefully contribute,
Bearing in mind that Member States are deeply concerned in the present intemational situation over the
continued ]ack of agreement on concrete guidelines
for carrying out United Nations peace-keeping operations in conformity with the Charter of the United
Nations,
l. Takes note of the report of the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations, in particular
paragraphs 10 and 11 thereof;
2. Notes with appreciation the efforts and contributions of those Member States that have submitted views
and suggestions to the Special Committee and requests
Member States to continue to make available to the
Committee any views and suggestions that they may
wish to submit to help its work;
3. Requests the Special Committee, taking into account the progress made by its Working Group, to
study the views and suggestions submitted by Member
States in response to paragraph 4 of General Assembly
resolution 2835 (XXVI) and referred to in paragraphs
2, 4 and 6 of the fifth report of the Working Group,23
as well as those expressed during the debate in the
Assembly at its twenty-seventh session, with a view to
making renewed efforts;
4. Recommends that, in order to ex,pedite progress
and to enable the Special Committee to hold a more
frequent exchange of views on the question, its Working
Group should prepare and submit at intervals reports
that would facilitate discussion and agreement on questions of substance;
5. Urges the Special Committee to accelerate and
intensify its work so as to make substantive progress,
in view of the importance of achieving, in pursuance of
its mandate, agreed guidelines for carrying out peacekeeping operations in conformity with the Charter of
the United Nations;
6. Requests the Special Committee to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth sessfon.
2108th plenary meeting
13 December 1972
3005 (XXVII). Report of the Special Commit•
tee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting
the Human Rights of the Population of the
Occupied Territories

The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principies of the
Charter of ,the United Nations,
22 !bid., Twenty-seventh Session, A.nnexes, agenda item 41,
document A/8888.
28 Jbid., document A/8888, annex.

lnvoking the provisions and principles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
Bearing in mind the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,24
Recalling Security Council resolutions 237 (1967)
of 14 June 1967 and 259 (1968) of 27 Septcmber 1968, as well as other pertinent resolutions of
the United Nations,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israelí Practices Affecting the
Human Rights of the Population of the Occupied
Territories, 25
Considering that a system of investigation and protection is required for ensuring effeotive implementation
of the international instruments, such as 1he Geneva
Convention of 12 August 1949, wbich provide for
respect for human rights in armed conflicts,
Recalling that, in accordance with article 1 of that
Convention, the States parties have undertaken not
only to respect, but also to ensure respect for, the
Convention in ali ci-rcumstances,
Considering that implementation of the Geneva
Convention of 12 August 1949 cannot and should not
be left open in a situation involving foreign military
occupation and the rights of the civilian population
of these territories under the provisions of that Convention and in accordance with the principles of in-ternational law,
1. Commends the Special Committee to Investigate
lsraeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the
Population of the Occupied Territories for its efforts
in performing the tasks assigned to it;
2. Strongly calls upon Israel to rescind forthwith,
and desist from, all such policies and practices as:
(a) Toe annexation of any part of the occupied
territories;
( b) The establishment of Israeli settlements in those
territories and the transfer of parts of an alien population into the occupied territories;
(e) The destruction and demolition of villages,
quarters and houses and the confiscation and expropriation of property;
(d) The evacuation, transfer, deportation and expulsion of the inhabitants of the occupied territories;
(e) The denial of the right of ,the displaced persons
to return to their homes;
3. Reaf]irms that a1l measures taken by Israel in
contravention of the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of Wa,r,
of 12 August 1949, to settle the occupied territories,
including occupied Jerusalem, are null and void;
4. Af]irms the principie of the sovereignty of the
population of the occupied territories over their national wealth and resources;
5. Calls upon ali Sta tes, international organizations and specialized agencies not to recognize or cooperate with, or assist in any manner in, any measures
undertaken by the occupying Power to exploit the
resources of the occupied territories or to effect any
changes in the demographic composition or geographic
character or institutional structure of those terdtories;
24 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973, p. 287.
25 A/8828.

Resolutions adopted on tbe reporta of tbe Special Politieal Committee

---------

6. Requests all States parties to the Geneva Convention of 12 August 1949 to do their utmost to ensure that Israel respects and fulfils its obligations
under that Convention;
7. Requests the Special Committee, pending the
early termination of Israeli occupation of Arab territories, to continue its work and to consult, as appropriate, with the International Committee of the
Red Cross in order to ensure the safeguarding of the
welfare and human rights of the population of the
occupied territories;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to render all
necessary facilities to the Special Committee, including
those required for its visits to the occupied territories
with a view to investigating Israelí policies and practices
affecting the human rights of the population of the
occupied territories, especially:
(a) Toe measures concerning the establishment of
Israeli settlements in the occupied territories and the
moving into the occupied territories of an alíen population, contrary to the provisions of ,the Geneva Convention of 12 August 1949;
(b) The situation concerning the annexation of any
part of the territories occupied by Israel since 5 June
1967;
(e) Toe exploitation and the looting of the resources
of the occupied territories;
( d) The changes in the physical character or
demographic composition or institutional structure of

31

those territories, including the transfer or deportation
of population thereof or the demolition of houses and
towns therein;
(e) The pillaging of the archaeological and cultural
heritage of the occupied territories;
(f) The interference in the freedom of worship in
the holy places of the occupied territories;
9. Calls upon Israel to co-operate with thc Sccretary-General and the Special Committee and to facilitate their tasks;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the
widest circulation of the reports of the Special Committee by all means available through the Office of
Public Information of the Secretariat;
11. Requests the Special Committee to report to
the Secretary-General as soon as possible and whenever the need arises thereafter;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session on the
task entrusted to him;
13. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its twenty-eighth session the ítem entitled "Report
of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Population
of tbe Occupied Territories".
2112th plenary meeting
15 December 1972
