United Nations

S/PV.3522

Security Council

Provisional

Fiftieth Year

3522nd Meeting
Friday, 21 April 1995, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Vondra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Czech Republic)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Botswana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Honduras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Oman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Cárdenas
Mr. Nkgowe
Mr. Li Zhaoxing
Mr. Mérimée
Mr. Graf Zu Rantzau
Mr. Martínez Blanco
Mr. Wibisono
Mr. Fulci
Mr. Gambari
Mr. Al-Khussaiby
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Ubalijoro
Sir David Hannay
Mrs. Albright

Agenda
The situation in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 13 April 1995 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/1995/302)

95-85333 (E)

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Section,
room C-178.

Security Council
Fiftieth year
The meeting was called to order at 3.20 p.m.

3522nd meeting
21 April 1995
Germany, Italy, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 13 April 1995 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/1995/302)
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Bosnia and Herzegovina in which he requests to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Muhamed
Sacirbey (Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a place at the
Council table.
The President: I have also received a request dated
21 April 1995 from Ambassador Dragomir Djokic to
address the Council. With the consent of the Council, I
would propose to invite him to address the Council in the
course of the discussion of the item before it.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/1995/302, which contains the text of a letter dated 13
April 1995 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council, transmitting the report of
the Co-Chairmen of the Steering Committee of the
International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia.
Members of the Council also have before them
document S/1995/319, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by the Czech Republic, France,

2

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents:
S/1995/301, letter dated 13 April 1995 from the
Permanent Representative of Croatia to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council; and S/1995/309, letter dated 15 April 1995 from
the Permanent Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council.
In accordance with the decision taken earlier in the
meeting, I now invite Ambassador Dragomir Djokic to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Djokic: At the outset, let me express on behalf
of my Government profound condolences to the United
States on the occasion of the tragic event that occurred in
Oklahoma City, in which innocent citizens were victims
of an outrageous terrorist act.
The Security Council is about to reach a decision on
the further extension of the partial and very limited
suspension of sanctions against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. Despite consistently positive reports by the
Co-Chairmen of the International Conference on the
Former Yugoslavia (ICFY) and the ICFY Mission that
Yugoslavia is adhering to the unilateral commitment to
close its border with the Bosnian Serbs, and despite the
well-known fact that it has absolutely and completely
fulfilled all the provisions of the relevant Security Council
resolutions by which the sanctions were introduced, we
note with regret that once again the Security Council
cannot muster the political will to make a bolder decision
and lift the sanctions against Yugoslavia altogether.
This negative stand is indeed highly unfortunate,
because by opting to lift the sanctions against the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia the Council would be making a
very significant breakthrough towards peace in the
Balkans. The war-option mentality and ideology of
extremists in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia would be seriously
undermined. Most important, the Bosnian Serbs would be
finally convinced that their recalcitrant approach has
definitely been superseded and that they must accept the
continuation of negotiations on the basis of the Contact
Group as a starting point.

Security Council
Fiftieth year
By opting to maintain the greatest part of the most
comprehensive sanctions regime adopted against any State
Member of the United Nations, the Security Council is
continuing to pursue the policy of punishment against the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the Serbian and
Montenegrin people for things for which they bear no
responsibility and which are out of their control. This
policy of collective punishment is being carried out despite
the increasing calls and appeals of numerous States,
especially States of the region, on the superfluousness of
the sanctions, their ineffectual nature and the extremely
harmful and devastating effects on the economy and
infrastructure of the whole of south-eastern Europe.
At a meeting in Athens on 15 April, five countries of
the Black Sea group adopted a declaration (S/1995/313,
annex) in which they stated that the implementation of the
sanctions could have a considerable ... negative impact on
the overall political, economic, security and social situation
in the region as a whole and called upon the Contact Group
to continue efforts towards achieving a peaceful, just and
lasting political solution to the crisis in parallel with the
suspension and lifting of the sanctions. A similar appeal
was adopted by the members of the Danube Commission in
Budapest.
The recent non-paper on the humanitarian impact of
the sanctions which was circulated by the five permanent
members of the Security Council focused on the need to
improve the effectiveness of the Sanctions Committees in
expediting humanitarian implications as much as possible.
We have taken particular note of the proposal that it should
be allowed to supply clearly defined categories of medical
supplies and foodstuffs even without the notification of the
relevant Sanctions Committees.
However, despite this non-paper and the clear call in
Security Council resolution 943 (1994) on the Sanctions
Committee concerning Yugoslavia to adopt appropriately
streamlined procedures for consideration of applications
concerning legitimate humanitarian assistance, the
Committee has not meaningfully resorted to doing so, and
the sanctions continue to be applied in a very strict manner.
In addition, the Council has opted to ignore the
request of the Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia for a one-shot export of $70 million worth of

3522nd meeting
21 April 1995
goods, through which it would finance humanitarian
imports of medicines and foodstuffs even though it was
decided to allow similar operations under different
sanctions regimes.
The new conditions being set by some members of
the Contact Group, especially the calls for the recognition
by the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Republic of Croatia as a prerequisite
for the further suspension of sanctions not only lack any
basis in the Security Council resolutions by which the
sanctions were introduced, but also represent a false and
counterproductive form of pressure. The Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia is not prepared to make the same grave
mistake committed by the international community and
recognize the separatist republics before the fundamental
problems have been resolved between the peoples living
in them.
These calls for premature recognition are a classic
example of putting the cart before the horse. Even if
recognition were granted, none of the problems of Bosnia
and Herzegovina would be resolved. The civil war would
continue. It would even gain in intensity as the Muslim
Government forces could well interpret the recognition as
giving carte blanche for continuing hostilities and
intensifying their drive to impose their will to create a
unitary State under Muslim domination, which is
unacceptable to other peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and is the main cause of the civil war.
In spite of very clear-cut reports by the ICFY
Mission that the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is fully
cooperating with the mission personnel and doing
everything it possibly can to fulfil its commitment to
keeping the border closed except for humanitarian
foodstuffs, medical supplies and clothing, it is constantly
being subjected to provocations and absurd allegations
that it is supplying the Bosnian Serbs with military
materiel. Preposterous reports on massive helicopter
flights from Bosnia and Herzegovina to the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia are circulated despite the fact that
they have never been verified by the ICFY Mission on
the ground.
The aim of such unprincipled provocations is to
undermine the constructive and peace-oriented policy that
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is following and is
basically geared towards the continuation of the conflict
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

3

Security Council
Fiftieth year
Unjustified calls for the cutting off of
telecommunications links between the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the Bosnian Serbs, demands for ridiculous
control of fuel supplies in Yugoslav Airline planes and the
Bar-Bari ferryboats, demands that the partial suspension be
continued for only 30 days: all these are absolutely
counterproductive and can only strengthen the hand of those
that do not wish the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to
continue to cooperate with the international community.
The decision by the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia to cut political and economic links
with the Bosnian Serb leadership was completely unilateral.
It is being pursued as a form of pressure on Pale to
convince it to accept the Contact Group plan as a basis for
negotiations on the final settlement. Yugoslavia accepted
the ICFY Mission as a way of facilitating its unilateral
decision. If, however, further pressure and new unprincipled
and totally meaningless conditions are brought to bear on
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, it must be very clear
that the Yugoslav Government will have to respond to great
internal pressure and reject all forms of blackmail and
coercion and call into question the activities of the ICFY
Mission as a whole on Yugoslav soil. The responsibility
for all negative consequences on the peace process in the
territory of the former Yugoslavia that might ensue would
rest solely with those members of the Security Council that,
by their absurd demands on the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, give obvious proof that they do not seek an
urgent and comprehensive political solution and the
restoration of peace. Instead, they abuse the Security
Council to pursue their own political interests.
Fully convinced that a peaceful settlement of the
conflict in the former Yugoslavia can be achieved only by
political means and negotiations conducted by equal
partners, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia stands ready
to do all it can to facilitate the peace process. It is not
prepared, however, to accept provocations and unprincipled
demands, conditions or blackmail which are contrary to the
Charter of the United Nations and international legal norms.
Such attempts by some Powers it has always rejected, and
I wish to assure the Security Council that this time again
Yugoslavia will do the same thing, most resolutely.
The President: The next speaker is the representative
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. I now call on him.
Mr. Sacirbey (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Let me
welcome you, Sir, to the Council on this most notable
occasion. It is a pleasure to have you in our midst today.

4

3522nd meeting
21 April 1995
Let me also take this opportunity to personally
congratulate my colleague from the Central European
Initiative, His Excellency Ambassador Karel Kovanda, on
the most capable and elegant manner in which he has
managed the tumultuous work — if you will, the April
storms — of the Security Council.
I would also extend my sincere appreciation to His
Excellency Ambassador Li Zhaoxing and the entire
Chinese delegation for their efforts during the month of
March.
Although frequently the subject of debate within the
Council, unfortunately Bosnia and Herzegovina has not
had the opportunity to be frequently thankful for the
results of those debates. The lack of decisive measures
and the continuation of the war and “ethnic cleansing”
against our citizens and our Republic indicate amply that
it is not that we do not know how to be appreciative, but
ultimately that the bottom line has left us with little to be
appreciative about except the humanitarian assistance and
good wishes of the international community and our own
determination and sacrifices for survival.
It does indeed give us satisfaction today to thank the
Council for its efforts to tighten the effectiveness of the
border-sealing regime and, in particular, to thank those
Member States that have striven for this objective and
that have been diligent and credible in alerting us to the
violations and flaws in the system. Without the efforts of
those States, the Council today probably would be
engaged in an exercise of fatalism and of legitimizing
fictions.
To be sure, we still have a long way to go before we
can ascertain, much less herald, that the new bordersealing and monitoring system is effective. And we
certainly cannot be satisfied that the Belgrade regime
continues to refuse to recognize its neighbours, including
the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina; that this regime
has failed to cease its ideological and material support for
an ethnically homogeneous and dictatorial “Greater
Serbia”; and that this regime therefore still reneges on
making a sincere commitment for peace.
The leadership of the Belgrade regime — or more
accurately, the one dictatorial leader — maintains the
duplicitous confidence that he is the grand matador, who
on the one hand, feints — projects to the world the cape
of his innocence and disarmed ambitions — while on the
other hand keeping his sword discreetly hidden behind the
cape. One would be almost tempted to exclaim a cynical

Security Council
Fiftieth year
“Olé” if it were not for the carnage and for the fact that
this is not entertainment.
National sovereignty and territorial integrity, regional
stability, international peace and security and, most
important, human life — Bosnian, Croatian, Serb, French,
British, Pakistani, Malaysian, Bangladeshi, Dutch and many
others — are very much at stake, as we have all come to
learn painfully over the last three years.
With this well-based and healthy skepticism we
therefore welcome today’s draft resolution as clearly
trumpeting “no more business as usual”: no more illusion
and concealing. The new mechanisms and reporting systems
should all help us advance towards the desired result. In
addition, we must emphasize the essential ingredient in the
hoped-for success for this refurbished system: Member
States must provide — and I emphasize “must provide” —
all the necessary resources for this new system to be
effective. We have all too painfully learned that preventive
measures faithfully undertaken are much more effective,
efficient and ultimately economical than corrective steps
taken after the damage is done.
If the international community and certain world
Powers are sincerely of the view that new weapons and
strategic material add fuel to the fire in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, then they must first, and strictly, apply this
policy — for practical, psychological, moral and legal
reasons — to the arsonists, those that originally set the fire,
including the aggressor across the border.
The Secretary General, the Co-Chairmen and other
members of the International Conference on the Former
Yugoslavia (ICFY) Mission, the members of the Security
Council and others must be vigilant in ensuring that the
Mission is effective and that the resources are adequate, in
providing independent evidence of violations, and in
making other necessary adjustments, including the potential
deployment of more experts and troops, along the border.
We must sadly state that the so-called certifications
from the Co-Chairmen of the ICFY Steering Committee,
along with their reports, sanitized or not, did not fill us with
confidence when compared to the mountain of independent
evidence to the contrary. We request that the Security
Council, the Secretariat and the ICFY Mission take note
that, after all, this monitoring Mission is along the border
of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In this context, we welcome the overdue provision
contained in paragraph 16 of draft resolution S/1995/319,

3522nd meeting
21 April 1995
which calls upon the ICFY Mission to provide the
relevant Government with its observations and findings —
and, we must assume, without manipulation of such
information. We will be in contact with the ICFY Mission
to facilitate implementation of this provision, and we
remain prepared, certainly, for the fullest of cooperation.
We should also take note that the provision relating
to the current easing of sanctions with respect to the
FRY — that is, Serbia and Montenegro — is scheduled
to expire by 5 July this year. This is a most appropriate
expression of the Security Council’s intention not to be
dictated to by the deserving object of its sanctions and not
to provide it with an alibi for its continuing culpability.
Also, this time-frame is long enough to test the efficacy
both of the border closure and monitoring mechanisms
and of the Belgrade regime’s sincerity. It is up to
Mr. Milosevic now.
Of course, the search for peace in the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina is a multi-variable equation.
Certainly, the sealing of the border is a critical step. Also,
abandonment by the Belgrade regime of its perverse and
illegal ambitions is a prerequisite. A commitment to peace
is not consistent with evading recognition of one’s
neighbours’ territorial integrity and sovereignty and with
the persistent resort by Milosevic to this matador
diplomacy. The cape of deceit and double-talk must be
set aside and the dagger must be sheathed once and for
all.
And, of course, we must be very frank about this:
Mr. Milosevic does not cut such a capable and elegant
figure as a matador except to some international political
leaderships that have become only too willing to play the
role of the bull.
As we have stated, the search for peace in our
Republic is a multi-variable equation, and while we seem
to be coming up to the mark on one variable, we are
unfortunately falling away from another: the alarming
acceleration of the erosion of the mandate of the United
Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR), and specifically
of the political will to see that mandate implemented.
When UNPROFOR’s mandate was renewed three weeks
ago, we hoped that the process of erosion had been
stemmed or even reversed. Obviously, that was not the
case. We still await, with a ray of positive anticipation,
the Secretary-General’s report with respect to the
concerns expressed in our letter of 29 March 1995
(S/1995/245) and cited in resolution 982 (1995). But how
is the Secretary-General to respond constructively to our

5

Security Council
Fiftieth year

3522nd meeting
21 April 1995

previous concerns and grievances when there is a rash of
new Serbian provocations and UNPROFOR withdrawals
and surrenders in the face of those provocations?

and all of us, and the faster you backpedal to avoid this
war, the more relentless the Karadzic Serbs become in
pursuing you and cornering you.”

The Serbians go into a United Nations weaponscollection point in an occupied suburb of Sarajevo and,
with UNPROFOR soldiers standing by, they fire mortars
into the civilian areas of Sarajevo. The response from the
United Nations and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) to such outrageous and murderous action is
supposed to be air strikes. Instead, the United Nations
soldiers on the scene are relegated, degraded, to the role of
witnesses to potential murder.

I should like here to address my dear colleague and
friend Ambassador Mérimée, the Permanent
Representative of the French Republic. When I watched
the television scenes of the young French corporal, Eric
Hardouin, fatally wounded while helping erect an antisniper barricade in front of the Holiday Inn in Sarajevo,
I was shocked and revolted and, ultimately, frozen in a
combination of fear and anger.

Now the Serbians control the skies, the same skies that
have been declared subject to a United Nations/NATOenforced “no-fly-zone”. Not only are United Nations/NATO
air-to-ground support and air strike missions curtailed, not
only are UNPROFOR planes fired upon regularly, but now
the Serbians are actually dictating to the United Nations
who can fly in United Nations planes. As of today, it seems
that even members of the Contact Group are no longer
welcome to fly in them. Bosnians are not allowed;
American and other diplomats are removed from flights;
and even United Nations civilian officials are denied the
right to land at Sarajevo, as their planes face the threat of
being shot at, and actually are shot at. The United Nations
and NATO have gone from losing control of the skies to
becoming the victims of nothing less than air terrorism.
Let me just briefly quote from a New York Times
Service article of 20 April 1995, under the headline “Test
in Bosnia: Limits of UN Humiliation”, which stated:
“The airlift to Sarajevo lies at the heart of the
UN mission here — it provides more than 80 percent
of the aid to the city. But it is obvious by now that the
airlift has also come to demonstrate how the world’s
collective authority is vulnerable in Sarajevo to the
whim of a Serb who is, in the end, a member of a
rebel army holding 70 percent of a State recognized
by the United Nations.” (International Herald Tribune,
20 April 1995, p. 5)
Some speak of the necessity for the United Nations to
be impartial, and others have pressed this argument to its
limits to profess neutrality. I say to members of the
Security Council “Excellencies, that is your interpretation.
But do you realize that the United Nations, your authority,
the dignity of your countries and, most critically, your men
and women, and not just the Bosnians, are under the direct
assault of these Serbians? War is being waged upon you

6

Once again I extend my deepest condolences to the
families concerned and to the French Government and
people over the death of two young Frenchmen. Similarly,
though, with their death another part of Sarajevo has also
died. The city they were hoping to protect is our city, my
city. The people they were looking to defend are our
citizens — actually, members of my family, my friends,
the future of our country. The Holiday Inn entrance in
front of which this one brave corporal was setting up the
barricade is the entrance that I use when I am in Sarajevo
and staying at that hotel.
I say to you, Mr. Ambassador, “Forensic evidence
may be inconclusive, politicians may speculate and some
may even slander, but when the Serbians shoot at you,
they also shoot at us. When they kill one of your
courageous young men, we also feel as if they have
murdered one of us. Do not mistake our political
differences as insensitivity to your sacrifices. Do not
mistake our stoic faces for indifference. It is just, Mr.
Ambassador, and all Council members with young men
and women in Bosnia and Herzegovina, that after three
years we have all become traumatized and numb. We are
all under attack, Blue Helmets or not.”
We have accepted the Contact Group peace plan,
with all its painful imperfections and injustices. The
Karadzic Serbs continue to believe that they can
successfully resist, and even bully the Security Council
into abandoning the Contact Group plan in favour of the
reality, the status quo of their conquest and “ethnic
cleansing”. Unfortunately, the Council sometimes gives
them hope, when in its resolutions and statements it calls
on the one hand for peace negotiations and cease-fires,
but on the other hesitating to offend them, does not
recognize our Government’s commitment to the plan and,
once again, does not demand their acceptance.

Security Council
Fiftieth year
The two latest French victims, the other United
Nations personnel, and the countless Bosnian civilians who
have been killed since August 1994 are the casualties of
this Serbian refusal to accept, and commit to, the Contact
Group peace plan.
Of course, the most critical variable in this equation
for peace is the Serbian acceptance and implementation of
this plan. However, until this comes about, the one
variable that we must maximize, or at least prevent from
being marginalized, is the commitment to, and capacity and
execution of, the United Nations mandate in our Republic
and, indeed, in the Republic of Croatia and elsewhere. This
will both serve to save lives and to maximize the positive
pressure upon the Karadzic Serbs to accept peace.
There are also other variables in the search for peace
in our country. We will continue to use all our capacity,
including the right and means to defend our population,
territorial integrity and sovereignty. We will use these
variables responsibly, and we here reassert our unabridgable
right to obtain the means to defend ourselves.
Our common search for peace, though, is most
definitely made more fruitful and less dangerous and
counter-productive to the extent that the United Nations in
the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the region
as a whole is more committed to, and better capable of,
executing its mandate.
I trust also that some bright soul will not, purposely or
otherwise, undermine the real objective by constantly
redefining the mandate so that expectations are always
lowered. Instead, the execution and implementation of the
mandate must be brought up to the proper and intended
level.

3522nd meeting
21 April 1995
from the time when I was in Bosnia. For me, Oklahoma
City was the first home that I ever had in the United
States. I know the people there to be generous, warm and
open. They help their neighbours in need, whether those
neighbours are across the street or halfway around the
world.
One of the emergency workers immediately on the
scene of the explosion, filmed on CNN, was Mr. Larry
Jones, from Feed the Children, an organization also active
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Now, he was helping his
immediate neighbours, after having helped Bosnians in
the past. I note his comment on the day of the explosion.
He said “I haven’t seen anything like this since I left
Sarajevo.”
The people in Sarajevo are in no position to offer
any real material help, but we do offer our most sincere
condolences and desire for recovery to the families and
all the people of Oklahoma City. Those who carried out
this crime must suffer the damnation of this world and the
next.
The President: I thank the representative of Bosnia
and Herzegovina for his kind words.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. If I
hear no objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the
vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall first call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements before the voting.

The sum of the equation that we must derive in order
to secure peace, unfortunately, is not variable, and therefore
we cannot cheat — I emphasize that we cannot cheat — in
the very demanding task required of us to reach our
solution.

Mr. Cárdenas (Argentina) (interpretation from
Spanish): First of all, I wish to express my delegation’s
pleasure at seeing you, Sir, in your capacity as First
Deputy Foreign Minister of the Czech Republic, presiding
over this meeting.

Once again, though, I should like to take the
opportunity to thank the Council for the small but
significant step it has taken today.

The members of the Security Council have received
a report from the Co-Chairmen of the Steering Committee
of the International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia
concerning the degree of compliance by the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) with its
commitment to close its border with the areas of Bosnia
and Herzegovina under the control of Bosnian Serb
forces. Certification of this fact is the necessary first
condition for this Council to consider continuing the

Finally, allow me to take a moment to address my
most dear colleague, Ambassador Madeleine Albright, on
behalf of our people and Republic.
Most Bosnians did not know where Oklahoma was
before the attack on that city and its people. Actually, I did,

7

Security Council
Fiftieth year

3522nd meeting
21 April 1995

limited suspension of sanctions provided for under
resolution 943 (1994).

extending or shortening the deadline set in resolution 970
(1995).

The report of the Co-Chairmen of the Steering
Committee also mentions certain difficulties in verifying the
closure of that border. However, we take the view that it
emerges clearly from the report that compliance by the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro)
with its commitments is, generally speaking, the rule, while
possible infringements — in no way exclusive to one
party — are in any event only exceptions.

We would like to express our thanks to the sponsors
of the draft for the change that they made to operative
paragraph 12, dividing it into two parts to become the
present operative paragraphs 11 and 12; this was to some
extent in response to views expressed by our delegation.
We also wish to recall that the agreement on sanctions
procedures presupposes negotiations between all the
members of the Committee concerned respecting technical
aspects of the regime. In that context, if there is a
continuation of the existing situation, which is marked by
what has shown to be a practice followed by some of
linking procedural aspects with others that strictly
speaking are outside the Committee’s mandate, it will be
difficult to free the Committee from the impasse that has
existed for some time now with respect to these
procedures.

We believe that such exceptions should be carefully
assessed in the context of endeavours to extend the ceasefire and to set the peace process on the right track, as well
as in the light of the regrettable increase in tension in the
former Yugoslavia in recent days, which is causing our
delegation the most serious concern.
Any sanctions regime must necessarily be progressive,
rational and in proportion to the behaviour it is intended to
discourage. If we in the Council, having witnessed the
efforts of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and
Montenegro) to meet its commitments, failed to react in
accordance with these criteria, we would run the risk of
using the powers conferred on us by the Charter without
taking properly into account the purposes for which they
were granted.
For these reasons, the Argentine Republic is in favour
of continuing the suspension of the sanctions on the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) until the
expiry of the time period set in resolution 970 (1995). In
this respect, and in a spirit of broad cooperation, it will join
the consensus in the Council on the adoption of the draft
resolution now before us.
However, we also feel bound to express our particular
viewpoint respecting some of the provisions of this draft.
Operative paragraph 1 sets a specific date limiting the
validity of the resolution. The delegation of Argentina
interprets that date not as being necessarily some kind of
curtailment ex profeso of the deadline set by resolution 970
(1995), but, rather, as establishing a new and more clear-cut
operational policy. Indeed, it would not be particularly
meaningful to interpret it as a setting of a shorter deadline
for the suspension of sanctions, when it is acknowledged
that there have been no substantive changes, negative or
positive, in the de facto circumstances, whether political or
technical, warranting that suspension. We repeat that we see
no particular reasons, other than technical, in the report for

8

The Argentine delegation also wishes to place on
record its interpretation of operative paragraph 2 of the
draft resolution. It is our understanding that the
authorization granted to the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) to operate
commercial flights necessarily means its being able to
obtain the quantities of fuel, lubricants, equipment and
spare parts required to allow those flights to take place
safely and in reasonable conditions. That is the only way
to interpret the first part of the provision.
Lastly, we wish to express our most sincere hope
that the draft resolution will provide an incentive to the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro)
to continue to meet its commitments, and, indeed, to
increase its level of compliance with measures that, in the
view of the Council, are absolutely vital to the
continuance of efforts to restore peace to the region.
The President: I thank the representative of
Argentina for his kind words.
Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): At the outset, my
delegation would like to say that it is pleased to see you,
Sir, the First Deputy Foreign Minister of the Czech
Republic, presiding over this meeting of the Security
Council.
The Indonesian delegation would like to express its
sincere and heartfelt condolences to the people and
Government of the United States over the death of scores
of innocent civilians in Oklahoma City earlier this week.

Security Council
Fiftieth year

3522nd meeting
21 April 1995

My delegation would also like to convey its
appreciation to the authors of the draft resolution before us
today, which extends, until 5 July 1995, the partial easing
of the sanctions against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
(Serbia and Montenegro) originally adopted under
resolutions 943 (1994) of 23 September 1994 and
970 (1995) of 12 January 1995.

it contains elements that recognize the importance of the
cooperation by authorities of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia in ensuring the border closure. The partial
suspension of sanctions against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia has, after all, been extended. Rather, the
resolution is one directed against those who are
determined to violate the border closure.

At the time of the adoption of resolution 970 (1995),
my delegation expressed its serious reservations regarding
the extension of the easing of sanctions against the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. However, the Indonesian
delegation stated then that, since resolution 943 (1994) had
already initiated the process of relaxing sanctions, we
emphasized the need for scrupulous fulfilment by the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia of the commitments it had
undertaken to close its border with the Republic of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

The Indonesian delegation must emphasize once
again, however, that the international community expects
a most rigorous implementation by the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia of the commitments they
have undertaken. Nor can we be oblivious to the fact that
recognition of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina by
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has yet to occur. Such
an act would contribute immeasurably towards the
creation of an environment that would be favourable to a
lasting and comprehensive peace in the region.

Over the past 100 days, my delegation has carefully
examined the periodic reports of the Co-Chairmen of the
Steering Committee of the International Conference on the
Former Yugoslavia (ICFY). It notes the consistent
assessment by the Mission Coordinator that the authorities
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia continue to provide
satisfactory cooperation with the ICFY Mission and that the
Mission continues to enjoy full freedom of movement
within the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and
Montenegro). Equally, however, my delegation cannot be
impervious to the constant flow of information that
indicates that a more effective closure of the border has yet
to be achieved. Few items of news have attracted as much
attention as the reports of helicopter flights in contravention
of the border closure. These incidents are reflected in the
recent reports of the ICFY Co-Chairmen. Our delegation
has also learned of reports of circumvention of the border
closure in the form of the transhipment of goods from the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia through the Republic of
Croatia to the areas of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina under the control of the so-called Bosnian
Serb forces.

The draft resolution before us contains a number of
important elements based on the experience of the past
100 days; some of these, we hasten to add, are
reaffirmations of previous commitments intended to
ensure a more effective implementation of the border
closure. We attach great importance, for example, to the
provision addressing the possible diversion of goods —
except foodstuffs, medical supplies and clothing for
essential humanitarian needs — from the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia through the Republic of Croatia
to the areas of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina
under the control of the so-called Bosnian Serb forces.

The Indonesian delegation is of the view that the draft
resolution before us maintains a correct balance between
recognition of the evaluations contained in the reports of
the Co-Chairmen of the ICFY relating to the cooperation by
the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
(Serbia and Montenegro) and the continuing imperfections
in the border closure.
The draft resolution is not one directed against those
who are genuinely concerned to ensure the border closure:

We also deem it important that the draft resolution
provides for a thorough investigation of alleged breaches
of the border closure, including those relating to aerial
violations, and stresses the importance of prosecuting
persons suspected of violating the border closure.
My delegation is also heartened by the recognition
in the draft resolution of the need to provide the ICFY
Mission with the capacity to discharge its tasks
effectively. The financial difficulties facing the Mission
have rightly seized our attention. This problem must be
addressed immediately lest it seriously impair the ability
of the Mission to certify the border closure credibly.
Further, my delegation would like to emphasize that
the draft resolution before us today provides that the
Co-Chairmen of the ICFY should make use not only of
information made available to them from the Mission, but
also from all other available sources that are deemed
relevant. This, in our view, is an important aspect of the

9

Security Council
Fiftieth year

3522nd meeting
21 April 1995

draft resolution and forms part of an effort to assist the
ICFY constructively in the implementation of its tasks.

Yugoslavia to all transportation across that border except
for food, clothing and medicines.

At this juncture, it would be remiss of me if I failed
to pay tribute to the members of the Mission for their
tireless efforts in fulfilling their important duties under
difficult physical and operational constraints.

This positive step by the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia was duly reciprocated by the
Security Council in its adoption of resolution 943 (1994),
under which existing sanctions against the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia were partially lifted. It is
therefore important for the Secretary-General and the
Co-Chairmen of the International Conference on the
Former Yugoslavia to continue to monitor closely the full
implementation of Belgrade’s commitment to close the
border as a quid pro quo for the partial suspension of the
sanctions. The present porousness of the border must be
corrected, and corrected faithfully.

The conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina has lasted for
far too long. Resolutions have been passed and statements
issued by this body, yet death and destruction continue to
be inflicted on the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. A
lasting settlement can be achieved only if all the parties
concerned share a true commitment to peace. The draft
resolution before us represents a means to encourage the
Bosnian Serbs to accept the Contact Group peace plan and
all the relevant resolutions of the United Nations Security
Council and General Assembly. It must therefore be
energetically implemented, as befits measures imposed
under Chapter VII of the Charter.
In light of these considerations, my delegation will
support the adoption of the draft resolution.
Mr. Gambari (Nigeria): My delegation would like
first of all to welcome into our midst the First Deputy
Foreign Minister of the Czech Republic, His Excellency
Mr. Alexander Vondra. We also wish to express our most
sincere condolences to the Government of the United States
of America and to the families of those who lost their lives
in the tragic explosion in Oklahoma City.
Nigeria had the opportunity during the informal
consultations of the Security Council of expressing its
thanks to the Co-Chairmen of the Steering Committee of
the International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia for
their latest report concerning the operations of the
International Conference’s Mission to the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro). It is the view of
my delegation that the work of the Co-Chairmen and their
staff remains crucial in the international effort to mediate
peace in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It was a bold and courageous decision when, on
14 August 1994, the Government of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) — against the
backdrop of our disappointment at the failure of the
Bosnian Serb party to agree to the Contact Group peace
plan for Bosnia and Herzegovina — decided, inter alia, to
sever political and economic relations with the Bosnian
Serb party and close the border of the Federal Republic of

10

What is of special concern to my delegation today is
that, in spite of the border closure, the continuing positive
contributions of the International Conference on the
Former Yugoslavia and the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s acceptance of the Contact Group peace
plan, the peace process in the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is still at an impasse. It is my delegation’s
considered view that, in the overall context of the search
for peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the present draft
resolution makes a contribution for at least two reasons.
Firstly, it rightly underscores the need to strengthen the
existing border-closure regime and the need for a more
assiduous investigation of reported violations, such as the
helicopter flights that may have crossed the border
between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and
Montenegro) and the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Secondly — and related to the previous
point — the draft resolution recognizes that the
continuation of the border-closure regime constitutes an
invaluable pressure point on the Bosnian Serb party and
accordingly extends the suspension of sanctions on
Belgrade, albeit for a reduced period.
The Nigerian delegation believes that the matters
relating to the border closure are only one part of the
problems stifling progress in resolving the Bosnian
conflict. There is no doubt that the Contact Group
countries themselves have a unique role to play, as
members of the Security Council, the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization, the European Union or, in some
cases, all three. As in my subregion, where the apparent
lack of unity of interests and positions of member States
has not augured well for the peace process in Liberia, so
too in Bosnia and Herzegovina the diversity of interests
and perspectives of countries in the subregion with the
necessary leverage has not helped matters at all.

Security Council
Fiftieth year
Hence, we believe it is necessary for the States in the
Contact Group to harmonize their views as soon as possible
on how best the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina may be
resolved. Unless the interests and perspectives of the
Contact Group are harmonized and adequate pressure is
promptly brought to bear on the parties in a nondiscriminatory manner, the draft resolution we are about to
vote for, like several others before it, may not achieve the
desired objectives after all. And what a great pity that
would be, once again, in the continuing tragedy in the area.
The President: I thank the representative of Nigeria
for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Nkgowe (Botswana): We join those who spoke
before us in conveying our heartfelt condolences to the
Government and the people of the United States following
the tragedy in Oklahoma at the hands of terrorists.
The delegation of Botswana wishes to thank the
Co-Chairmen of the Steering Committee of the International
Conference on the Former Yugoslavia (ICFY) for their
report (S/1995/302), which we read with keen interest. It is
gratifying to note that the authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) have
continued to honour their commitment to seal the
international border between the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) and areas of Bosnia
and Herzegovina under the control of Bosnian Serb forces.
There have been no discoveries of weapons or
ammunition crossing the border since the Mission began its
work back in 1994, although sizeable amounts of other
contraband have been confiscated. This is an indication that
some contraband, including weapons, must have crossed the
border unnoticed. If it could be determined with absolute
certainty that there had been no weapons or ammunition
transshipments across the border, this would indeed be a
most gratifying piece of information, because the primary
purpose of the border closure was to prevent war materials
from reaching the Serb forces in Bosnia.
It is common knowledge, however, that it is not an
easy task to seal a border between two countries totally,
even at the best of times. There is no denying that weapons
and ammunition must be reaching Bosnian Serbs through
the porous border. We will never know, of course, the
extent to which transshipments of weapons have been
carried out. It is, however, impossible to doubt that
weapons are reaching the territory of Bosnia under the
control of Serb forces undetected: the unexplained and
seemingly inexplicable cross-border helicopter movements,

3522nd meeting
21 April 1995
the large vehicle tracks along the border and the lack of
protection for the Mission staff, who have on occasion
been forced to flee under fire, all suggest that the border
is not sealed at all times and that arms supplies must be
reaching the Bosnian Serb forces.
My delegation supports the extension of the partial
suspension because any decision to the contrary would
mean an end to what has been achieved so far to stop the
transshipment of military contraband. In the meantime,
the international community should continue to make a
determined effort to pressure Belgrade to isolate the
Bosnian Serb forces completely until they realize that
acceptance of the Contact Group plan is their only hope
for a solution to the conflict. There is no doubt that the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia can play
a crucial role in this endeavour if they so wish, and it is
our earnest hope that President Milosevic will do
everything possible to make the border closure more
effective.
Just as the border closure between the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) and
areas of Bosnia and Herzegovina under the control of
Bosnian Serb forces is a critical factor in the efforts to
bring the war in Bosnia to an end, so is the general arms
embargo. It is shocking to learn that weapons of war are
being shipped into this cauldron of conflict by some
Members of the United Nations, in violation of Security
Council resolution 713 (1991). It is most disheartening
that those who have the capacity to stop this flow of arms
have decided to watch passively as Security Council
resolutions are flouted with total abandon. We cannot
expect to make any headway at the negotiating table
when the parties to that violent, deep-rooted and complex
conflict are being armed to the teeth. Fuelling the fires of
war in the former Yugoslavia with new arms is simply
bad business. It puts the lives of the Blue Helmets on the
ground at risk, and we do not believe that this is in
anybody’s interest.
The crisis in the former Yugoslavia threatens to
create a perception of the Security Council as an
ineffective machine good for the production of resolutions
and nothing more. It accounted for 23 Council resolutions
in 1992, 25 in 1993, 12 in 1994 and 5 in the first four
months of 1995 alone. By the time the gavel falls for the
adjournment of this meeting, the Council will have added
yet another resolution to this already long list. Countless
presidential statements have also been issued, yet there is
not the slightest sign that there will be a settlement soon.

11

Security Council
Fiftieth year
The flip side of this record number of resolutions is,
of course, the fact that the Council has been able to muster
an unprecedented degree of agreement on how to bring this
conflict to an end. Unfortunately, the same cannot be said
about the resolve to implement these Council decisions.
Perhaps it is time the Security Council thought of changing
its approach to the search for a solution to the conflict in
the former Yugoslavia: there may just be a way out of the
dark clouds of war hanging over the former Yugoslavia
other than the one we have charted so far.
Mr. Al-Khussaiby (Oman): At the outset, allow me,
on behalf of the Government of Oman, to welcome you,
Sir, to the Council. We are particularly pleased to see you
presiding over this formal meeting of the Security Council,
and we express our appreciation to your country for the
very able manner in which its delegation has steered the
work of the Security Council so far this month under its
able Ambassador, Mr. Kovanda.
On a sad note, I should like to extend, through you,
Mr. President, our heartfelt condolences to the
representative of the United States of America on the death
of innocent people caused by a tragic, horrific crime in
Oklahoma City.
While members of the Security Council welcome the
decision taken by the Belgrade authorities and consider it
a preliminary step in the right direction that will pave the
way for a new relationship between the international
community and that country, on the other hand they
stressed, during the Council’s deliberations preceding the
adoption of resolution 943 (1994), the need for the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia to take further practical steps to
implement fully all relevant Security Council resolutions
aimed at easing the sanctions against the Bosnian Serbs.
These steps include the following: first, recognition of the
independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty of the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and States in the
region; secondly, an end to all military and political
practices of aggression that might place any doubt on the
legitimacy of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
endanger its peace and territorial integrity; thirdly, mutual
recognition of the international borders of all States in the
region; fourthly, the promotion of peaceful coexistence
between all the States and peoples of the region in
accordance with the principles and purposes of the United
Nations Charter; and, fifthly, cooperation with the United
Nations and the International Tribunal for the prosecution
of persons responsible for serious violations of international
humanitarian law committed in the territory of the Former
Yugoslavia.

12

3522nd meeting
21 April 1995
Those were the demands of the international
community and the members of the Security Council.
However, seven months have elapsed since we suspended
the international sanctions imposed on the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) and to
this very day none of these demands have been met by
Belgrade. On the contrary, we are witnessing a loose
regime of border closure and certain incidents like the
helicopter flights which compel us to question the wisdom
behind the suspension of the sanctions, in the light of the
partial implementation of the relevant resolutions. My
delegation therefore calls on the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) to completely carry
out its obligations, in full.
After a thorough examination of the reports of the
Co-Chairmen of the Steering Committee of the
International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia, we
would like to commend the work done and the efforts
exerted in this regard, and we look forward to the day
when the Council receives a satisfactory report from the
Co-Chairmen of the Steering Committee that will state
right up front that the authorities in the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia are cooperating fully with the Mission
towards an effective and sound implementation of the
border closure. This, in my Government’s view, will help
the Security Council to take another look at the
comprehensive regime of sanctions imposed on that
country, with a view to having an indefinite suspension of
these sanctions.
In conclusion, and based on our understanding of the
matter at hand, my delegation, once again, will vote in
favour of a draft resolution on the suspension of the
sanctions, and hopes to see in the coming days more
positive steps taken by the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro).
The President: I thank the representative of Oman
for the kind words he addressed to my delegation.
Mr. Martínez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation
from Spanish): My delegation wishes to welcome His
Excellency Mr. Alexandr Vondra, a First Deputy Foreign
Minister of the Czech Republic in his capacity of
President of the Security Council today.
We wish also again to extend our condolences to the
people and Government of the United States on the loss
of so may lives caused by the deplorable, criminal attack
that took place in Oklahoma City two days ago.

Security Council
Fiftieth year
My delegation wishes to express its appreciation for
the report provided by the Co-Chairmen of the Steering
Committee of the International Conference on the Former
Yugoslavia. Once again, this report tells us that the Mission
continues to have full freedom of movement in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and that the cooperation of the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia continues
to be satisfactory. For this reason, the report, in its final
part, certifies — or reaches the conclusion — that the
Belgrade Government is continuing to meet its commitment
to closing the land border between the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the areas of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina under the control of Bosnian Serbs.
My delegation knows from its own experience how
difficult a task it is to close a border completely, especially
in an area of conflict and war. During the Central
American crisis in the nineteen eighties the international
community required something similar of Honduras. In
many cases it was physically impossible for us to do what
we were asked to do, and we thereby were the object of
international condemnation or censure. For this reason, we
understand today the situation in the former Yugoslavia
and, having studied the periodic reports of the Co-Chairmen
of the Steering Committee of the International Conference
on the Former Yugoslavia, transmitted through the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, we support the
temporary suspension of the sanctions against that country
and we urge it to continue to cooperate towards securing an
indefinite suspension of the sanctions.
The report has been prepared by a mission of
responsible and qualified persons from more than 18
nations, and we therefore have no doubt that it has been
impartial in submitting the report.

3522nd meeting
21 April 1995
we shall be adopting today will help promote trust and
cooperation between all the parties involved in the
conflict.
Finally, I wish to call attention to the letter
(S/1995/313) addressed to the Secretary-General, and
hence to the Security Council, by the Permanent
Representative of Greece to the United Nations,
concerning the impact of the sanctions on countries such
as Bulgaria, Greece, the Republic of Moldova, Romania
and Ukraine. The Foreign Ministers of those countries,
meeting in Athens, decided to initiate action in the
Security Council as a result of the economic problems
caused by the sanctions regime imposed on the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. My delegation takes the view
that this matter should be given consideration as soon as
possible.
As on other occasions, my delegation wishes to
acknowledge the positive attitude of the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, and urges them to
continue to cooperate with a view to achieving a just and
lasting peace in the former Yugoslavia, for well-being and
peace for its neighbours will also mean well-being and
peace for the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. For that
reason we support the draft resolution on which the
Council will soon take action.
The President: I thank the representative of
Honduras for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation
from Russian): It gives me sincere pleasure to welcome
you, Sir, First Deputy Foreign Minister of the Czech
Republic, as President of today's meeting of the Security
Council.

My delegation wishes to reiterate the ideas presented
by the Secretary-General in regard to sanctions regimes in
his "Supplement to An Agenda for Peace", which was
endorsed in a recent statement by the Council. I would
venture to recall, as I have done on previous occasions, that
the purpose of sanctions is to modify the conduct of the
party or parties to a conflict which is threatening
international peace and security, and not to punish or exact
any other kind of reprisals. All this must be seen in the
context of Article 41 of the Charter of the United Nations.

The Russian delegation wishes also to convey its
profound condolences to the United States on the tragic
loss in Oklahoma City of the lives of Americans,
including children, who fell victim to a horrific terrorist
act. This senselessly cruel and barbarous crime
demonstrates yet again the need for the most resolute
joint efforts by the international community to suppress
the threat posed by extremism and terrorism, which has
become global in scale.

With the aim in mind of taking firm and lasting steps
towards bringing peace to the Balkans, the Council recently
adopted three distinct resolutions relating to three peacekeeping operations: in Croatia, in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and in Macedonia. We hope that the draft resolution that

Russia will be unable to support the draft resolution
before the Council, because, in our view, it is not
consistent with the principle of positive and negative
incentives previously agreed in the Contact Group and in
the Security Council; according to the principle, those that

13

Security Council
Fiftieth year
support the peace plan would be encouraged while pressure
would be exerted on those that reject it. That principle was
intended to be an effective tool in the effort to reach a
peaceful settlement. It might be appropriate today, though,
to ask just how effectively that tool is being used.
I would, in that connection, recall the background to
this issue. In August last year, the Government of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia of its own free will decided
to close its border with Bosnia and Herzegovina to all
except humanitarian goods. The Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia then requested the International
Conference on the Former Yugoslavia (ICFY) to send an
international Mission to the border to assist in implementing
that decision. In both instances, the Government of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia acted on its own initiative,
thereby demonstrating its readiness to cooperate actively
with the international community in the efforts to achieve
a peaceful settlement, including through the exertion of
serious pressure on the Bosnian Serb leadership to change
its unconstructive position.
This was a courageous and far from easy step, but
despite the inevitable attendant problems the Government
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has held firm over
implementing its decision. The Security Council responded
by adopting resolution 943 (1994), partially suspending
restrictions on commercial flights, the ferry service between
Bar and Bari and cultural and sporting exchanges. We
should honestly recognize that this response was not
entirely adequate or commensurate with the significance of
Belgrade's closure of the border: essentially, these were
symbolic measures that did not really ease the burden of
economic and trade sanctions.
Since that time, and as corroborated by numerous
reports of the Co-Chairmen of the Steering Committee of
the ICFY, including the latest report — annexed to
document S/1995/302 of 13 April — the Government of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has stuck strictly to its
decision. Its cooperation with the ICFY Mission remains
very good and is steadily improving as experience in
working together is acquired. Problems that arise are
resolved speedily and constructively. Of course, no
Government can seal its borders 100 per cent, so there are
isolated cases of smuggling and other situations. But the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, as
clearly indicated in the reports from the ICFY, is actively
facilitating their resolution.
Many are alarmed by the reports of cross-border
helicopter flights; here, as we all know, much remains

14

3522nd meeting
21 April 1995
uncertain and requires further investigation. In any case,
the border has been substantially closed for nine months,
and this has been a major factor on the side of the earliest
possible achievement of a political settlement to the crisis.
The Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
has shown itself to be a serious partner of the Contact
Group and of the entire international community in the
quest for peace.
Under these circumstances, the Council would seem
to have had every justification for adopting further
positive stimuli, especially since it stated its resolve as
early as resolution 943 (1994) to keep the situation under
close review and to consider further steps to ease
sanctions. As a minimum, it should long ago have made
the partial suspension of sanctions indefinite, as
repeatedly proposed by the Russian Federation. This time,
we presented for the Council's consideration our own
draft resolution, based on resolution 970 (1995); actually,
our draft set out the minimum the Security Council could
do to further encourage the constructive line Belgrade is
taking.
Unfortunately, all our proposals have gone unheeded.
Instead, with each regular extension of the partial
suspension of sanctions, the Security Council has been
inclined to make yet more fresh demands on the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. This trend is reflected in today's
draft resolution, too, which contains many alarming
innovations — this despite the views of the Co-Chairmen
of the Steering Committee of the ICFY, on whose
conclusions doubts are in essence being cast without any
convincing grounds whatever for so doing. We reaffirm
our firm support for the activities of the Co-Chairmen and
of the ICFY Mission, and reject attempts to disparage
them.
For example, the draft resolution attempts to link the
voluntary decision by the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
to close its border with Bosnia and Herzegovina to the
situation on its border with Croatia. This is a serious step
towards changing the mandate of the ICFY Mission, and
it is being proposed without consulting Belgrade. It is
beyond our understanding why it was necessary to cut
back the draft resolution's duration to 75 days when a
mechanism, which is still operational was agreed upon in
September last year that provides for the immediate
reimposition of full sanctions should the Government of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia fail to implement its
decision to close the border.

Security Council
Fiftieth year
One could cite a whole range of other provisions that
are puzzling, to put it mildly. For example, paragraph 2 in
essence proposes to establish harsh restrictions on the
volume of fuel in the tanks of Yugoslav and other aircraft.
Applying this requirement may create serious and
unwarranted difficulties for permitted flights, not to mention
that the Security Council’s desire to manage the technical
details of the amounts of fuel in fuel tanks would appear
odd, to say the least. The same paragraph, incidentally, de
jure introduces additional restrictions on the supply of
aviation fuel to Belgrade, even though resolution 943
(1994) suspended the restrictions on the provisions of the
goods and services needed for international air links with
Belgrade.
The new draft resolution also calls on the Government
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to sever
telecommunication links with the Bosnian Serbs. And yet
the Security Council itself, in resolution 942 (1994),
unequivocally excluded telecommunications from the scope
of application of the sanctions. We find it difficult to grasp
the logic here.
All these measures not only contradict the conclusions
of the Co-Chairmen, but in essence reflect yet another
attempt to introduce a double standard into the work of the
Council. In this instance, the Security Council is beginning
to get into unwarranted micromanagement, whereas in other
instances it closes its eyes to flagrant violations of its own
decisions, as has long been happening with respect to the
embargo on arms shipments to the republics of the former
Yugoslavia.
As a result, on thorough reading the draft resolution
begs the following question: can it be considered a positive
stimulus and if so, then why have the views of the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, whose
policy, in the final analysis, has made it possible to
establish control over the border, not been taken into
account? We have serious doubts as to whether this draft is
intended to encourage those who support the Contact Group
peace plan. Rather, what is involved is in principle a new
approach, that may have very undesirable consequences. It
may very well hand a trump card — or may even have
already handed it — to those who are urging the Bosnian
Serbs not to accept the peace plan, and to prosecute the war
on to victory. We are in any event convinced that that
approach does not enhance the Council’s options in its
efforts to achieve a political settlement. The sad thing is
that this is taking place right at this present critical moment,
when we are all justifiably feeling profound alarm over the

3522nd meeting
21 April 1995
future course of events in the region of the former
Yugoslavia.
We would like to hope that in future the Security
Council will be able to offer a more responsible political
approach in its decisions guided not by the considerations
of the moment, but by the interests of achieving a
comprehensive, lasting and truly just settlement in the
former Yugoslavia.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Russian Federation for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Li Zhaoxing (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): Mr. President, first of all, the Chinese
delegation welcomes you as you join us to guide the
meeting of the Security Council this afternoon. We
believe your vitality and excellent skills and wisdom will
lead us to the smooth conclusion of this afternoon’s
meeting. To you and to Ambassador Kovanda, we would
like to express our thanks for the contribution made to the
work of the Security Council by the Czech delegation.
The Chinese delegation also wishes to express its
shock at the recent tragic event in Oklahoma City. We
would like, through Ambassador Albright, to extend our
condolences to the Government and people of the United
States on the loss of life in the explosion.
The report of the Co-Chairmen of the International
Conference on the Former Yugoslavia (ICFY), transmitted
by the Secretary-General to the Security Council, states
that the Mission enjoys freedom of movement and good
cooperation from the Government of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia in implementing its mandate, that the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
continues to fulfil its commitment to closing its border
with Bosnia and Herzegovina, and that there have been no
commercial transshipments across that border. We
welcome this development and believe that it should be
the basis for our consideration of the draft resolution
before us.
We have all along advocated a peaceful settlement
of the conflict in the former Yugoslavia and have been
against the introduction of sanctions or mandatory
measures in this connection, for facts have proved that
sanctions or pressure will in no way help resolve any
issue, but rather will further complicate and perpetuate it.
The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is an important
factor for restoring peace and stability in the region of the

15

Security Council
Fiftieth year
former Yugoslavia. Its Government has facilitated and
supported the Mission in many ways in the discharge of its
duties, and has taken measures to effectively close its
border with Bosnia and Herzegovina. The purpose of the
efforts made by the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in
implementing Security Council resolutions 943 (1994) and
970 (1995) is to urge the Bosnian Serbs to accept the peace
plan. The international community should continue to give
encouragement, not discouragement, to the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia for its continued fulfilment of its
commitment to closing its border and making further efforts
to bring peace to Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Regrettably, though the draft resolution before us has
further extended the provisions for easing sanctions set
forth in resolution 970 (1995), it has not only shortened the
period of extension but also attached more restrictive
conditions to it, which is apparently a step backward from
resolutions 943 (1994) and 970 (1995). Furthermore, the
reasonable suggestions we made on the draft resolution
were not accepted.
Due to the aforementioned situation and based on our
principled position on sanctions, we shall have to abstain on
the draft resolution before us.
The long absence of a solution to the question of the
former Yugoslavia has brought tremendous suffering to the
people in the region. It is also jeopardizing peace and
stability in Europe and the world as a whole. We are deeply
concerned over the conflict in the former Yugoslavia, and
strongly urge the parties concerned to restart at an early
date peaceful negotiations for a solution acceptable to all by
taking into account the fundamental interests of the people
there. We also deem it imperative for the countries in the
region to recognize each other and coexist in amity and
good-neighbourliness. This will help bring an early end to
the conflict and war in the region, which will be in
conformity with the long-term interests of the countries in
the region and contribute to the maintenance of peace and
stability in Europe, as well as in the rest of the world.
The President: I thank the representative of China for
the kind words he addressed to me.
I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/1995/319.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:

16

3522nd meeting
21 April 1995
Argentina, Botswana, Czech Republic, France,
Germany, Honduras, Indonesia, Italy, Nigeria,
Oman, Rwanda, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America
Against:
None
Abstaining:
China, Russian Federation
The President: There were 13 votes in favour, none
against and 2 abstentions. The draft resolution has been
adopted as resolution 988 (1995).
I shall now call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements following the voting.
Mrs. Albright (United States of America): Let me
say, Mr. President, on behalf of my Government, that we
are delighted that you are chairing this very important
meeting, and, on my own behalf, that it is a very great
pleasure to see a very good personal friend in the Chair.
I also would like to thank, on behalf of my
Government, the members of the Council for their
statements of condolence and support today, and
specifically the very personal reflections of Ambassador
Sacirbey. As President Clinton has said, the United States
is determined that the perpetrators of the outrageous and
cowardly attack in Oklahoma City shall be brought to
justice. Our thoughts and prayers are with the victims and
their families. Although we do not know the motives of
those who committed this heinous crime, we do know that
it bore the senseless, brutal and indiscriminate stamp of
terrorism. Few of the countries represented here have not,
at one time or another, been its victims. The tragedy
should reinforce our common determination to forge a
world where those who obey the law are secure and those
who commit outrages against it are brought to heel.
We deeply appreciate the offers of assistance from
other Governments. At this time, our officials in
Oklahoma believe that they do have sufficient resources.
However, if a need arises, we will be in contact with the
Governments concerned. On behalf of the people of the
United States, I thank all members for this demonstration
of concern for the victims of this crime. On behalf of us
all, I urge renewed commitment to the rule of law and
civility in human affairs.

Security Council
Fiftieth year
I recall the cautious optimism that went into our initial
decision to ease sanctions in response to Serbian President
Milosevic's announced willingness to close his borders with
the Serb-controlled areas of Bosnia. I recall, too, the greater
realism that characterized our work in January, when we
acknowledged progress made and worked to remedy
weaknesses in the border closure regime. In these exercises,
and in the monthly reviews of the situation, my
Government has welcomed successes, but we have also
been frank about shortcomings in implementation. My
Government has made our concerns known to other
members of this Council, to the authorities in Belgrade and
to the International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia
(ICFY) monitoring Mission. The United States believes that
Belgrade has not done enough to comply with its
commitment to isolate the Bosnian Serbs. That is why we
could not have supported a resolution that represented
“business as usual”.
For the past 200 days, as now, we have supported and
encouraged the excellent work of the ICFY Mission and
have contributed to strengthening its capabilities. If we are
to ensure that the closure of the border is as comprehensive
as President Milosevic said it would be, we have no
stronger instrument than a fully staffed and fully funded
ICFY Mission. We therefore strongly encourage all
Member States to increase their support for this important
Mission.
The resolution we have just adopted is designed to
acknowledge progress, but even more important, it is
intended to close remaining loopholes. This Council must
be prepared to take steps to bolster enforcement and signal
to the Serb authorities that we expect them to live up to
what they claim is a shared objective — absolute closure of
the border, except for those instances and items which the
Council has explicitly exempted. The resolution we have
just voted on is straightforward. Belgrade must close the
land and air border with Bosnia and not seek to circumvent
the closure of that border by illegally shipping goods
through Serb-controlled parts of Croatia. The United States
was prepared to block adoption of this resolution if these
steps to tighten the border closure were not included.
During the 75-day period leading up to 5 July we will
watch closely to see if Belgrade improves compliance with
its commitment to close the border. We urge the ICFY
monitoring Mission, the Co-Chairmen of the ICFY Steering
Committee and the Secretary-General to implement fully
paragraphs 13 and 15 of this resolution. It is up to them to
make sure that the Council's decisions are more than words
on pieces of paper.

3522nd meeting
21 April 1995
We need also to remind ourselves that the border
closure is not an end in itself. Our objective remains what
it has always been: to persuade the Pale Serbs that their
interests, and the interests of the people who suffer under
their misguided leadership, are not served by continuing
intransigence. The border closure has had some effect on
the Pale Serbs, but its political goal, Pale's acceptance of
the Contact Group plan and map, seems as remote today
as it did six months ago. Nevertheless, we must be hardheaded, patient and persistent in keeping up the pressure
on the Pale Serbs. Similarly, the authorities in Belgrade
should understand that suspension of additional sanctions
will depend on their willingness to take further steps
towards peace, most notably by recognizing the Republic
of Croatia and the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina
within their internationally recognized borders.
Let me also say a word about the performance of the
United Nations peace-keeping forces in these tragic
conflicts in the former Yugoslavia. Members of the
Security Council must keep in mind that our credibility,
and that of this Organization, depends on our willingness
to respond to provocations. The United Nations forces on
the ground have faced continuous challenges, now
perhaps more difficult than ever. My Government
appreciates the sacrifices they have made and the good
they do. We are also prepared to support measures that
would enhance the ability of those forces to defend
themselves and to carry out their mandate with greater
effect.
In closing, let me say that the United States insisted
that a message be sent by today's action. The message is
clear: when it comes to sanctions relief, this Council must
remain vigilant to ensure that Belgrade is vigilant in
delivering on its promises. Our few successes in Bosnia
have come from our firmness and resolve, not from a
willingness to give Belgrade the benefit of the doubt.
The President: I thank the representative of the
United States for the kind words she addressed to me.
Mr. Mérimée (France) (interpretation from French):
The delegation of France would like to welcome you, Sir,
to the Security Council. It is delighted that this meeting
is taking place under your presidency.
My delegation would also like to associate itself
with all those who have expressed their sympathy with
the United States Government over the terrible bombing
that claimed so many inhabitants of Oklahoma City as its
victims.

17

Security Council
Fiftieth year

3522nd meeting
21 April 1995

My delegation welcomes our Council's adoption of the
resolution extending the suspension of sanctions against the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro).
Like many other members of the Council, France was
called upon to make a difficult choice, which it did on the
basis of a number of considerations.

spirit that should inspire us all, namely, keeping alive the
peace process’s chances of success.

Firstly, we are convinced that the mechanisms now in
place to monitor the closure of the frontier between the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro)
and the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina are, overall,
achieving the objectives they were set up to achieve. In this
regard, we do have confidence in the reports by the CoChairmen and in the work of the observer Mission, which
is unfortunately restricted by a lack of material and
financial means. We reaffirm that the best way of
improving the Mission’s operation is by increasing the
resources allocated to it and by increasing the number of
observers too.

I too wish to extend our condolences to the
Government of the United States and to the families of
those who died in the terrible explosion in Oklahoma
City.

At the same time, we recognize that the authorities in
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, as the latest report by
the Co-Chairman states and the resolution picks up, have
demonstrated that they are cooperating and have provided
the necessary assistance to the activities of the observer
Mission; this is essentially why my delegation wished to
extend the suspension of sanctions.
Secondly, a number of steps have proved useful in
plugging the gaps resulting from the shortfalls we have
noted in the field, the most striking examples of which are
the helicopter flights — where there is an inquiry now
under way — and the sidestepping of the frontier closure
by passing goods for Bosnia and Herzegovina by way of
Croatian territory, which is why a part of the resolution
includes a strengthening of the existing measures. This
strengthening, in our view, is not such as to cast doubt on
the degree of cooperation being afforded by the Belgrade
authorities, but does respond to the loopholes that have
been shown up by experience.
I should like to stress that, even if the length of the
extension of the sanctions suspension has been cut back, the
cutback is still small in scale. My delegation would have
had no problem with going back to the period set in
previous resolutions, and accepted the time-frame in the
resolution in a spirit of compromise, which seemed to us to
be the only way of achieving in the Council a result that we
think is on the whole positive.
We therefore call on the authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia to accept the resolution in the same

18

Mr. Graf zu Rantzau (Germany): It is a pleasure to
welcome you today, Mr. Deputy Foreign Minister, to the
Council and to see you in the President’s chair.

Let me begin by expressing the gratitude of my
Government to the members of the Mission of the
International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia
(ICFY). The Mission plays an essential role in monitoring
the closure of the border between the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which closure is the subject of the resolution just adopted
by our Council. We are fully aware that the Mission is
working under extremely difficult conditions. My
Government hopes that, in keeping with today’s
resolution, Member States will provide the ICFY Mission
with additional material and financial support.
This is the second time that the Security Council has
taken a decision to continue the limited sanctions relief
originally extended to Belgrade under resolution
943 (1994). In order to do so, the Council needed to
determine whether the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
was continuing to implement the closure of its border
with the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The reports
received from the Co-Chairmen of the ICFY indicate that
the Belgrade authorities are continuing to cooperate with
the Mission. Based on the information available to them,
the Co-Chairmen conclude that the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia is continuing to meet its commitment
regarding border closure.
However, the reports also note a number of serious
violations and presumed violations of the border regime.
Indeed, the last two certifications contain an important
caveat regarding helicopter flights, which are a question
of particular concern to my Government. In addition, we
have become increasingly concerned about circumvention
of the border regime by way of Serb-controlled areas in
the Republic of Croatia.
Today’s resolution, while extending the suspension
of certain sanctions, is designed to address these
problems. The question of helicopter flights will be the
subject of a thorough investigation and a report to the

Security Council
Fiftieth year

3522nd meeting
21 April 1995

Council. The Secretary-General will also submit a report on
ways to improve the effectiveness of the border regime.
The continued suspension of sanctions is now tied to
preventing diversions of goods through the Republic of
Croatia to areas under the control of Bosnian Serb forces.

The resolution adopted today by the Security
Council extends the suspension of certain — largely
symbolic — sanctions against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) in the areas of civil
aviation and cultural and sports events until 5 July 1995.

Finally, in light of the problems during the period just
past, the duration of the suspension has been curtailed.
However, the authorities in Belgrade can count on further
renewals of the suspension if they comply with the
provisions of the resolution.

This resolution seems to us the logical and natural
consequence of the four reports by Co-Chairmen Owen
and Stoltenberg on the monitoring activity of the Mission
of the International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia
(ICFY) along the border between the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) and the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina over the past 100 days. All four
reports take note of the freedom of movement the Mission
has enjoyed in Yugoslav territory, the collaboration
offered by the Belgrade authorities and, above all, the fact
that the Belgrade Government has continued to honour its
commitment to keeping closed the border between the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro)
and the areas of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina
currently controlled by the Bosnian Serbs.

I should like to underline that Belgrade can expect
additional sanctions relief if it moves beyond an effective
border closure and extends its full support to the approach
pursued by the Contact Group. We call on the authorities
in Belgrade to accept mutual recognition of the successor
states of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
work with the international community to bring an end to
the conflict in the Republic of Croatia.
As regards the leadership in Pale, we hope that it will
finally recognize that it must return to the negotiating table.
It must accept the Contact Group’s peace plan as a starting
point. The Bosnian Serb leaders will not improve their
position by procrastinating: instead, they will increase the
sufferings of the Serbs of Bosnia and Herzegovina together
with the sufferings of the rest of the Republic’s civilian
population.
Germany believes that the pressure on Pale must be
maintained in order to achieve an overall settlement of the
conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina. My Government
remains convinced that a peaceful settlement can be
achieved. That is why we appeal, once again, to the
Bosnian parties to extend without further delay the
agreements on a cease-fire and a complete cessation of
hostilities.
The President: I thank the representative of Germany
for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Fulci (Italy): Allow me to begin, Sir, by
addressing to you a warm welcome from my delegation and
our best wishes on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council today. I would also like to take this
opportunity to thank your Government for having sent to
the United Nations such a fine and able diplomat,
Ambassador Karel Kovanda, who has presided so
efficiently and impartially over our deliberations since the
beginning of April.

That said, we cannot ignore the reports in recent
months of helicopter flights across the border. In this
regard, paragraph 8 of the resolution underlines the
important need for a thorough investigation of the matter
and requests the cooperation of the Belgrade authorities
and a report of the Secretary-General in this connection.
Neither can we ignore reports that goods could have
been diverted from the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
(Serbia and Montenegro) to the Bosnian Serbs through the
Serb-controlled areas of Croatia. This is why in paragraph
13 the Secretary-General is asked to report whether the
Co-Chairmen of the ICFY have received substantiated
evidence of such diversions. Furthermore, paragraph 15
provides for an end to the suspension if that should be
proved to be the case. Frankly, we believe it is in the
interest of the Belgrade authorities that their good faith be
proved.
It is equally essential that the size and operative
capacity of the ICFY Mission be strengthened in order to
guarantee a more effective monitoring of the border, in
particular with regard to the possibility of illegal
helicopter crossings. A serious commitment by the
international community to reinforcing the Mission, which
is performing such an important, difficult and delicate
task, could thus help to remove the existing climate of
doubts and suspicions.

19

Security Council
Fiftieth year
Finally, I should like to recall once more that in my
Government’s opinion the role that the Belgrade
Government can play in the framework of the peace
process is important, because that Government can exert its
influence on the Bosnian Serbs, whose obstinate rejection
of the peace plan continues to be a major obstacle. In a
difficult period such as the present one, with so many
factors that are still unknown, and on the eve of the
expiration of the cease-fire agreement in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, we believe that Belgrade’s role continues to
deserve encouragement and incentives.
I would be remiss if I concluded without echoing in
the Council the feeling of shock and horror provoked in
Italy by the cowardly terrorist attack perpetrated two days
ago in Oklahoma City. Through you, Mr. President, I wish
to extend sincere condolences and deep sympathy to our
American colleague, Ambassador Albright, and her
delegation.
The President: I thank the representative of Italy for
his kind words addressed to my delegation.
Mr. Gomersall (United Kingdom): My delegation
would also like warmly to welcome you to the Council, Mr.
President, and take the opportunity of your presence to
express our appreciation of your country’s presidency of the
Council in what has been a very busy month so far.
The United Kingdom also expresses its shock and
sympathy with the United States over the bomb outrage in
Oklahoma. We echo entirely Ambassador Albright’s words
about the universality of terrorism, which calls for a united
condemnation and response.
No one, certainly not the British Government, is happy
with the state of discussions on the peace process in the
former Yugoslavia. But there have been two important
gains over the last year. First, there has been the
establishment of the Bosnian Federation, which my
Government regards as an essential building block towards
an overall settlement. Secondly, the isolation of the Bosnian
Serbs as a result of their refusal to accept the Contact
Group plan has been confirmed, in particular by the
decision of the Belgrade authorities to close their border
with Bosnian Serb-held territory. Central to the international
community’s response to the Belgrade authorities’ decision
was the establishment of the International Conference on
the Former Yugoslavia (ICFY) Mission to monitor this
closure.

20

3522nd meeting
21 April 1995
These two developments have brought benefits, but
both need to be nurtured and developed further if the
Bosnian peace process is to move forward. Closure of the
border between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
(Serbia and Montenegro) and Bosnia has had an
economic, military and political impact upon Pale. This
closure must be maintained and intensified — not only by
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and
Montenegro) authorities but also by the Bosnian and
Croatian Governments — to ensure that trade diversion,
whether by land or by sea, is stopped. The Bosnian Serb
leadership must understand that there is no alternative to
resuming peace negotiations, with the Contact Group plan
as the starting point.
The ICFY Co-Chairmen have reported that the
border is generally closed and that cooperation with the
Belgrade authorities remains good. My Government fully
endorses that assessment and has the fullest confidence in
the work of the Co-Chairmen and of the ICFY Mission.
We are grateful for their efforts.
There are two important issues that now need to be
addressed without delay. The first is to ensure that border
closure is really tight; in this connection, we are
particularly concerned about reports of cross-border
helicopter flights. The second is to reinforce the ICFY
Mission so that it is able to continue carrying out its task
effectively.
As far as helicopter flights are concerned, my
Government has made personnel available to participate
in a team which will shortly begin the detailed analysis of
available data and thereafter report authoritatively. We
must be clear as to whether serious breaches of the border
closure are occurring, over it, in the air. Such breaches
would be unacceptable.
As for reinforcing the ICFY Mission, it is essential
that the international community provide the necessary
finance, manpower and equipment. We remain concerned
over the Mission’s continued financial crisis, which has
necessitated a reduction in its strength. My Government
wants to see a fully financed ICFY Mission with its
strength increased to 250 personnel. Denying the Mission
the support it needs serves only to undercut efforts to
bring about a settlement in Bosnia. We hope that other
Governments will join the United Kingdom in responding
to the Mission’s urgent need for resources, and that they
will bring forward the timing of their contributions.

Security Council
Fiftieth year
A limited suspension of sanctions remains in our view
the appropriate response to Belgrade’s cooperation to date.
The renewal of this suspension is justified. Furthermore, it
is right to use sanctions flexibly and imaginatively to
encourage initiatives in the interests of securing a peaceful
settlement. The fact is that the status quo in Bosnia is not
acceptable or sustainable and that United Nations peacekeeping forces cannot be expected to remain there forever,
in the absence of progress towards a political settlement
and if there is not the requisite degree of cooperation from
the parties. Additional sanctions relief would be justified
only if the authorities of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) made further
commitments to advancing the peace process. The Council
should support the Contact Group’s efforts to persuade
Belgrade to take these steps immediately.
The President: I thank the representative of the
United Kingdom for the kind words he addressed to my
delegation.
I shall now make a statement in my national capacity.
First, on behalf of the Czech Republic and its
Government and people, I wish to join all those who have
expressed their sorrow and sympathy to Ambassador
Albright and the American people in connection with the
terrorist bombing in Oklahoma City.
I turn now to the matter at hand.
On balance, the Czech Republic views the results of
the operations of the ICFY Mission in the former
Yugoslavia as successful. This balance is determined by a
mix of technical and political considerations.
Reports of the ICFY Co-Chairmen of the last 100 days
all contain one main message: the Government of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is continuing to meet its
commitment to closing the land border with Bosnia and
Herzegovina. This is a major chord. In addition, though,
there are worrisome undertones.

3522nd meeting
21 April 1995
Some other of these worrisome undertones, however,
have to do with the Mission itself — including its critical
financial situation, with the attendant need to decrease its
size.
We feel the ICFY Mission is doing a terrific job,
given the resources it has at hand, even if the political
position of Pale has hardly shifted during the period of its
operation. Keeping up the pressure on Pale and continuing
to recognize Belgrade's cooperation by maintaining the
regime of abated sanctions, first enacted in resolution
943 (1994), is the best way ahead. In fact, my delegation
would have preferred an extension of this regime
significantly beyond the 5 July deadline we have now
adopted — both for technical and for financial reasons,
but also because we do feel Belgrade is substantively
cooperating.
However, as we adopt another resolution on the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, let us not lose sight
of the big picture. This resolution, with the continuing
abatement of the sanctions, and the functioning of the
ICFY Mission are only tools, instruments, in an effort to
get the Bosnian Serbs, the most recalcitrant party to the
conflict, to accept the Contact Group peace plan. And
even this peace plan is only an instrument to bring about
peace and normalcy in the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We will have to take many more such
small, partial steps — many of which will turn out not to
have any effect at all — before we attain the final
objective.
I now resume my function as President of the
Council.
There are no further names on the list of speakers.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.
The meeting rose at 5.35 p.m.

Some of these have to do with the situation on the
border. Borders cannot perhaps be sealed hermetically, but
they should not be too porous. The phantom helicopter
flights are also troubling. The rupture of
telecommunications contacts with Pale that the authorities
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia had instituted was
welcome, and we encourage them to resume those contacts.
These and other aspects are addressed in the resolution we
have just adopted.

21
