S/PV.8987

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8987

th meeting
Monday, 7 March 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Alhefeiti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mrs. Gasri
Mr. Biang
Mr. Boateng
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mr. Ochoa Martínez
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in South Sudan (S/2022/156)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-27854 (E)
*2227854*

S/PV.8987

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in South Sudan (S/2022/156)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance with
rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
I invite the following briefers to participate in this
meeting: Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for South Sudan and Head
of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan;
Major General (Retired) Charles Tai Gituai, Interim
Chairperson of the reconstituted Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development; and Ms. Riya Williams
Yuyada, civil society briefer.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/156, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in South Sudan.
I now give the floor to Mr. Haysom.
Mr. Haysom: I thank the Council for this
opportunity to brief it on developments in South Sudan.
This year, 22 February marked the two-year
anniversary of the formation of the Revitalized
Transitional Government of National Unity. In that
period, the ceasefire continued to largely hold and
civilian casualties were significantly reduced over the
past year. Executive appointments at the national and
state levels were concluded. The Transitional National
Legislative Assembly and Council of States were
reconstituted, as were the state parliaments. Moreover,
key institutions of Government at the national and
state levels are in operation. The Cabinet endorsed
the permanent constitution-making bill, and a task
force was established to operationalize the transitional
justice mechanism of the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan.
Despite a formidable legislative agenda,
parliamentary proceedings are now in motion. The
2/20

07/03/2022

debate on the 2021-2022 national budget is a positive
step, particularly in view of reforms that South Sudan
has undertaken. Similarly, the President’s recent
commitment to economic and financial management
reforms is welcome. I also acknowledge the launch
of the joint technical working group, in which the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS),
supporting the National Disarmament, Demobilization
and Reintegration (DDR) Commission and other
partners, is advancing the design of a community
violence reduction project. The project will serve as a
bridge until national plans are in place for a broader
DDR programme.
I also welcome the decision of the Pagan Amum
and General Paul Malong factions of the South Sudan
Opposition Movements Alliance (SSOMA) to engage
with the Government of National Unity, under the
Community of Sant’Egidio-led mediation initiative. I
encourage the SSOMA faction, led by Thomas Cirillo,
to join those efforts, as the hold-out parties also have a
responsibility to promote peace in South Sudan.
As we enter the remaining 12 months of the
transitional period and even as we acknowledge
some progress, we are mindful of the accumulation
of unfulfilled commitments and the imperative to
address them in the limited time at hand. Key pending
benchmarks relate to the necessary conducive political
and civic space, as well as technical and logistical
prerequisites and an agreed timetable for free and fair
elections. That is intended to bring the transitional
period to a close.
While UNMISS stands ready to support the electoral
process, the Government has not yet pronounced
on the role of UNMISS or on a time frame for the
elections. Critically, the constitution-making process
bill is still pending and the process of drafting a new
constitution for the country remains stalled. Likewise,
although the parties have engaged on transitional
security arrangements, the actual graduation of unified
forces is yet to commence, with no agreement on the
command structure.
Stakeholders agree that the sluggish implementation
pace is a cause of disillusionment among the people of
South Sudan. That worrisome trend has the potential
to undermine the peace agreement. In that connection,
the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission has called for the parties to resolve their
22-27854

07/03/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

disputes, as provided for in the peace agreement, as it
remains the agreed pathway to sustainable peace.
Slow implementation comes at a cost. Peace
dividends remain elusive. Nowhere is that more clearly
reflected than in the frustration of marginalized youth,
many of whom have joined tribal militias, as we see in
Jonglei and the Greater Pibor Administrative Area, or
channel their anger at humanitarians and peacekeepers.
In 2021, five humanitarian workers were killed. This
year already, two have been killed.
The dire economic situation and its impact on youth
has resulted in a surge in criminality and xenophobic
hostility towards humanitarians and peacekeepers. It
is critical that their important concerns be taken into
consideration in our overall response and addressed
in a manner that acknowledges the voice of the youth,
while manifesting zero tolerance for violence directed
at humanitarians.
The Mission is supporting the development of the
national action plan for youth, peace and security in
partnership with the South Sudan national coalition for
youth, peace and security, a group of 30 national civilsociety organizations. The Government must create
the prospect of a future for South Sudan’s young men
and women.
Subnational violence continues to spread. That
includes the perennial conflicts in Jonglei and the
Greater Pibor Administrative Area; the emerging crossborder conflicts in Northern Bahr El-Ghazal, Unity and
Upper Nile states; and the Abyei Administrative Area.
All of that underscores the need to liberate South Sudan
from the repetitive cycles of violence and revenge.
That in turn is fuelled by national and local political
competition, some involving non-signatory armed
groups, some involving intra-Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement-Army in Opposition clashes — that is,
the opposition in the Government — and community
disputes over land and resources, including those
induced by climate change. With the dry season setting
in, a spike in intercommunal violence has been observed
in the past month.
As briefings from the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs have demonstrated, this year
overall humanitarian needs are projected to continue
growing. Yet donors’ appetite to furnish additional
resources to South Sudan is trending in reverse. The
third year of consecutive floods, exacerbated by
insecurity and the prolonged impact of the coronavirus

S/PV. 8987

disease, has strained coping mechanisms, destroyed
farmland, killed livestock and threatens dikes and
similar flood-mitigation infrastructure, all causing
further displacement and unprecedented food
insecurity. That bears negatively on the prospects for
next year’s agricultural season in a country that should
otherwise be the breadbasket of the region.
With regard to the efforts made by UNMISS, over
the last two years the Mission has provided an extensive
programme of assistance to political parties to facilitate
consensus around multiparty electoral policies and
alliance-building. UNMISS stands ready to provide
technical advice on constitutional and electoral matters,
acknowledging that, ultimately, those are sovereign
choices for the South Sudanese to make.
Since 2021, UNMISS has established 125
temporary operating bases to prevent and respond to
conflict hotspots, working with humanitarian partners
and leveraging our capacities to support political
solutions. That includes our national and field-level
presence across 10 states, deploying integrated civilianmilitary teams for grass-roots engagement and using
the collective weight of the diplomatic community for
leadership engagement and advocacy in Juba. Civilian
and military efforts complement each other, as neither
is effective on its own. Our peacekeeping activities
have been supplemented by 17 conflict-resolution
engagements, which have yielded 34 intercommunal
peace agreements.
The Mission has enhanced its capabilities by
moving away from static, base-centric security tasks.
We have made efforts to maximize the mobility of the
force so that it can respond to threats the full year round.
Importantly, the Mission’s strategic interventions
contributed to a 42 per cent decline in the number of
civilian casualties over the past year. The Mission will
continue to pivot to a more responsive posture through
its early-warning system and meeting the most pressing
protection needs.
Bu the conduct of short and long-term patrols has on
the one hand yielded results but on the other also given
rise to challenges, particularly as civilians establish
settlements for internally displaced persons around the
temporary operating bases. That creates difficulties in
redeploying force assets to other hotspots. The result
has been a pressure on our capacity to address a wider
range of contingencies, including those expected to

22-278543/20

S/PV.8987

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

arise in the more political environment of political
competition and tension.
Concurrently, we continue to work with the
South Sudan National Police Service as it takes on
responsibilities for the protection of civilians, including
preventing and addressing sexual and gender-based
violence, which remains a key concern in South Sudan.
UNMISS is working with humanitarian and
development partners on planning joint programmes
over the medium term. While preparedness planning
is essential ahead of the next rainy season, a genderinclusive triple-nexus approach — meaning, integrating
development,
peacekeeping
and
humanitarian
efforts — is required to achieve successful and
sustainable intervention. A longer-term reduction in
conflict will assist in reviving the Equatorias as the
breadbaskets of South Sudan.
Concerning the international community’s efforts,
the Revitalized Agreement remains a valid framework
for building political stability. The proposed Kampala
“principals’ retreat” offered an opportunity to address
the remaining roadblocks to implementation. The
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and other partners are required to overcome the current
impasse, which has led to the postponement of the
Ugandan initiative.
The support of regional and international partners
remains critical. The call of the African Union (AU)
Peace and Security Council for a trilateral AUUnited Nations-IGAD evaluation of the electoral and
constitution-making needs of South Sudan presents a
platform to leverage our comparative advantages. The
Mission intends to be an active partner in that effort.
With regard to the mandate renewal, it is my
view that the three-year strategic vision called for by
the Security Council, as informed by the five tracks
of the development of our engagement, has sharpened
UNMISS’s core mandate and remains an appropriate
framework. The present troop ceiling — 17,000
peacekeepers and 2,100 police officers — ensures
flexibility as UNMISS addresses contingencies and
plans for 2022.
We anticipate a mandate flexible enough support
the conduct of free and fair elections, upon the request
of the Government. That in turn will be contingent
upon progress in implementing the peace agreement.
As I have stated before, elections have the potential to
4/20

07/03/2022

be a nation-building moment or a catastrophe. Much
depends on the political will and leadership of the
South Sudanese working together.
In conclusion, though progress has been
undeniably slow, there is still space — even a window
of opportunity — to capitalize on the country’s relative
stability to pursue and ground a democratic transition.
The Mission, as ever, stands shoulder-to-shoulder with
the people of South Sudan as they collectively chart
their way forward towards sustainable peace. I thank
the Council for its continued and strong support for the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan.
The President (spoke
Mr. Haysom for his briefing.

in

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to Major General Gituai.
Mr. Gituai: I thank you, Madam President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council for the first
time as Interim Chairperson of the reconstituted Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission. I would like to
offer my congratulations to the United Arab Emirates
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of March, and I thank it for having invited
the Commission to brief the Council this morning. We
wish it the best in its presidency.
The reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission (R-JMEC) is the official oversight body
mandated to monitor and evaluate the implementation
of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, which
was mediated by the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD). The Commission oversees
the mandate and tasks of the Revitalized Transitional
Government of National Unity, including the
adherence by the parties to the agreed timelines and
implementation schedule.
The Commission is obligated, under article 7.9 of
the revitalized peace agreement, to submit quarterly
status reports, followed by detailed briefings to the
Council and to the following: the Revitalized Unity
Government Council of Ministers; the Transitional
National Legislative Assembly; the Chairperson of the
IGAD Assembly of Heads of State and Government;
the Chairperson of the IGAD Council of Ministers; the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission; the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union; and
the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
22-27854

07/03/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV. 8987

Since the revitalized peace agreement was signed
in September 2018, the Commission has submitted
13 status-of-implementation reports.

development of a road map for implementing the
requirements of transitional justice and the making of
the permanent Constitution.

Although there has been some progress in the
implementation of the revitalized peace agreement,
the end of the transition period, in February 2023, is
fast approaching, and yet several critical tasks of the
agreement remain unimplemented. Therefore, my
briefing to the Security Council will focus on the
key milestones achieved in the implementation of
the revitalized peace agreement to date, and critical
pending states, tasks and requirements for the conduct
of elections at the end of the transition period, as per the
Agreement. I will also highlight recurring challenges
and conclude with recommendations.

The foregoing progress notwithstanding, some
critical tasks of the agreement remain pending,
most notably, the following: establishment of the Ad
Hoc Judicial Reform Committee mandated to study
and recommend appropriate judicial reforms to the
Revitalized Unity Government; ratification of eight
bills by the Transition National Legislative Assembly,
namely, six security bills, the constitution-making bill
and the political parties bill, with the establishment
of the Political Parties Council, amendment of the
National Election Act 2012 and the setting up of a
competent and impartial National Election Commission;
the unification of forces and their deployments;
implementing disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes; addressing the challenges of
reconstruction, repatriation, resettlement, rehabilitation
and reintegration of IDPs and returnees; establishment
of the Special Construction Fund and Board, and the
convening of a South Sudan pledging conference
to support its humanitarian and reconstruction
efforts; informing the public finance management
institutions, especially the National Audit Chamber
and the Anti-Corruption Commission, to enhance
transparency and accountability; establishment of the
three transitional justice mechanisms, namely, the
Commission for Truth, Reconciliation and Healing, the
Hybrid Court for South Sudan, and the Compensation
and Reparation Authority, and completion of the
permanent constitution-making process to guide the
conduct of elections.

As Council members may recall, in July 2016,
armed conflict broke out in South Sudan, within one
year of the signing of the 2015 agreement, barely
two months after the first coalition Government
was formed. By contrast, the 2018 revitalized peace
agreement has entered its fourth year, and Revitalized
Unity Government marked its second anniversary last
month, February 2022, which is an indication of its
comparative success.
Since its signing, the Revitalized Peace Agreement
has contributed significantly to the following: cessation
of violence across the country among the signatories of
the agreement and continued holding of the permanent
ceasefire; the establishment and reconstitution of
all pretransition institutions and implementation
mechanisms of the Agreement; establishment of the
Revitalized Transitional Government of National
Unity and state-level government; the constitution of
the Transitional National Legislative Assembly and the
state assemblies; the incorporation of the revitalized
peace agreement into the Transitional Constitution of
the Republic of South Sudan, 2011, as amended; the
review and amendment of four security-related laws by
the National Constitutional Amendment Committee,
which has been submitted by the Revitalized
Unity Government and is awaiting enactment; the
recruitment, screening, selection and training of the
unified forces, with approximately 50,000 trainees
awaiting graduation under deployment; opening of
humanitarian corridors, which has facilitated gradual
voluntary return of some of the refugees and internally
displaced persons (IDPs); stabilization of the exchange
rates and progress in implementing some economic
reforms by the Revitalized Unity Government; and

In R-JMEC’s assessment, the tasks most critical for
the conduct of free, fair and credible elections and the
fulfilment of the revitalized peace agreement are the
unification of forces and their deployment; enactment
of the permanent Constitution; review of the political
parties and electoral-related laws; and the constitution
of the Political Parties Council and the National Election
Commission. I wish to underscore the importance of a
people-led and people-owned permanent Constitution,
which will be the cornerstone of the State of South
Sudan, preparing the way for democratic transition
through free, fair and credible elections.
Overall progress in implementation of the revitalized
peace agreement has generally been very slow from the
beginning, and there are several recurring challenges
facing it. The challenges include lack of sufficient

22-278545/20

S/PV.8987

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

resources, both financial and material, needed for the
implementation of the agreement; insufficient political
will and commitment from some actors; trust deficits
among the parties and capacity gaps; subnational
violence and activities of holdout groups; military
defections from one signatory party to another; flooding
and the coronavirus disease pandemic.
Given the challenges facing implementation, the
critical tasks pending and the agreement timeline
nearing expiry, R-JMEC has tasked the Revitalized
Unity Government with reviewing the status of the
implementation of the agreement and develop a clear
road map and strategy within the framework of the
revitalized peace agreement on how to implement the
outstanding critical tasks as the end of the transition
period approaches. The road map should be consensusbased, with verifiable benchmarks and timelines.
I would like to conclude with the following
recommendations to the Council. It should actively
engage the Revitalized Unity Government to
ensure implementation of the critical outstanding
tasks, especially the unification of forces and the
permanent constitution-making process, both tasks
being fundamental to the holding of free, fair and
credible elections; encourage the Revitalized Unity
Government to reconcile its interparty differences
and work collegially in the best interests of South
Sudan and its people; assist the Revitalized Unity
Government’s efforts aimed at mobilizing resources
from the international community to enhance
implementation of revitalized peace agreement;
support the Revitalized Unity Government to establish
the Special Reconstruction Fund and convene a
South Sudan pledging conference; provide support to
conflict-affected states and communities, as provided
for in the agreement, and continue supporting the full
implementation of the revitalized peace agreement and
the free, fair and credible elections.
Finally, I would like to appeal to the Council to
remain seized of the peace process in South Sudan, to
encourage it to consider visiting the country again and
continue supporting R-JMEC in its mandate, including
providing regular briefings to the Council on the status
of the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Major
General Gituai for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Yuyada.
6/20

07/03/2022

Ms. Yuyada: Greetings from my sunny city, Juba.
I am Riya Williams Yuyada, a women’s human rights
and peace activist working with Crown The Woman, a
local feminist non-governmental organization working
on women’s human rights in South Sudan. I appreciate
this opportunity to brief the Security Council.
To date, 11 South Sudanese women have briefed the
Security Council, and today I am the twelfth. We are
grateful that the Security Council has recognized the
importance of hearing from South Sudanese women in
its discussions.
As my civil society colleagues have previously
highlighted, since the signing of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South
Sudan over three years ago, there has been limited
to no progress in implementing crucial provisions of
the agreement with respect to security sector reform,
constitutional and electoral reform, judicial reform and
transitional justice. Although major towns including
the capital Juba remain calm, violence has increased at
the local level.
One of the factors driving the increased violence
is the exclusionary nature of political and peace efforts
at all levels in the country. Communities do not feel
represented by officials, and there is no accountability
for those who misuse their authority. This is a
particularly important lesson for the Security Council
to take into account when renewing the mandate for the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
It is sad, disheartening and unacceptable that we
keep raising the same issues with Council members,
only to see the situation continue to worsen. We
are tired of sharing the same stories of rape, child
marriage, war, trauma and loss. Having visited many of
the affected communities, I can personally attest that
after enduring decades of conflict, the resilience of my
fellow South Sudanese people is fading. Although ours
is a history of struggle for liberty, freedom, prosperity
and dignity, we can struggle no more. To expect the
people of South Sudan to remain resilient in the face
of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and
other trauma — losing our children and loved ones;
being displaced from our homes; dying from hunger,
floods and disease; and witnessing the impunity
with which sexual violence, including rape and other
horrific crimes under international law, have been
committed under the watch of the Council and its
Member States — is unacceptable.
22-27854

07/03/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

As the transitional period comes to an end this
year, South Sudanese are expected to go to the polls
for general elections tentatively planned for 2023.
However, in consultations with my fellow civil society
members and having listened to citizens’ views,
including in refugee camps, there is agreement that the
ground is not ripe for free, fair and peaceful elections.
Not only is the necessary legal and institutional
framework not in place, with less than one year before
the planned elections, but the current insecurity and
lack of confidence the people have, due to the failure
to implement the revitalized peace agreement, can
only have a detrimental impact on the legitimacy of the
outcome, which risks further violence.
If steps are not taken to ensure that the election is
inclusive, transparent and safe, we fear the outcome.
In that context, all UNMISS support for the electoral
process must be geared towards ensuring that it is safe,
inclusive and in alignment with international standards.
The Security Council must also clarify that under its
existing protection-of-civilians mandate, UNMISS is
expected to ensure the safety and security of all voters,
poll workers, candidates and officials, as well as human
rights defenders and activists.
The safety of civilians in the lead up to and during
the elections will be at considerable risk, particularly
given the recent defections by military actors within
the parties to the agreement. Those defections only cast
uncertainty on the sustainability of the revitalized peace
agreement and securing our future. For proper elections
to take place, citizens want to see that all forces are
cantoned, that military forces and allied militias are
unified under one central command trained to reflect
a national professional army that is non-political and
defends the people and territorial integrity and that a
nationwide disarmament and demobilization programme
is under way. Although the constitution-makingprocess bill is before Parliament, no steps have
been taken to prioritize its adoption. Moreover, the
constitution-making process ought to be consultative
and citizen driven. Civic space and education on the
electoral process and constitution-making are critical.
Without guarantees that the Government will ensure
freedom of expression and opinion, association and
peaceful assembly, citizens are worried about elections
and scared of its consequences.
Were I the first South Sudanese woman to brief the
Security Council, I would discuss in-depth the ongoing,
systematic and widespread sexual and gender-based

S/PV. 8987

violence that is perpetrated with impunity, highlighting
the way in which displaced women and women and
girls with disabilities are particularly affected, noting
the increase of domestic violence in the context of the
COVID-19 pandemic and emphasizing that genderbased violence is rooted in systems of patriarchy and
inequality. However, the Council has already heard
detailed testimony and analysis on those very issues. I
therefore want to reinforce that the insights shared by
my civil society colleagues remain relevant, and I urge
the Council to take forward their recommendations.
For my part, the issue that continues to be raised to
our Organization is the denial of protection and justice
to survivors of gender-based violence, resulting from
near-total impunity. I want to briefly highlight the
effect that this culture of impunity has on survivors.
In our work with and on behalf of survivors, the
alleged perpetrators — often in positions of power — face
little to no consequence for carrying out acts of genderbased violence, including conflict-related sexual
violence. The result is that alleged perpetrators, who
continue to live and work in the community, are free
to threaten survivors. There have been many occasions
where we have feared for the lives of the survivors we
work with, as well as for our own safety. The survivors
we work with have no place to go. In all of South Sudan,
there are only two safe houses — imagine that. Those
safe houses cannot handle the increasing number of
survivors who seek assistance and shelter. The increase
in gender-based violence and the frequency of threats
against survivors are both a direct result of the failure
to establish a system of justice to ensure accountability
for crimes, including those committed in violation of
international law.
I welcome the Government’s adoption of the joint
action plan for the armed forces on addressing conflictrelated sexual violence in South Sudan. However, it is
unfortunate that more than a year has passed since its
adoption, and the implementation of the Joint action plan
does not match the immense suffering and needs of the
high number of survivors. Since 2013, countless victims
are still waiting for justice, yet the Government does
not invest in the judicial system or the establishment of
the rule of law and refuses to establish the Hybrid Court
for South Sudan enshrined in the peace agreement.
Judges are paid peanuts and left unprotected; activists
are threatened and intimidated with impunity. The
civic space has closed. Women human rights defenders
can hardly even obtain a copy of the Joint Action Plan

22-278547/20

S/PV.8987

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

in order to supplement and support its implementation.
Tell me, how can we continue our work for justice when
every effort is made to deter progress?
I urge the Security Council to follow-up on its
previous call on the Government of South Sudan to
improve the judicial system and establish the Hybrid
Court for South Sudan, as well as call for the swift
implementation of the joint action plan, in particular
the identification and adoption of practical measures
to protect victims and witnesses. All interventions are
supposed to be guided by a survivor- and human-rightscentred approach, which is currently not happening.
I will stop here and remind the Security Council
not to remain loudly quiet about the violation of our
human rights.
The President (spoke
Ms. Yuyada for her briefing.

in

Arabic):

I

thank

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Haysom and the briefers for their
insightful and sobering presentations. Their reports
provide a clear understanding of current developments
and lack of progress in South Sudan and of the significant
contributions that the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) is making in this country.
Let me start by thanking the women and men of
UNMISS, who serve to protect the people of South Sudan.
I also commend the troop- and police-contributing
countries and civilian experts for their efforts to
preserve peace and stability in South Sudan.
In his most recent UNMISS report (S/2022/156),
the Secretary-General made clear that the Mission’s
mandated tasks remain valid. The United States agrees.
To that end, I want to discuss four aspects of the situation
in South Sudan — the security situation and protection of
civilians, the widespread human rights abuses, progress
towards democracy and the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan and the
importance of humanitarian access — and the role of
UNMISS within them.
First, the United States remains deeply concerned
about the volatile security situation throughout the
country. Fighting between numerous armed actors
has led to allegations of horrific human rights abuses,
8/20

07/03/2022

including the killing of civilians, rapes, burning and
destruction of villages and the looting of humanitarian
supplies. We strongly condemn those atrocious acts
of violence and the impunity with which they are
taking place. And we urgently call on local, state and
national leaders to immediately intervene and hold
accountable the perpetrators of human rights abuses and
attacks against humanitarian aid workers, regardless
of affiliation.
Overall, the protection of civilians, including the
protection of women and children, and accountability
for sexual exploitation and abuse must continue to be
a top priority for UNMISS. Ms. Williams Yuyada has
made a demand that the Council deal with this issue
and we need to listen to her request, which leads me to
my second point.
The United States is appalled by the recent findings
in the joint report of UNMISS and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
on human rights abuses committed in Tambura. The
report documents 14 incidents of conflict-related
sexual violence, involving 64 victims. It documents the
abduction of civilians. It documents the killing of at
least 440 civilians. Horrifically, the report documents
that political and security sector elites have instigated,
facilitated and aided this violence and manipulated
ethnic identities.
The victims and survivors of sexual violence were
predominantly women and girls, of course. They were
assaulted publicly and at least 19 of them who were
publicly sexually assaulted were brutally killed during
and after. One of those killed was a 13-year-old. The
Security Council has to take these kinds of reports
seriously. We cannot stay silent, and the region cannot
stay silent. The Government of South Sudan must
investigate and prosecute all those responsible for crimes
committed, including and especially those in positions
of command and authority. Similarly, we remain deeply
concerned about reports of sexual exploitation and
abuse committed by UNMISS personnel over the past
year, including two allegations filed last December.
We urge all parties involved in these investigations to
complete their inquiries in a timely and transparent
manner and to ensure accountability for perpetrators if
these allegations are substantiated.
Thirdly, the Government of South Sudan must
swiftly implement key provisions of the revitalized
agreement to work towards a true democracy. That
22-27854

07/03/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

means an inclusive constitution-drafting process,
public financial management reform, transitional
security arrangements and transitional justice
mechanisms — including the Hybrid Court for South
Sudan — in order to ensure free and fair elections that
reflect the will of all South Sudanese. Unfortunately,
the Government of South Sudan is behind in meeting
key electoral benchmarks outlined in the revitalized
agreement, and that is simply unacceptable. We urge
the Government to establish the legal and institutional
framework required to conduct free and fair elections.
The diminishing civic space in South Sudan is
hindering the country’s progress towards democracy. In
particular, the United States was seriously concerned by
the detentions and arrests of journalists and civil rights
activists by national security forces on 22 February.
Journalists and activists belong on the beat; they
belong on the street, not in prison. The Government of
South Sudan must respect the rights of all citizens, in
accordance with the Transitional Constitution. South
Sudan needs to create an enabling environment for free
and fair elections by respecting fundamental freedoms
of expression, association and peaceful assembly.
Fourthly and finally, we urge actors at the national
and subnational levels to do everything possible to
facilitate humanitarian access. There are 8.9 million
people estimated to need humanitarian assistance
this year; that is 600,000 more than last year. This
increase is driven by continued conflict, widespread
flooding, deepening food insecurity, inflation, high
food prices and a lack of access to basic services.
These factors make the role of UNMISS so important.
UNMISS must continue to work with all parties to
implement its core task, and that is to create conditions
that allow humanitarians unhindered access to the
most vulnerable.
The United States remains committed to the people
of South Sudan. We remain committed to working
closely with the Transitional Government of National
Unity, our fellow Council members and all stakeholders
to enable peace and prosperity for the country and for
the region.
Mr. Ochoa Martínez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank Special
Representative Haysom, Major General Gituai and
Ms. Williams Yuyada for their briefings.
I will begin by taking up one of the points raised
by the briefers, namely, the preparation for elections.

S/PV. 8987

The reports indicate that, as of today, the conditions for
holding elections in the time frame envisaged, given
the lack of progress in the area of security and in the
drafting of the constitution, do not appear to exist.
We will closely follow the results of the coordination
and work undertaken by the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
South Sudanese authorities to conduct an evaluation
of what is needed for the holding of elections and the
drafting of the constitution.
In this context, like Ms. Williams Yuyada, we are
concerned about the reports of restrictions on civic
space and the suppression of fundamental rights,
such as the freedom of expression and association.
As the Secretary-General has warned, it will be very
difficult to conduct a credible electoral process if such
prohibitions are in place. We call on the South Sudanese
authorities to urgently address incidents of censorship,
harassment and arbitrary arrests.
We also reiterate that the implementation of the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in South Sudan cannot be selective. Efforts must be
focused on overcoming the existing obstacles, and we
therefore acknowledge the efforts of the President of
Uganda in organizing a forum to seek solutions and
facilitate their implementation.
I would like to state that, although the ceasefire
is holding, the security situation in the country is
deplorable. Violence continues to be a critical factor
that led to tens of thousands of displacements last
year. In Tambura alone, some 83,000 people have been
displaced and hundreds killed. Violence also has a
direct impact on humanitarian operations. We condemn
the attack on the World Food Programme convoy and
the killing of two humanitarian workers this year. We
call on the Government to minimize interference in
humanitarian activities and ensure that there are no
checkpoints requesting the payment of levies from
humanitarian operations.
The causes of violence are multifaceted, fuelled
by inter-party conflicts, ethnic divisions and economic
depression, among others. In this regard, we recognize
the efforts of state authorities to foster reconciliation
and address the causes of instability.
We are closely following the Mission’s work on
the redesignation of the protection of civilians site in
Malakal. While we know that the evaluation process
will be rigorous, the change of status should occur only

22-278549/20

S/PV.8987

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

when the conditions are in place. I mention this because
we are following with concern reports of the recruitment
of minors in the Bentiu camp, among others.
We recognize the challenge of protecting civilians
faced by the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) and therefore urge the Mission to continue
promoting preventive violence reduction projects,
such as the reintegration of ex-combatants and
inter-community conferences, in various parts of the
country to ensure peaceful cattle migration.
I would like to emphasize the importance of the
Council’s recognition of the adverse effects of climate
change and natural disasters on the humanitarian
situation and stability in South Sudan.
I conclude by reiterating Mexico’s support for
UNMISS and our readiness to work constructively
to ensure that the Council can renew the Mission’s
mandate next week.
Ms. Evstigeena (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for South Sudan, Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, for his informative briefing. We also listened
attentively to the information provided by the Interim
Chairperson of the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission, Major General Charles Tai
Gituai, as well as to the civil society representative,
Ms. Riya William Yuyada. We have carefully read the
latest report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in South Sudan and the work of United Nations
peacekeepers there (S/2022/156).
The Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan continues
to work and the ceasefire is largely holding. We note
the de facto completion of the formation of transitional
authorities in South Sudan and the start of work on
a draft permanent constitution. We welcome the
intentions of the South Sudanese leadership to hold
elections in 2023. We trust that the peacekeeping
Mission will be able to provide the necessary assistance
in conducting those elections, if requested by the South
Sudanese side.
We welcome the recent progress in the dialogue
with non-signatories to the revitalized peace
agreement, primarily in terms of the peace agreements
between the Government and the breakaway Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement-Army in Opposition
Kitgwang faction, led by General Gatwech Dual, and
10/20

07/03/2022

Johnson Olony’s Agwelek forces. We pay tribute to the
mediation efforts of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and, above all, the Sudan, in that process.
We support Uganda’s initiative to host a meeting among
South Sudanese leaders. We are counting on continued
mediation through the Community of Sant’Egidio.
We note the overall decrease in the level of violence
in the country, as well as the readiness of an increasing
number of refugees and internally displaced persons to
return to their homes. However, we are concerned by
reports of sporadic local armed conflicts. We strongly
condemn any violations of the revitalized agreement,
as well as acts of violence against civilians, including
humanitarian personnel working in South Sudan.
We believe that only the swift and full
implementation of the agreements reached will help the
parties enhance mutual trust and prevent the mistakes
of the past from being repeated. We deem it particularly
important to speed up the formation of the national
unified forces. We urge the non-signatories of the peace
agreement to join the State-building process.
We are convinced that, as the situation normalizes,
we will need to adapt South Sudan’s sanctions regime
to the new reality in South Sudan. We must not forget
that sanctions have never been a solution to the conflict
in that country.
In the coming days, the Security Council is to
renew the mandate of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan, which plays a crucial role in stabilizing
the situation in the country. The Russian Federation is
determined to work constructively to reach an agreement
on that document. We believe that it is important, first
and foremost, to ensure that it adequately reflects the
genuine needs of the country. We consider attempts to
give the document a human rights focus and ramp up
pressure on Juba on other issues under the pretext of
elections as counterproductive.
We call on the Security Council to pay
greater attention to assisting the authorities in the
implementation of the revitalized peace agreement and
building capacity to resolve the issue of local conflicts.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): First, I would like
to thank Mr. Haysom for not only illustrating the
achievements of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS), but for also very clearly setting
out the challenges that remain. I think he provided a
very timely and insightful reflection on where we are
22-27854

07/03/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

currently at as we work towards the renewal of the
Mission’s mandate.
I also want to thank Major General Gituai for his
work. We are deeply indebted to him and his teams
for the work they are carrying out to see through the
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, which is clearly a tough job.
I want to thank Ms. Riya Williams Yuyada
specifically for the very sober and frank assessment
she gave us this morning, particularly in terms of what
is happening on the ground. We need to hear about that
at the grass-roots level. I heard her say this morning
that resilience is fading, which certainly struck me
and, I think, others here in the Chamber. For my part,
I want to reassure her that the phenomenal efforts of
civil society groups on the ground in South Sudan are
deeply appreciated and that she can rest assured that
her work will surely always have the support of my
country, Ireland.
It was also very clear from her statement that we
need to do better. We heard what she said about the
horrific abuses occurring, including conflict-related
sexual violence, which we find totally unacceptable
and need to address. I also noted her assessment about
the lack of readiness for elections on the ground. I
want to thank her again for her candour to the Council
this morning.
Ireland notes that the report of the Secretary General
(S/2022/156) outlines welcome progress in some areas.
In that regard in particular, I want to welcome the
progress that has been made on the constitution-making
process. We call now for its continuation in an open and
inclusive manner, but we must say once again that we
regret that the implementation of the peace process itself
remains limited, at best. I believe that was reinforced,
frankly, by what we have heard from the briefers today.
The fact is that progress is simply too slow and we are
now hearing questions being raised as to how elections
can actually be delivered next year. Urgent action by
and cooperation between all parties, of course, remains
essential and we need to promote an understanding and
an acceptance that delivering effectively for citizens
actually means embracing accountability. It is critical
to the welfare of the people of South Sudan, as well as to
their confidence in the peace process, that we see faster
progress being made and concrete steps being taken.

S/PV. 8987

The recent reports emanating from Tambura
are particularly shocking. Politicized subnational
violence and grave human rights abuses, including the
systematic use of sexual violence, are completely and
utterly horrifying and unacceptable. We fully agree
with those here today who have said that we cannot look
the other way in the face of such abuses. I also think it
highlights the fact that UNMISS’s role in monitoring
and investigating human rights violations is not just
critically important but absolutely necessary. The
increased deployment of temporary operating bases by
UNMISS to support populations that are affected by
increased insecurity is extremely welcome. We see that
as a really important step.
Ireland is very concerned by the alarming level
of persistent humanitarian need in South Sudan. The
sheer number of citizens requiring assistance is truly
shocking. We regret not only the impact that has on the
lives and prospects of young and old, as Mr. Haysom
mentioned, but also the State’s failure to invest the
necessary energy and resources into tackling that
crisis. As the humanitarian crisis deepens, full and
unrestricted humanitarian access and the protection of
humanitarian workers remains critical, as we have said
a thousand times. All sides must respect international
humanitarian law and allow aid to reach those
vulnerable people who most desperately need it. That is
a basic and fundamental concern.
In addition to that, we remain highly alert to the
undeniable impact of climate change on peace and
security in South Sudan. We have seen prolonged and
intense flooding increase population displacement,
disrupt agriculture and alter cattle migration patterns,
all of which risk accentuating or provoking violence.
Those are neither new nor unexpected phenomena, but
we have been witnessing them as the results of climate
impacts for some time. Climate and security are clearly
interacting in South Sudan.
In recognizing the action that is required on that
front, Ireland is proud to fund a climate security
adviser with UNMISS to help to identify and
address climate-related security risks and to support
community-led-based peacebuilding measures to
mitigate such risks and prevent violence.
I want to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and UNMISS colleagues for their
steadfast efforts to bring about peace in the country,
not least in relation to the Mission’s protection

22-2785411/20

S/PV.8987

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

mandate, including its support for civil society, which
is particularly important given the concerning reports
of the shrinking civic space, of which we heard Riya
Yuyada speak very clearly this morning. An open civil
society space is particularly critical in the context of
preparations — whatever the time frame — for elections.
It is crucial to ensuring an inclusive democratic process
in which all voices can be heard.
The peace workshops of the South Sudan Women’s
Empowerment Network offer promise for meaningful
participation by women, and I want to particularly
welcome that. We are heartened by the development of
the pilot community violence reduction project, and we
look forward to hearing more about that in due course.
The importance of engagement by neighbours and
regional actors, such as the African Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, cannot
be overstated today. We welcome President Museveni’s
intention to convene a retreat in Kampala, as well as
the recent visit of the African Union Peace and Security
Council to Juba, Jonglei and Pibor.
We hope that both initiatives will help to chart a
path forward for the effective implementation of the
peace agreement, which we expect will include the
establishment of the Compensation and Reparation
Authority, the Commission for Truth, Reconciliation
and Healing and the Hybrid Court for South Sudan, as
committed to by President Kiir Mayardit in his New
Year message.
In conclusion, we want to support a pathway
to a brighter future for South Sudan. It is clear that
inclusive and democratic elections, hopefully in
2023, can represent a turning point for South Sudan,
but that can happen only if South Sudan can work to
fully implement the peace agreement. I believe that
real peace is within reach. We know what that looks
like, and it is achieved when basic needs are met, when
human rights are protected — as we know, women’s
rights are human rights — and when the citizens of
South Sudan are free and safe to express themselves
without fear of repercussions. I believe that we wish
them absolutely nothing less.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Security Council, namely, Gabon, Ghana and
Kenya (A3).
12/20

07/03/2022

We thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Nicholas Haysom, Major General Charles
Gituai and Ms. Riya Williams Yuyada for their
briefings. We also welcome the participation of the
Permanent Representative of South Sudan, Ambassador
Akuei Bona Malwal.
The A3 statement will touch on five pertinent
issues: the political situation; security; the humanitarian
and economic situation; climate and security; and the
UNMISS mandate.
First, on the political front, South Sudan is at a
critical juncture with only one year remaining of the
transition period under the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan. The A3
welcomes the progress made since the formation of the
Revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity
two years ago. The recent passage of the constitutional
amendment bill (2021) and the launch of the screening
and registration of the Necessary Unified Forces, as
well as the recommitment to resuming negotiations with
the non-signatory groups under the Rome initiative, are
commendable. We urge the non-signatory groups to take
the opportunity in the next round of mediation by the
Community of Sant’Egidio to join the implementation
of the peace process.
The A3 recognizes that further efforts are needed
to register success during the transition period.
While we remain mindful of the existing challenges,
as reflected in the Secretary-General’s latest report
(S/2022/156) and by the briefers this morning, there
are also opportunities. We therefore urge the leadership
of the parties to refocus their efforts and resources
on the implementation of the remaining items of the
revitalized peace agreement.
Fundamentally, the engagement and the role of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
the African Union and regional leaders, as well as
the support of the United Nations and international
partners, remain indispensable to the process.
The A3 welcomes the decision of the African Union
Peace and Security Council requesting a trilateral
evaluation of the electoral and constitution-making
needs for South Sudan. However, we share the
view that elections alone cannot guarantee stability
without adequate implementation of the provisions
of the revitalized peace agreement. In that regard,
the proposed South Sudan leaders’ retreat for mutual
confidence-building and for the parties to draw
22-27854

07/03/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV. 8987

up a road map for the remaining transition period
remains critical.

unilateral coercive measures will heed the call by IGAD
and the African Union in that regard.

Secondly, on the security situation, the A3 is
pleased that the permanent ceasefire has held, but we
remain seriously concerned by the worrying incidents
of ethnic and intercommunal clashes in some parts of
the country, as well as fighting among party factions.
The A3 condemns such breakdowns of security and
violence against civilians.

Fourthly, the impact of the extreme weather
conditions cannot be overemphasized. It worsens the
competition for resources between pastoralists and
farmer communities and is a driver of the perennial
low-level conflicts and insecurity in South Sudan.
Therefore, developing strategies on climate change
mitigation, adaptation and building resilience should
be part of the recovery efforts and the development
assistance extended to South Sudan.

The Government of South Sudan has a duty to protect
its civilians. We therefore urge the authorities to take
steps to investigate all incidents of violence and ensure
that those responsible are held legally accountable.
The A3 further reiterates that improvements
in the security situation can be guaranteed only
through implementation of the transitional security
arrangements. It is incumbent upon the parties to
expedite the unification of the armed forces and the
graduation of the Necessary Unified Forces without
further delays. The A3 also commends and supports
the expansion of the community violence reduction
programme as a critical measure in addressing some of
the drivers of conflicts.
Thirdly, the A3 is deeply concerned by the
deteriorating economic and humanitarian situation in
South Sudan. The drought currently ravaging the Horn
of Africa has compounded the devastating impacts of
last season’s floods, which worsened food insecurity. We
call for the urgent scaling up of humanitarian support.
While applauding the efforts of humanitarian
partners, agencies and their workers for their continuous
assistance to the people of South Sudan under these
challenging circumstances, we also express concern
and deplore the reported incidents of attacks, killings
and harassment of humanitarian workers. Such reports,
when verified, will not only be regrettable but they are,
to say the least, unacceptable. We urge the Government
to take appropriate measures to protect humanitarian
workers and facilitate unhindered humanitarian access
to all those in need.
The A3 also reiterates its call for the lifting of
sanctions and the arms embargo against South Sudan.
They are counterproductive to the peace efforts and
have had the unintended consequence of undermining
the country’s potential for economic investments. We
hope that the Council and all those that have imposed

Fifthly, the A3 commends UNMISS and the troopcontributing countries for their continued commitment
to the course of peace in South Sudan. In view of the
cumulative progress made since the signing of the
revitalized peace agreement, the ongoing negotiations
for the renewal of the UNMISS mandate provide an
opportunity to calibrate that mandate and make the
Mission more fit for purpose.
In that regard, the A3 believes that providing
technical assistance, capacity-building and logistical
support to national and local institutions across the
four mandated tasks of UNMISS is essential. As a
multidimensional peacekeeping operation, UNMISS
should live up to the purpose for which it was
established, including support for State and institutional
capacity-building. That is critical if UNMISS is to
achieve the three-year strategic vision.
The A3 welcomes the submission by South Sudan
to engage with the Peacebuilding Commission. That
offers a unique and resourceful opportunity to help
the country advance peace consolidation, as well as to
transition to post-conflict recovery and development.
We also welcome the announcement by the World Bank
of the $34-million grant to aid in the implementation
of public financial management reforms, in line with
Chapter IV of the revitalized agreement.
In conclusion, Gabon, Ghana and Kenya reaffirm
their commitment to continuing to accompany the
Government and the people of South Sudan in their
quest for lasting peace, stability and development.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Let me start by
commending the personnel of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) for their brave and
vital work. I would like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Nicholas Haysom and Major
General Charles Tai Gituai, Interim Chairperson of

22-2785413/20

S/PV.8987

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission to the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, for their informative briefings. I also
thank Ms. Williams Yuyada for her participation.
We welcome the participation of the Permanent
Representative of South Sudan, Ambassador Malwal.
I would like to highlight three issues in South
Sudan that merit the Council’s attention and action.
The first is the protection of civilians. We all know
and appreciate that the South Sudanese authorities bear
the core responsibility for that duty. In Brazil’s view,
that is also a cornerstone of the UNMISS mandate.
In that sense, the recently published UNMISS brief
compiling 2021 data on violence affecting civilians
makes it clear that South Sudan has made progress.
Not only violent incidents against civilians, but also
casualties have decreased. We hope that this trend
points to both enhanced protection and improved
monitoring and investigation.
The second issue is the peace process. The
establishment of the Transitional National Legislative
Assembly and the adoption of the constitutional
amendment bill are important transitional arrangements.
However, the implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South
Sudan has been slow. We all know that all parties to
the agreement should remain fully committed to peace.
South Sudan therefore needs quicker action with regard
to its Necessary Unified Forces. The South Sudanese
Government should move faster to take advantage of
the efforts and expertise of UNMISS.
The third and last point that I would like to raise
relates to intercommunal violence. The recent killings
in many parts of the country are deeply concerning.
One wonders whether petty motives and inconsequent
criminal behaviour are the causes of those incidents.
Otherwise, if what fuels murder and destruction are
revenge, unresolved disputes and broader dissatisfaction
with the transitional security arrangements that
the revitalized agreement promises to deliver, then
the cases of intercommunal violence are even more
dangerous. We appreciate the sustained efforts led by,
among others, the Ceasefire and Transitional Security
Arrangements Monitoring and Verification Mechanism,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
the Community of Sant’Egidio. However, we remain
concerned. Dispute resolution, mediation and good
offices will be truly effective only if sound development
14/20

07/03/2022

strategies and the fair distribution of resources are in
place and palpable to the concerned individuals.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming Brazil’s
commitment to peace in every corner of South Sudan.
We are proud that we have Brazilian experts, police
officials and staff officers that contribute to UNMISS.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-Genera1
Haysom, Major General Gituai and Ms. Williams
Yuyada for their valuable briefings.
First, the United Kingdom would like to commend
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
for its continued efforts to protect civilians, build
durable peace and support inclusive and accountable
governance in South Sudan. As we approach the
mandate renewal, it is our sincere hope that UNMISS
continues to receive the Security Council’s full support
at this critical juncture in South Sudan’s implementation
of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in South Sudan, particularly as we look ahead
towards elections.
Two years have now passed since the formation
of the Transitional Government of National Unity. We
have each welcomed the positive steps taken during this
time, including on national and state governance, and
today we welcome the adoption of the constitutional
amendment bill. Once again, however, we recognize
that progress remains woefully slow. We should not
forget the human price of those delays. It remains our
sincere hope that the full implementation of the peace
agreement will deliver positive change to the South
Sudanese people.
Of particular concern is the continued lack
of progress on the unification of forces and their
redeployment. We echo the Secretary-General’s
concerns over defections and subsequent violent
clashes between different armed factions across the
country. Such incidents perpetuate division at a time
when the need for unity is greater than ever. They are
also against the letter and spirit of the peace agreement.
The human rights situation in South Sudan is also
deeply worrisome. The continued crackdown on civic
space, including harassment of human rights activists,
the detention of journalists and restrictions on freedom
of speech and association, are unacceptable. We also
remain deeply concerned about the harrowing reports
of violence, killings and the continued use of sexual
22-27854

07/03/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

violence by the parties to the conflict, including the
deeply disturbing reports of sexual violence in Tambura.
As Ms. Williams Yuyada said earlier, the perpetrators
must be held accountable. We call on the Government
to South Sudan to fulfil its responsibilities with respect
to its people.
Lastly, I would like to highlight our serious concern
about the urgent humanitarian crisis. With an estimated
2 million people expected to be acutely malnourished
in 2022, the crisis is set to become yet more severe
unless the humanitarian response improves. For
its part, South Sudan’s Government must reduce
interference in humanitarian activities and remove
illegal checkpoints and other bureaucratic impediments
to humanitarian delivery.
In conclusion, the United Kingdom would like to
reiterate its calls on South Sudan’s leaders to deliver on
their commitments and foster the conditions for holding
free and fair elections.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I thank Special
Representative Haysom and the two briefers for their
insights. We commend the work of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and the troopcontributing countries for their important contribution
to the Mission.
While political violence has decreased over the
past years, the suffering of the people of South Sudan
continues. The devastating effects of climate change
have led to mass flooding and drought, causing hunger,
displacement and a fight for resources. It is time to
address those issues and build capacity and resilience.
We commend the work of UNMISS to mitigate the
devastation of the climate emergency in the short term.
As we heard from the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, intercommunal violence has
increased in recent weeks. The protection of civilians
must therefore remain a key priority for UNMISS. We
recall the primary responsibility of the Government
of South Sudan to protect civilians and humanitarian
actors, allowing their full and unhindered access to
those in need. We are deeply concerned about attacks
on humanitarian workers in South Sudan. They
are unacceptable.
As mentioned by our civil society briefer, Ms. Riya
Williams Yuyada, sexual and gender-based violence
is still widespread. Accountability is key to fighting
impunity, deterring further crimes and giving justice

S/PV. 8987

and hope to the survivors of such atrocities. We support
the mobile courts provided by UNMISS and would like
to reiterate the need for the protection of witnesses and
survivors, even in remote settings. In that context, we
call on the Government, in cooperation with the African
Union, to redouble its efforts in setting up the Hybrid
Court for South Sudan. We are deeply concerned about
continuing reports of human rights violations and
abuses, as well as the harassment of journalists.
Despite some progress, the implementation of
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in South Sudan has been slow. We call on all
parties to redouble their efforts and show action on
their commitments.
We welcome the fact that the Government has
committed to the path of elections. However, elections
must be free, fair and credible, while being inclusive
and ensuring the full, equal and safe participation of
women and youth. The Government must ensure the
necessary security arrangements to protect freedom
of opinion and expression. Albania supports UNMISS
in providing electoral assistance to deliver inclusive
elections, although the primary responsibility lies with
the Government of South Sudan.
We support the renewal of the UNMISS mandate,
while maintaining its four pillars. We are pleased to hear
from Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Haysom that the present mandate, with a three-year
strategic vision, is the appropriate framework.
In conclusion, Albania calls on all parties to
implement the revitalized agreement, meet the key
benchmarks, establish institutions and reforms, unify
the command of the armed forces and ensure the full,
equal and meaningful participation of women, youth
and civil society in all peacebuilding efforts.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Haysom, Major General
Gituai and, not least, Riya Williams Yuyada for their
insightful briefings.
The Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in South Sudan has now entered its final
year. Yet, we continue to be deeply concerned about
the situation in South Sudan. Time is running out if
elections are to be held, as scheduled, at the end of the
transitional period.
The level of violence remains unacceptably high and
humanitarian needs are increasing. There are reports of

22-2785415/20

S/PV.8987

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

human rights violations and abuses in Unity state. We
urge the Government to investigate those allegations
and to hold perpetrators accountable. Competition for
political control and resources among various armed
actors is also causing fighting throughout the country,
including among signatories of the peace agreement. It
is fair to ask whether or not the permanent ceasefire is
actually holding.
Subnational violence, combined with significant
economic distress, threatens prospects for an inclusive
constitution-making process and the peaceful conduct
of elections. However, South Sudan has made some
progress recently on public financial management
reforms. Those reforms are important in addressing
the link between economic mismanagement and
insecurity across the country. We call on the
Government to eliminate avenues for corruption, to
increase transparency and accountability, especially
for oil revenues, and to give higher priority to
delivering services.
Blaming the slow implementation of the peace
agreement on a lack of resources is not convincing.
We commend the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) for its efforts to promote dialogue,
peaceful coexistence and reconciliation at the local
level. We also appreciate its focus on securing the full,
equal and meaningful participation of women in local
peace efforts.
Further efforts are needed. We call on all parties
to end violence at all levels. We stress the need to
finalize the implementation of chapter II of the peace
agreement, on security arrangements, and urge the
parties to expedite that process. The graduation of
the Necessary Unified Forces and unification of the
command structure are also essential and long overdue.
Moreover, to create the conditions conducive to the
holding of elections, we need to see a fundamental
shift in the approach of the parties to the revitalized
agreement. An inclusive constitutional reform process,
led and owned by the people of South Sudan and built
on shared values, is a unique opportunity for a young
nation. Yet, it will be a positive experience only if there
is political space and true freedom. Attempts to silence
civil society activists and the media run counter to the
spirit of the peace agreement, respect for human rights,
the rule of law and democratic governance.
We support President Museveni’s invitation to a
principals’ retreat but regret the fact that, yet again,
16/20

07/03/2022

it has been delayed. We strongly encourage South
Sudan’s leader to value and capitalize on regional
peace initiatives.
Furthermore, Norway remains deeply concerned
about the humanitarian situation in South Sudan.
Violence leads to increased humanitarian needs and
prevents humanitarians from delivering assistance.
We reiterate the fact that it is the Government’s
responsibility to protect civilians, including children.
As we just heard from Riya Williams Yuyada, human
rights violations, including sexual exploitation and
abuse, are close to breaking up the very social fabric of
South Sudan.
We also need to ensure that climate-related security
risks are integrated into efforts to manage communal
natural resources and conflicts over land ownership
and rights. The Government’s capacity to adapt to
climate change and integrate climate-related security
risks needs to be strengthened. We believe that there is
an important supporting role for UNMISS in that area.
In conclusion, Norway strongly supports the
renewal of the UNMISS mandate. We hope that the
people of South Sudan will experience much-deserved
peace and development in the coming mandate period.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representative Nicholas Haysom and Major
General Charles Tai Gituai, Interim Chairperson of
the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission to the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, for their briefings. We also listened
carefully to the briefing by Ms. Riya William Yuyada.
The youngest Member of the United Nations,
South Sudan, is confronted with unique challenges
to its nation-building. The international community
should demonstrate a greater level of patience with the
peace process in South Sudan and provide constructive
assistance. Instead of focusing on castigation and
pressure, the international community should become
a supporter of, participant in and contributor to the
peace process.
Continued progress has been achieved in the
implementation of the revitalized agreement. That
momentum must be maintained. South Sudan’s
national legislative bodies have been reconstituted
and amendments were made to the transitional
Constitution. In his New Year’s Day message, President
Kiir reaffirmed his commitment to implementing
22-27854

07/03/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the revitalized agreement. China welcomes that
commitment and hopes that all parties in South Sudan
will maintain the current positive momentum and
work together to advance the implementation of the
agreement. We call on political parties that have not yet
signed the peace agreement to join the peace process,
without delay.
We applaud the important role of the African Union,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
Uganda and other countries and organizations of the
region in achieving peace in South Sudan. Conflict
resolution is the common aspiration of the people
of South Sudan, and it requires a holistic approach.
The recent security situation in South Sudan has
been stable overall, but sectarian and intercommunal
conflicts occur from time to time. We must carefully
analyse the causes of the conflicts and resolve them
with a combination of methods, including prevention,
mediation, dialogue and development.
We must also respond to the early warning signs
of conflict and address the settlement process after
demobilization. The formation of the necessary unified
forces is not a smooth process. As some challenges have
been encountered, the international community should
actively provide assistance and create favourable
conditions for transitional security arrangements.
China has been providing support for the establishment
of the unified forces to the best of its capacity.
Development is the way to go for nation-building in
South Sudan and requires greater investment. As a result
of the coronavirus disease and floods, South Sudan’s
humanitarian needs remain high, with an estimated
8.9 million people in need of humanitarian assistance.
China calls on international partners to increase
their humanitarian relief efforts this year. That said,
humanitarian relief can treat only the symptoms, not
the root causes. The international community should
help South Sudan strengthen its own development
capacity and unleash its potential in the agriculture,
energy and other sectors so as to achieve peace through
development. Unilateral coercive measures have
exacerbated the plight of the people of South Sudan,
and China urges the countries concerned to lift them as
soon as possible.
In terms of South Sudan’s nation-building, China
has always stood with the people of South Sudan.
President Kiir has called on international partners to

S/PV. 8987

shift more aid from the humanitarian to development
sectors, to which China has responded positively.
Guided by the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation
and our bilateral framework, a number of key projects
have been completed, including the Jur River bridge in
Wau and the Juba teaching hospital. China also provided
emergency food aid to South Sudan, sending out health
expert groups and shipping out vaccines and medical
equipment. Together with the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) in Eastern Equatoria state,
we have launched a pilot project to build capacities for
youth and women engaged in eco-agriculture to help
South Sudan fight the pandemic, help its economy to
recover and improve its people’s livelihoods.
Under the leadership of Special Representative
Haysom, UNMISS has done a great deal of work to
help implement the revitalized agreement and protect
civilians. The level of coordination between the
Government of South Sudan and UNMISS has been
improved, and the number of violations of the statusof-forces agreement continues to decrease. That shows
that strengthening communication between the Mission
and the host country has a positive impact on ensuring
the safety of peacekeepers and improving peacekeeping
performance. China encourages both parties to continue
to strengthen their cooperation and work together to
implement the peace agreement.
Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
would like to thank Nicholas Haysom and the two other
briefers for their presentations.
France welcomes the progress made in the
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of Conflict in South Sudan. Several of the
benchmarks established by the Security Council a year
ago have been respected, including the reconstitution
of the Transitional National Legislative Assembly,
the reduction in hindrances to the mobility of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
and the protection of displaced persons in areas
that are now under the responsibility of the South
Sudanese authorities.
However, the delays seen are cause for concern,
given that the transitional period is coming to a close.
The implementation of the security arrangements
remains incomplete. The signatory parties must reach
agreement on the composition of a unified command
and finalize the training of fighters. Those measures
are indispensable to creating conditions suitable for the

22-2785417/20

S/PV.8987

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

holding of elections. They are also part of the criteria
with respect to a review of the arms embargo.
It is also vital to establish the legal and constitutional
framework for elections and to operationalize the
National Elections Commission. The freedoms of
expression and peaceful assembly must be guaranteed,
and we are counting on UNMISS, in coordination with
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
the African Union, to provide assistance in preparing
for the elections and in assessing whether the conditions
for a credible electoral process are indeed in place.
We take note in that regard of the caution expressed
by the Secretary-General on this subject in his most
recent report (S/2022/156). The South Sudanese
authorities must focus on unity and provide the resources
necessary to implement those priorities. As others have
done, we call upon all parties to take advantage of the
opportunities offered by the efforts made by the region,
particularly the mediation of President Museveni.
Finally, we remain concerned at the high level of
violence, which is affecting people already impacted
by the flooding, the health crisis and the lack of basic
services. We welcome the responsiveness of UNMISS
in that area and call upon the authorities to continue
their cooperation with the Mission in order to facilitate
the deployment of judges and develop plans for reducing
community violence. We condemn the confrontations
between the signatory parties to the peace agreement
as well as attacks against humanitarian and medical
personnel. Those responsible for that violence must be
brought to justice and be sanctioned by the Council.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): At the outset, let me
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Nicholas Haysom for his briefing on the implementation
of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
mandate and the recent developments in South Sudan. I
also thank the other briefers — the Interim Chairperson
of the Reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, Major General Charles Tai Gituai, and
civil-society activist Ms. Riya Yuyada — for their
updates. I also welcome the presence of the Permanent
Representative of South Sudan at today’s meeting.
Last month marked the two-year anniversary of
the establishment of the Transitional Government of
National Unity. Since our most recent meeting (see
S/PV.8931), the ceasefire has continued to hold; the
state legislatures have been reconstituted; and the
18/20

07/03/2022

screening of the first batch of trained unified forces has
been completed. The constitutional amendment bill has
been passed in the National Assembly. Furthermore,
President Kiir has reiterated his commitment to the
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan.
Regional efforts to assist South Sudan are also
gearing up, including the initiative by Uganda of
holding a retreat. The African Union Peace and Security
Council also held a meeting in January and requested
a trilateral evaluation of the electoral and constitution
drafting requirements. All those developments reflect
the positive trajectory of progress in South Sudan.
In the coming days, the focus should be on further
expediting the implementation of the agreement,
particularly the graduation and unification of the
necessary unified forces and addressing legislative
issues concerning election preparations. We hope that
the leadership of South Sudan will continue to take
steps in the right direction. In that regard, we welcome
the efforts at holding talks between President Salva
Kiir and First Vice-President Riek Machar and hope
that it will help to resolve outstanding issues, including
with regard to the electoral timetable.
The implementation of the transitional security
arrangements remains critical for the electoral process
at the end of the transitional period, as does the early
resumption of the Rome mediation by the Community
of Sant’Egidio with the non-signatories.
The security situation has remained tenuous in
some regions of South Sudan. Intercommunal and
intracommunal violence has continued. However, the
progress made in the peace process, particularly as
concerns the South Sudan Opposition Movements
Alliance factions continuing the dialogue with
Government, has made an impact on the ground. We
hope that the remaining non-signatory groups will also
engage with the Government to enter the mainstream.
The humanitarian situation remains a matter of
concern. The 2021 humanitarian response plan has
had a significant deficit. The international community,
including the United Nations, needs to step in with
respect to resource mobilization and help to fill the
capacity gaps faced by the Government.
Regarding the UNMISS mandate implementation,
we have noted the improved communication between
UNMISS and the Government. That development
22-27854

07/03/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

is showing a positive impact on the facilitation of
the Mission’s operations, which is evident from the
decrease in the number of status-of-forces agreements
violations. We also take note of the integrated and
cross-mission approach, including the setting up of
temporary operating bases, and welcome the efforts
being made by the Mission to promote accountability
and mitigate intercommunal tensions.
We appreciate the Mission’s efforts to support the
rule of law and accountable institutions by supporting
special courts, mobile courts and the development
of a framework for victim and witness protection
programmes. We also recall the provisions of resolution
2589 (2021) and the responsibility of the host State to
bring the perpetrators of crimes against peacekeepers
to justice. In that regard, we request an update from the
Secretary-General in his next report.
We also appreciate the Mission’s efforts to ensure
the delivery of humanitarian assistance to those in
need, particularly in flood-affected areas.
India has been one of the largest troop-contributing
countries to UNMISS since its establishment more than
a decade ago. At present, we have nearly 2,300 troops
serving in the country. The Indian contingent in UNMISS
is also contributing to sustainable development and the
welfare of the people of South Sudan. It is a matter of
immense satisfaction that the level II plus hospital in
Juba and the level II hospital in Malakal operated by
the Indian contingent have been functioning at full
capacity, with high-grade capabilities.
At this transformative phase of its development
journey, South Sudan requires the wholehearted
support of the international community, including from
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
African Union and the United Nations. Our actions in
the Security Council should encourage the authorities
of South Sudan to move towards full implementation of
the revitalized agreement. The Council also needs to be
realistic and practical while setting out the mandate for
the Mission.
In conclusion, India is cognizant of the enormous
challenges with which South Sudan is confronted in its
path towards peace and stability. India has been at the
forefront of efforts to render humanitarian assistance to
South Sudan. It supplied life-saving essential medicines
in 2020, as well as in 2021 during the coronavirus
disease pandemic. India has also provided 70 megatons
of food-grain assistance to flood-affected people. India

S/PV. 8987

is organizing an artificial-limbs fitment camp, which
will benefit over 500 amputees very soon. India has also
trained around a thousand South Sudanese nationals
in different disciplines. India will continue to support
South Sudan and its people in their journey towards
securing sustainable peace and a prosperous future.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
United Arab Emirates.
At the outset, I thank Mr. Haysom and Mr. Gituai
for their valuable briefings. I also thank Ms. Yuyada for
her message and her call for peace in South Sudan in the
Security Council today. I also welcome the Permanent
Representative of South Sudan to today’s meeting.
I would like to emphasize the support of the United
Arab Emirates for all efforts aimed at fulfilling the
interests and aspirations of the people of South Sudan
for prosperity, development and peace.
From this standpoint, we believe that the
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan remains the
basis for achieving stability, peace, development and
unity in South Sudan. We hope that the Government’s
efforts in this regard will lead to implementing the
agreement with a view to realizing a peaceful solution
that includes a meaningful and comprehensive dialogue
with the concerned parties, as well as enhanced women’s
participation in the peace process, with the aim of
reaching the goal of 35 per cent women’s participation
as per the agreement. In addition, continuing mediation
efforts are necessary to enable the parties to move
towards a lasting peace. In this context, we appreciate
the constructive role of regional and international
partners, especially the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and the United Nations.
Despite the efforts made at the political level, the
security situation in some areas remains a source of
concern, especially in the greater Upper Nile region.
This situation requires a comprehensive response,
and all parties should exercise restraint. Greater focus
should also be placed on protecting civilians, including
women and children, who are subjected to sexual
violence and gender-based violence.
Furthermore, the repercussions of climate change
in South Sudan, especially on the humanitarian
and security situations, require us to pay special
attention to them. We look forward to continued joint

22-2785419/20

S/PV.8987

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

efforts between the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) and the United Nations country
team, aimed at responding to climate and security
challenges. It is important to support the efforts of the
Government, in cooperation with the Mission, in order
to take advantage of renewable energy for the benefit of
local communities.
Moreover, the United Arab Emirates expresses its
concern over the increasing humanitarian needs across
the country. Recent United Nations reports indicate
that around 9 million people require protection and
basic services. Addressing these challenges, foremost
among which is the unprecedented dangerous level of
food insecurity, as well as the increasing numbers of
refugees and internally displaced persons, requires
intensifying collective international efforts while also
calling on all parties to ensure continued access to
humanitarian assistance.
We affirm our support for the efforts of the Special
Representative and UNMISS, and we look forward
to the Mission’s continued work and coordination
with the Government, as well as to collective and
constructive Council engagement in the context of its
mandate renewal.

20/20

07/03/2022

As part of our pledge to highlight both the
implementation of resolution 2565 (2021) and the
contribution of the pandemic to fragility, we note
that there obstacles to vaccination in South Sudan
remain. According to the World Health Organization,
fewer than 4 per cent of the population are fully
vaccinated. We therefore welcome national plans to
integrate coronavirus disease vaccination into routine
immunization, and we emphasize once again the
importance of implementing the relevant Security
Council resolution.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates supports
efforts aimed at promoting social and economic
development, the values of peaceful coexistence and
lasting stability in South Sudan.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
I will now adjourn the meeting so that the
Council can continue its discussion on the subject in
closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

22-27854
