A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/92
26 January 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 104
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/52/636)]
52/92.

International action to combat drug abuse and illicit production and
trafficking

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 50/148 of 21 December 1995 and 51/64 of 12 December 1996,
Gravely concerned that, despite continued increased efforts by States and relevant international
organizations, there is a global expansion of illicit demand for, production of and trafficking in narcotic drugs
and psychotropic substances, including synthetic and designer drugs, which threatens the health, safety and
well-being of millions of persons, in particular young people, in all countries, as well as the political and
socio-economic systems and the stability, national security and sovereignty of an increasing number of States,
Deeply alarmed by the growing and spreading violence and economic power of criminal organizations
and terrorist groups engaged in drug trafficking activities and other criminal activities, such as money
laundering and illicit traffic of arms and precursors and essential chemicals, and by the increasing
transnational links between them, and recognizing that enhanced international cooperation and effective
strategies are essential to achieve results against all forms of transnational criminal activities,
Convinced of the growing need for closer coordination and cooperation among States in combating drugrelated crimes, such as terrorism, illicit arms trade and money laundering, and bearing in mind the role that
could be played by both the United Nations and regional organizations in this respect,
Fully aware that States, the relevant organizations of the United Nations system and multilateral
development banks need to accord a higher priority and political determination to dealing with this scourge,
which undermines development, economic and political stability and democratic institutions, and the combat
against which entails increasing economic costs for Governments and the irreparable loss of human lives,

98-76267

/...

A/RES/52/92
Page 2

Reaffirming and stressing the need for increased efforts to implement the comprehensive framework for
international cooperation in drug control provided by the existing drug control conventions, the Declaration
of the International Conference on Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking 1 and the Comprehensive
Multidisciplinary Outline of Future Activities in Drug Abuse Control,2 the Political Declaration and Global
Programme of Action3 adopted by the General Assembly at its seventeenth special session, which was
devoted to the question of international cooperation against illicit production, supply, demand, trafficking and
distribution of narcotic and psychotropic substances, the declaration adopted by the World Ministerial Summit
to Reduce the Demand for Drugs and to Combat the Cocaine Threat,4 the United Nations System-wide Action
Plan on Drug Abuse Control,5 the Naples Political Declaration and Global Action Plan against Organized
Transnational Crime adopted by the World Ministerial Conference on Organized Transnational Crime, held
at Naples, Italy, from 21 to 23 November 1994,6 and other relevant international standards,
Underlining the importance of a balanced approach in efforts undertaken by Member States in the fight
against illicit demand, production and trafficking in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances,
Recognizing the efforts of countries that produce narcotic drugs for scientific, medicinal and therapeutic
uses to prevent the diversion of such substances to illicit markets and to maintain production at a level
consistent with licit demand in line with the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961,7
Convinced that civil society, including non-governmental organizations, can make an effective
contribution to addressing the illicit drug problem,
Recognizing that the use of the Internet poses new opportunities and challenges to international
cooperation in combating drug abuse and illicit production and trafficking,
Acknowledging that there are links, under certain circumstances, between poverty and the increase in the
illicit production of and trafficking in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances and that the promotion of
the economic development of countries affected by the illicit drug trade requires appropriate measures,
including strengthened international cooperation in support of alternative and sustainable development
activities in the affected areas of those countries, which have as their objectives the reduction and elimination
of illicit drug production,
Stressing that respect for human rights is and must be an essential component of measures taken to
address the drug problem,

1

See Report of the International Conference on Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking, Vienna, 17-26 June 1987
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.87.I.18), chap. I, sect. B.
2

Ibid., sect. A.

3

Resolution S-17/2, annex.

4

A/45/262, annex.

5

See A/49/139-E/1994/57.

6

A/49/748, annex, chap. I, sect.A.

7

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 520, No. 7515.
/...

A/RES/52/92
Page 3

Emphasizing the need for a continued analysis of transit routes used by drug traffickers, which are
constantly changing and expanding to include a growing number of countries and regions in all parts of the
world,
Underlining the role of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs as the principal United Nations policymaking body on drug control issues, the leadership role and commendable work of the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme as the main focus for concerted international action and the important
role of the International Narcotics Control Board as an independent monitoring authority, as set out in the
international drug control treaties,
Recalling the important and central role of relevant United Nations bodies in evaluating the
implementation by States parties of their obligations under the United Nations drug control treaties, as set
out in those treaties,
Also recalling that in resolution 51/64, section IV, it decided to convene, for three days in June 1998,
a special session of the General Assembly to consider the fight against the illicit production, sale, demand,
traffic and distribution of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances and related activities and to propose
strategies, methods, practical activities and specific measures to strengthen international cooperation in
addressing the problem of illicit drugs, and convinced that the special session will make a significant
contribution to the effectiveness of the United Nations and its Member States in the fight against this global
problem,
I
RESPECT FOR THE PRINCIPLES ENSHRINED IN THE CHARTER OF THE UNITED NATIONS
AND INTERNATIONAL LAW IN THE FIGHT AGAINST DRUG ABUSE AND ILLICIT
PRODUCTION AND TRAFFICKING
1. Reaffirms that the fight against drug abuse and illicit trafficking must be carried out in full
conformity with the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and international
law, particularly respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and the non-use of force or the
threat of force in international relations;
2. Calls upon all States to intensify their actions to promote effective cooperation in the efforts to
combat drug abuse and illicit trafficking so as to contribute to a climate conducive to achieving that end, on
the basis of the principles of equal rights and mutual respect;
II
INTERNATIONAL ACTION TO COMBAT DRUG ABUSE
AND ILLICIT PRODUCTION AND TRAFFICKING
1. Renews its commitment to further strengthening international cooperation and substantially
increasing efforts against the cultivation for illegal purposes, illicit production, sale, demand, traffic and
distribution of narcotics and psychotropic substances, including synthetic drugs, and to controlling and
preventing the diversion of precursors and essential chemicals used in the illicit manufacture of narcotic and
psychotropic substances, in accordance with obligations of States under the United Nations drug control
conventions, based on the principle of shared responsibility and taking into account experience gained;

/...

A/RES/52/92
Page 4

2. Urges all States to ratify or accede to and implement all the provisions of the Single Convention
on Narcotic Drugs of 19617 as amended by the 1972 Protocol,8 the Convention on Psychotropic Substances
of 19719 and the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances of 1988;10
3. Calls upon all States to adopt adequate national laws and regulations, to strengthen national judicial
systems and to carry out effective drug control activities in cooperation with other States in accordance with
those international instruments;
4.

Requests the United Nations International Drug Control Programme:

(a) To continue to support the focus on regional, subregional and national strategies for drug abuse
control, particularly the master-plan approach, and to complement those strategies with effective interregional
strategies;
(b) To undertake additional measures to strengthen the dialogue and cooperation with multilateral
development banks so that they may undertake lending and programming activities related to drug control
in interested and affected countries and to keep the Commission on Narcotic Drugs informed on further
progress made in this area;
(c) To continue to provide legal assistance to Member States that request it in adjusting their national
laws, policies and infrastructures to implement the international drug control conventions, as well as
assistance in training personnel responsible for applying the new laws;
(d) To continue providing assistance to Member States requesting support in establishing or
strengthening national drug detection laboratories;
(e) To continue to include in its report on illicit traffic in drugs an assessment of worldwide trends in
illicit traffic and transit in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, including methods and routes used,
and to recommend ways and means for improving the capacity of States along those routes to deal with all
aspects of the drug problem;
5. Reaffirms the danger and threat posed to civil society by illicit drug trafficking and its links to
terrorism, transnational crime, money laundering and the illicit arms trade, and encourages Governments to
deal with this threat and to cooperate to prevent the channelling of funds to and between those engaged in
such activities;
6. Calls upon States to adopt effective measures to stem the illicit trade in small arms, which, as a
result of its close link to the illicit drug trade, is generating extremely high levels of crime and violence
within the societies of some States, threatening the national security and economies of those States;

8

Ibid., vol. 976, No. 14152.

9

Ibid., vol. 1019, No. 14956.

10

See Official Records of the United Nations Conference for the Adoption of a Convention against Illicit
Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances, Vienna, 25 November-20 December 1988, vol. I
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.XI.5).
/...

A/RES/52/92
Page 5

7. Acknowledges that there are links between the illicit production of, demand for and traffic in
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances and the economic and social conditions in the affected countries
and that there are differences and diversity in the problems of each country;
8. Calls upon the international community to provide increased economic and technical support to
Governments that request it for programmes of alternative and sustainable development, which have as their
objectives the reduction and elimination of illicit drug production and which take fully into account the
cultural traditions of peoples;
9. Recalls the World Programme of Action for Youth to the Year 2000 and Beyond adopted by the
General Assembly on 14 December 1995,11 and stresses the importance of participation of youth organizations
and youth in decision-making processes, in particular in relation to demand reduction programmes for illicit
drugs;
10. Stresses the need for effective government action to prevent the diversion to illicit markets of
precursors and essential chemicals, materials and equipment used in the illicit manufacture of narcotic drugs
and psychotropic substances;
11. Commends the valuable work, the reports and recommendations of the International Narcotics
Control Board in monitoring the production and distribution of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances
so as to limit their use to medical and scientific purposes, and urges increased efforts to implement its
mandate under article 12 of the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances of 1988 concerning the monitoring of the movement of precursors and essential
chemicals;
12. Notes that the International Narcotics Control Board needs sufficient resources to carry out its
mandate, including under article 12 of the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs
and Psychotropic Substances of 1988, and therefore urges Member States to commit themselves in a common
effort to assign adequate and sufficient budgetary resources to the Board, in accordance with Economic and
Social Council resolution 1996/20 of 23 July 1996;
13. Calls upon States to increase efforts, with international cooperation, to reduce and eliminate illegal
crops from which narcotics are obtained, as well as to prevent and reduce the demand for and the
consumption of illicit drugs, in accordance with their obligations under the Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs of 1961 and the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances of 1988;
14. Underlines the need for Governments, with international cooperation, to increase and implement
alternative development programmes with the objective of reducing and eliminating the production of illicit
drugs, taking into account the economic, social, cultural, political and environmental aspects of the area
concerned;
15. Emphasizes the need to maintain the capacity of the International Narcotics Control Board, including
through the provision of appropriate means by the Secretary-General and adequate technical support by the
United Nations International Drug Control Programme;
16. Reaffirms the importance of achieving the objectives of the United Nations Decade against Drug
Abuse, 1991-2000, under the theme "A global response to a global challenge", by Member States, the United
Nations International Drug Control Programme and the United Nations system;

11

Resolution 50/81, annex.
/...

A/RES/52/92
Page 6

17. Urges the Commission on Narcotic Drugs to complete its work on the draft declaration on the
guiding principles of demand reduction being developed by the Executive Director of the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme, in consultation with Member States, and to submit it for adoption
by the General Assembly at its special session in 1998, and calls upon Member States to continue to
cooperate with the Programme by providing relevant information and their views on the draft declaration with
due regard to the linkages between demand and supply reduction activities;
18. Also urges the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, acting as the preparatory body for the special
session of the General Assembly, to complete its work concerning money laundering, judicial cooperation,
precursors, stimulants, alternative development and on a political commitment, in preparation for the special
session;
19. Welcomes Economic and Social Council resolution 1997/41 of 21 July 1997 on the implementation
of comprehensive measures to counter the illicit manufacture, trafficking and abuse of amphetamine-type
stimulants and their precursors, and calls upon Member States to strengthen their efforts to control precursors
and their substitutes in cooperation with the International Narcotics Control Board and to implement as a high
priority the measures contained in that resolution;
20. Takes note of the Baku Accord on Regional Cooperation against Illicit Cultivation, Production,
Trafficking, Distribution and Consumption of Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances and their
Precursors,12 and welcomes the contribution of the Subcommission on Illicit Drug Traffic and Related Matters
in the Near and Middle East on international action to combat drug abuse and illicit production and
trafficking;
III
GLOBAL PROGRAMME OF ACTION
1. Reaffirms the importance of the Global Programme of Action3 as a comprehensive framework for
national, regional and international action to combat illicit production of, demand for and trafficking in
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances;
2. Calls upon States to implement the mandates and recommendations of the Global Programme of
Action, with a view to translating it into practical action for drug abuse control at the national, regional and
international levels;
3. Urges all Governments and competent regional organizations to develop a balanced approach within
the framework of comprehensive demand reduction activities, giving adequate priority to prevention,
treatment, research, social reintegration and training, in the context of national strategic plans to combat drug
abuse, which should include raising public awareness concerning the detrimental effects of drug abuse;
4. Calls upon the relevant United Nations bodies, the specialized agencies, the international financial
institutions and other concerned intergovernmental organizations and all actors of civil society, notably
non-governmental organizations, community-based organizations, sports associations, the media and the
private sector, to cooperate more closely with and to assist States in their efforts to promote and implement
the Global Programme of Action;
5. Welcomes the efforts made by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme to facilitate reporting by Governments on the implementation of the

12

Economic and Social Council resolution 1997/39, annex.
/...

A/RES/52/92
Page 7

Global Programme of Action, and encourages them to pursue those efforts so as to increase the number of
Governments that report on a regular basis;
6. Notes the efforts being made by the United Nations International Drug Control Programme and
other United Nations bodies to obtain reliable data on drug abuse and illicit trafficking, including the
development of the International Drug Abuse Assessment System, encourages the Programme, in cooperation
with other United Nations bodies, to take further steps to facilitate the efficient collection of data so as to
avoid duplication of effort, and also encourages the increased and timely provision of updated information
by Member States;
7. Reaffirms the importance of strengthening the role of the International Narcotics Control Board and
development of a unified information system for the collection and analysis of data concerning the nature,
patterns and trends of the global problem of drug abuse, as called for by the Economic and Social Council
in its resolution 1996/20 of 23 July 1996;
8. Invites the United Nations International Drug Control Programme to continue providing assistance
to Member States that request it in their efforts to establish appropriate mechanisms to collect and analyse
data and to seek voluntary resources for this purpose;
9. Underlines the importance of precise and reliable information on the impact of the drug problem
on the world economy;
10. Calls upon Member States to continue to make efforts to provide systematic, precise and updated
information to the United Nations International Drug Control Programme on the various ways in which the
drug problem affects their economies;
IV
SPECIAL SESSION OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY DEVOTED TO THE FIGHT AGAINST THE
ILLICIT PRODUCTION, SALE, DEMAND, TRAFFIC AND DISTRIBUTION OF NARCOTIC DRUGS
AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES AND RELATED ACTIVITIES
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs acting as the
preparatory body for the special session of the General Assembly devoted to the fight against the illicit
production, sale, demand, traffic and distribution of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances and related
activities;13
2. Decides that the special session will be held, as recommended by the Economic and Social Council
in its decision 1997/238 of 21 July 1997, from 8 to 10 June 1998, and calls upon Member States to
participate at a high political level;
3. Stresses that the special session should be devoted to assessing the existing situation within the
framework of a comprehensive and balanced approach that includes all aspects of the problem, with a view
to strengthening international cooperation to address the problem of illicit drugs within the framework of the
United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 198810
and other relevant conventions and international instruments;

13

E/1997/48.
/...

A/RES/52/92
Page 8

4. Reaffirms that, at its special session, it will address the issues on the basis of the principle of shared
responsibility and with full respect for the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and
international law, in particular respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States;
5. Invites the Commission on Narcotic Drugs to continue to take all necessary measures to ensure
adequate preparation of the special session;
6. Takes note of Economic and Social Council decision 1997/234, of 21 July 1997, in which the
Council decided that the Commission on Narcotic Drugs should devote at least five days at its forty-first
session to the preparation of the special session ;
7. Notes with appreciation the initiatives of Member States aimed at providing inputs to the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs in its capacity as the preparatory body for the special session, including the
convening of groups of high-level governmental experts;
8. Recognizes the important role played by non-governmental organizations in the implementation of
the Global Programme of Action contained in the annex to its resolution S-17/2 of 23 February 1990, and
recognizes the need for their active involvement in preparations for the special session, as well as the need
to ensure appropriate arrangements for their substantive contribution and active involvement during the
special session, and, in that context, invites the President of the General Assembly to propose to Member
States, in consultation with them, appropriate modalities for the effective involvement of non-governmental
organizations in the special session;
9. Decides to invite States members of the specialized agencies of the United Nations that are not
members of the United Nations to participate in the work of the special session in the capacity of observers;
10. Reaffirms the objectives of the special session contained in section IV, paragraphs 11 and 12, of
resolution 51/64, which provide the basis for the draft agenda of the special session;
11. Welcomes Economic and Social Council decision 1997/239 of 21 July 1997 on the preparations for
the special session;
12. Invites the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, in its capacity as the preparatory body, to report to the
General Assembly at its special session on the preparations for the special session;
13. Stresses the importance of taking into account a gender perspective in preparing the reports of the
special session;
14. Urges organs, organizations and the specialized agencies of the United Nations system, including
multilateral development banks, to contribute fully to the preparations for the special session, in particular
by submitting, as soon as possible, to the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, acting as the preparatory body for
the special session, through the Executive Director of the United Nations International Drug Control
Programme, concrete recommendations on the issues to be addressed by the special session;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the necessary support to ensure the success of the special
session and to give particular attention to the need for raising global awareness of the holding of the special
session and of its importance;

/...

A/RES/52/92
Page 9

V
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS SYSTEM-WIDE ACTION PLAN ON DRUG
ABUSE CONTROL: ACTION BY ORGANIZATIONS OF THE UNITED NATIONS SYSTEM
1. Supports the United Nations System-wide Action Plan on Drug Abuse Control5 as a vital tool for
the coordination and enhancement of drug abuse control activities within the United Nations system;
2. Reaffirms the role of the Executive Director of the United Nations International Drug Control
Programme in coordinating and providing effective leadership for all United Nations drug control activities
so as to increase cost-effectiveness and ensure coherence of action within the Programme as well as
coordination, complementarity and non-duplication of such activities throughout the United Nations system;
3. Urges the United Nations organizations associated with the System-wide Action Plan to collaborate
further with the United Nations International Drug Control Programme to integrate the drug control dimension
and assistance into their programming and planning processes in order to ensure that the drug problem is
being addressed in all its aspects in relevant programmes;
4. Takes note of the recent action taken by the Administrative Committee on Coordination to ensure
the increased commitment by the specialized agencies, programmes and funds, as well as international
financial institutions, to include the drug control dimension in their programmes of work;
5. Invites Member States to engage United Nations agencies and multilateral development banks in
addressing the drug problem in all its aspects and to promote due consideration by governing bodies of
requests for assistance for drug control programmes at the national level;
VI
UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL DRUG CONTROL PROGRAMME
1. Welcomes the efforts of the United Nations International Drug Control Programme to implement
its mandate within the framework of the international drug control treaties, the Comprehensive
Multidisciplinary Outline of Future Activities in Drug Abuse Control,2 the Global Programme of Action3 and
relevant consensus documents;
2. Also welcomes the publication of the World Drug Report prepared by the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme;
3. Notes with concern the decline of available resources for the Fund of the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme;
4. Welcomes Commission on Narcotic Drugs resolution 6 (XL) of 25 March 1997 concerning the
revised budget for the biennium 1996-1997 and the proposed outline for the biennium 1998-1999 of the
United Nations International Drug Control Programme, and urges all Governments to provide the fullest
possible financial and political support to the Programme by widening its donor base and increasing voluntary
contributions, in particular general-purpose contributions, to enable it to continue, expand and strengthen its
operational and technical cooperation activities;
5. Invites Governments and the United Nations International Drug Control Programme to consider
ways and means of improving the coordination of United Nations activities related to drug control;

/...

A/RES/52/92
Page 10

6. Notes with appreciation the efforts made by the Executive Director of the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme to comply with the approved format and methodology of the
programme budget of the Fund and to improve the budget presentation for the biennium 1996-1997 and the
proposed outline for the biennium for 1998-1999, in accordance with relevant resolutions of the Commission
on Narcotic Drugs and the General Assembly and the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, and encourages the Executive Director to continue his efforts to
improve the presentation of the budget;
7. Stresses the importance of the meetings of heads of national drug law enforcement agencies, and
encourages them to consider ways to improve their functioning and to strengthen their impact so as to
enhance cooperation in the fight against drugs at the regional level;
8. Also stresses the need to strengthen United Nations activities in the field of narcotic drugs, and
takes note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1997/37 of 21 July 1997 entitled "Review of the United
Nations International Drug Control Programme: strengthening the United Nations machinery for international
drug control within the scope of the existing international drug control treaties and in accordance with the
basic principles of the Charter of the United Nations";
VII
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;14

2.

Requests the Secretary-General, taking into account the promotion of integrated reporting:

(a) To include in his annual report on the implementation of the Global Programme of Action
recommendations on ways and means to improve implementation and provision of information by Member
States;
(b) To submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-third session an updated report on the status of the
United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988.10
70th plenary meeting
12 December 1997

14

A/52/296.
