IX.

41/77.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Report ofthe United Nations Commíssion on lnternational Trade Law

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Commission on lnternational Trade Law on the work of
its nineteenth session,2 1
Recalling that the object of the Commission is the promotion of the progressive harmonization and unification
of international trade law,
Recalling, in this regard, its resolution 2205 (XXI) of
17 December 1966, as well as its other resolutions relating
to the work of the Commission,
Recalling a/so its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (SVI) of 1 May 1974, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974
and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975,
Reaffirming its conviction that the progressive harmonization and unification of international trade law, in reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow of international
trade, especially those affecting the developing countries,
would significantly contribute to universal economic cooperation among ali States on a basis of equality, equity
and common interest and to the elimination of discrimination in international trade and, thereby, to the well-being
of ali peoples,
Having regard for the need to take into account the different social and legal systems in harmonizing and unifying international trade law,
Stressing the value of participation by States at ali levels
of economic development, including developing countries,
in the process of harmonizing and unifying international
trade law,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
on the work of its nineteenth session;
2. Commends the Commission for the progress made
in its work and for having reached decisions by consensus;
3. Notes the progress made by the Commission at its
nineteenth session in the preparation of a draft Convention on International Bilis of Exchange and International
Promissory Notes, 22 and, in this connection:
(a) Takes note of the need to minimize the financia!
costs of adopting the Convention without sacrificing its
quality or international acceptability;
(b) Requests the Commission to complete its work on
the draft Convention during its twentieth session;
(e) Decides to consider the draft Convention during its
forty-second session, with a view to its adoption or other
appropriate action;
4. Cal/s upon the Commission to continue to take account of the relevant provisions of the resolutions concerning the new international economic order, as adopted
by the General Assembly at its sixth and seventh special
sessions;
5. Reaffirms the importance, in particular for developing countries, of the work carried out by the Working
Group on the New International Economic Order on a legal guide on the drawing up of international contracts for
construction of industrial works, and notes with satisfaction the progress made in the preparation of the legal
guide; 23

21 /bid., Supplement No.
22 /bid., annex 1.

6. Welcomes the decision of the Commission to commence work on the subject of international procurement
as a matter of priority;
7. Notes with particular satisfaction the completion by
the Commission of the Legal Guide on Electronic Funds
Transfers and welcomes its decisions to authorize the Secretary-General to publish the Legal Guide as a product of
the work of the Secretariat, in ali official languages of the
United Nations, and to undertake work on the formulation of model legal rules on electronic funds transfers; 24
8. Reaffirms the mandate of the Commission, as the
core legal body within the United Nations system in the
field of international trade law, to co-ordinate legal activities in this field in order to avoid duplication of effort and
to promote efficiency, consistency and coherence in the
unification and harmonization of international trade law,
and, in this connection, recommends that the Commission, through its secretariat, should continue to maintain
close co-operation with the other international organs and
organizations, including regional organizations, active in
the field of international trade law;
9. Reaffirms a/so the importance, in particular for developing countries, of the work of the Commission concerned with training and assistance in the field of international trade law and the desirability for it to sponsor
symposia and seminars, in particular those organized on a
regional basis, to promote such training and assistance,
and, in this connection:
(a) Expresses its appreciation to those regional organizations and institutions that have collaborated with the
secretariat ofthe Commission in organizing regional seminars and symposia in the field of international trade law;
(b) Welcomes the initiatives being undertaken by the
Commission and its secretariat to collaborate with other
organizations and institutions in the organization of regional seminars;
(e) Invites Governments, international organizations
and institutions to assist the secretariat ofthe Commission
in financing and organizing regional seminars and symposia, in particular in developing countries;
(d) Invites Governments, relevant United Nations organs, organizations, institutions and individuals to make
voluntary contributions to allow the resumption of the
programme of the Commission for the award of fellowships on a regular basis to candidates from developing
countries to enable them to participate in such symposia
and seminars;
10. Stresses the importance of bringing into effect the
conventions emanating from the work of the Commission
for the global unification and harmonization of international trade law;
11. Recommends that the Commission should continue its work on the topics included in its programme of
work;
12. Expresses its appreciation for the important role
played by the International Trade Law Branch of the Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat, as the substantive
secretariat of the Commission, in assisting in the structuring and implementation of the work programme of the
Commission.
95th plenary meeting
3 December 1986

17 (A/41/17).

23 /bid., chap. 111, sect. A.

259

24

[bid .. chap. 11, sect. B
