A/RES/57/68

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
30 December 2002

Fifty-seventh session
Agenda item 66

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the First Committee (A/57/510)]

57/68.

Bilateral strategic nuclear arms reductions and the new
strategic framework

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 53/77 Z of 4 December 1998 and other relevant
resolutions,
Welcoming the completion of strategic arms reductions codified in the Treaty
on the Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms (START) 1 by Belarus,
Kazakhstan, the Russian Federation, Ukraine and the United States of America,
Agreeing that new global challenges and threats require the building of a
qualitatively new foundation for strategic relations between the United States of
America and the Russian Federation,
Noting with satisfaction the building of the new strategic relationship between
the United States of America and the Russian Federation based on the principles of
mutual security, trust, openness, cooperation and predictability,
Appreciating the joint determination of the two countries to work together and
with other nations and international organizations to promote security, economic
well-being and a peaceful, prosperous free world,
Applauding the agreement whereby each country will reduce its strategic
nuclear warheads to a number that does not exceed 1,700 to 2,200, as specified in
the Treaty on Strategic Offensive Reductions (“the Moscow Treaty”), 2 by
31 December 2012,
Believing that the agreed strategic reductions advance the commitment of both
the United States of America and the Russian Federation under article VI of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 3
Appreciating that the United States of America and the Russian Federation will
continue to work closely together, including through cooperative programmes, to
_______________
1

The United Nations Disarmament Yearbook, vol. 16: 1991 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.92.IX.1), appendix II.
2
See CD/1674.
3
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.

02 54256

A/RES/57/68

ensure the security of weapons of mass destruction and missile technologies,
information, expertise and material,
1.
Welcomes the commitment of the two countries to strategic nuclear
warhead reductions in the Treaty on Strategic Offensive Reductions (“the Moscow
Treaty”), signed on 24 May 2002, 2 which is an important result of this new bilateral
strategic relationship and which will help to establish more favourable conditions
for actively promoting security and cooperation and enhancing international
stability;
2.
Looks forward to the entry into force of the Moscow Treaty at the earliest
possible date;
3.
Notes with satisfaction the Joint Declaration signed by the United States
of America and the Russian Federation in Moscow on 24 May 2002,2 which, inter
alia, created the Consultative Group for Strategic Security, chaired by Foreign and
Defence Ministers, through which the United States of America and the Russian
Federation will strengthen mutual confidence, expand transparency, share
information and plans and discuss strategic issues of mutual interest;
4.
Recognizes that the Group of Eight Global Partnership Against the
Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction, launched by leaders at the
Kananaskis Summit, held at Kananaskis, Canada, on 26 and 27 June 2002, will
enhance international security and safety by supporting specific cooperation
projects, initially in the Russian Federation, to address non-proliferation,
disarmament, counter-terrorism and nuclear safety issues;
5.
Invites all countries, as appropriate, to join the Group of Eight
commitment to the non-proliferation principles endorsed by the Group of Eight
leaders at the Kananaskis Summit aimed at preventing terrorists, or those who
harbour them, from acquiring or developing nuclear, chemical, radiological and
biological weapons, missiles, and related materials, equipment and technology;
6.
Invites the United States of America and the Russian Federation to keep
other States Members of the United Nations duly informed of their strategic
offensive reductions;
7.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-eighth session an
item entitled “Bilateral strategic nuclear arms reductions and the new strategic
framework”.
57th plenary meeting
22 November 2002

2
