A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/48/188
9 March 1994

Forty-eighth session
Agenda item 98
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/48/724)]
48/188. International Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction
The General Assembly,
Expressing its support to all countries that have suffered a heavy loss
of human life, as well as serious damage, both material and economic, as a
result of natural disasters,
Recalling its resolutions 44/236 of 22 December 1989, in which it
proclaimed the International Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction, and 46/182
of 19 December 1991, in the annex to which it called for substantive
improvements in international humanitarian emergency assistance and which led
to the establishment of the Department of Humanitarian Affairs of the
Secretariat,
Recalling also its resolution 46/149 of 18 December 1991, in which it
endorsed the convening in 1994 of a world conference of representatives of
national committees for the Decade,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council decision 1993/328 of
30 July 1993 on the World Conference on Natural Disaster Reduction,
Recognizing the important contribution the Decade can make to the
improvement of emergency management in general and to capacity-building for
disaster preparedness and mitigation at the national level,
Emphasizing the important role of professional and other nongovernmental organizations, particularly scientific and technological
societies, humanitarian groups and investment institutions, in the
implementation of programmes and activities of the Decade,

/...

A/RES/48/188
Page 2

Having considered the 12-point Plan of Action for the Conference,
adopted by the Special High-Level Council on the Decade at its second
session, 1/
Having also considered the recommendations made by the Secretary-General
with the purpose of providing guidance for the continuing implementation of
the Decade and the effective preparation and convening of the Conference,
Recognizing the close interrelationship between disaster prevention and
sustainable development, which was already recognized at the United Nations
Conference on Environment and Development and taken account of in chapter 7,
section F, of Agenda 21, 2/
Convinced that each country bears the primary responsibility for
protecting its people, infrastructure and other national assets from the
impact of natural disasters,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the Decade, 3/
which contains, inter alia, the second annual report of the Scientific and
Technical Committee on the Decade, 4/
1.
Commends those countries exposed to disasters that have already
taken initiatives to reduce their vulnerability, encourages them to continue,
in the context of their socio-economic process, with the implementation of
natural disaster mitigation policies during the International Decade for
Natural Disaster Reduction, taking into account the targets for progress in
disaster reduction defined by the Scientific and Technical Committee on the
Decade, 5/ and also encourages them to pursue the possibilities of regional
cooperation within the framework of the Decade;
2.
Encourages the members of the Special High-Level Council on the
Decade, on the basis of the advice they have provided to the SecretaryGeneral, to embark actively, individually and as a group on measures to
increase public awareness of the potential for disaster reduction and raise
support for the activities of the Decade from Governments, international
financing institutions and other funding organizations, and the business
community;
__________
1/

A/48/219-E/1993/97, annex.

2/
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June 1992 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), vol. I, Resolutions adopted by the Conference,
resolution I, annex II.
3/

A/48/219-E/1993/97 and Add.1.

4/

A/48/219/Add.1-E/1993/97/Add.1, annex.

5/

See A/46/266/Add.1-E/1991/106/Add.1, annex II, sect. IV.A.

/...

A/RES/48/188
Page 3

3.
Commends the Scientific and Technical Committee for the work
accomplished in 1992, and endorses its proposals for the preparations for the
World Conference on Natural Disaster Reduction;
4.
Calls upon Member States and all other participants in the Decade
to participate actively in the financial and technical support of Decade
activities, including those of the secretariat of the Decade;
5.
Calls upon the Department of Humanitarian Affairs of the
Secretariat, of which the secretariat of the Decade has become an integral
part, to continue to bring closer together the operational and promotional
efforts in disaster preparedness and mitigation, thus paving the way for the
successful attainment of the goals and objectives of the Decade;
6.
Decides to convene in 1994 the World Conference on Natural
Disaster Reduction in 1994 with the following objectives:
(a)
To review the accomplishments of the Decade at the national,
regional and international levels;
(b)

To chart a programme of action for the future;

(c)
To exchange information on the implementation of Decade programmes
and policies;
(d)
policies;

To increase awareness of the importance of disaster reduction

7.
Accepts with deep appreciation the generous offer of the
Government of Japan to host the World Conference, and decides that the
Conference will be held at Yokohama, Japan, from 23 to 27 May 1994;
8.
Decides to establish a Preparatory Committee for the World
Conference on Natural Disaster Reduction, which will meet for five days at
Geneva, no later than March 1994, to review organizational and substantive
preparations for the Conference, approve the programme of work of the
Conference and propose rules of procedure for adoption by the Conference, on
the basis of recommendations submitted by the secretariat of the Decade, after
consultation with the host country;
9.
Requests the secretariat of the Decade to serve as the secretariat
of the Conference and to coordinate preparatory activities, in close
cooperation with the host Government and the Preparatory Committee for the
Conference, with the full support of relevant departments and offices of the
United Nations Secretariat;
10.
Recognizes the importance of broad and multidisciplinary
participation in the Conference and, to this end, requests the SecretaryGeneral to invite to the Conference all States, national committees for the
Decade, and organs, organizations and programmes of the United Nations system,
as well as the intergovernmental organizations and scientific associations
concerned, relevant non-governmental organizations and the private sector;
11.
Calls upon all Governments to take an active part in the
Conference and its preparatory process, in particular by:

/...

A/RES/48/188
Page 4

(a)
Undertaking systematic assessments of national and local hazards
and risks, with the assistance of the intersectoral national committees for
the Decade;
(b)
Organizing multidisciplinary national and regional conferences and
technical meetings, so as to ensure that the entire potential of each country,
both at the national level and within the context of regional cooperation,
including its scientific and technical capability, is fully utilized in
disaster reduction;
(c)
Preparing comprehensive reports on progress achieved and plans for
further action to be presented at the Conference;
12.
Calls upon all United Nations bodies and specialized agencies to
participate actively in the Conference, as well as its preparatory process,
and commends those organizations which, in line with the open and
participatory nature of the Decade, have assumed responsibility for the
organization of technical committees at the Conference;
13.
Decides that the preparatory process and the Conference itself
should be funded through existing budgetary resources, without negatively
affecting programmed activities, and through voluntary contributions to the
Trust Fund established for the Decade;
14.
Requests the Secretary-General to appeal to all Member States to
contribute generously to the Trust Fund with a view to financing the
additional activities required in preparing for and holding the Conference;
15.
Expresses its deep appreciation to those countries that have
provided generous support for the activities of the Decade by making voluntary
contributions to its Trust Fund, making available scientific and technical
knowledge, developing and implementing innovative disaster reduction projects
and hosting activities or meetings of importance to the Decade;
16.
Also expresses its deep appreciation to those national committees
and focal points for the Decade that have participated actively in the process
of attaining the goals and objectives of the Decade;
17.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly
at its forty-ninth session a report on progress made in the implementation of
the present resolution, including the findings of the mid-term review of the
implementation of the International Framework of Action for the International
Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction, to be carried out by the Economic and
Social Council at its substantive session of 1994.
86th plenary meeting
21 December 1993
