Resolution11 adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Bearing in mind the resolution on the United Nations
Development De<:ade, 10 in which reference is made to
the possibility and advisability of preparing a development charter which would serve as a guide for international co-operation to further economic, social and
cultural development,
C onvinced that the concerted practical action of the
United Nations in the social field should be concentrated, above all, on the solution of the basic social
problems, and should be aimed at creating better
standards of living for man and at guaranteeing respect
for his dignity,
l. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
1139 (XU) of 29 July 1966 concerning the reappraisal
of the role of the Social Commission ;11
2. Affirms the main objectives and principies of the
social programme of the United Nations and of the
Commission for Social Development and the methods
and means to be used by the United Nations, Member
States and specialized agencies in pursuit of these objectives, which are set forth in section I of Economic
and Social Council resolution 1139 (XLI);
3. Calls upon the Economic and Social Council to
request the Commission for Social Development to
prepare: on the basis of the purposes and principies of
the U mted N ations and the specialized agencies and
also on the basis of the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Econornic and Social Council
and taking into account the docurnentation submitted
to the Third Committee 12 and the discussions in that
Committee at the twenty-first session of the Assembly,
~ draft declaration on social development which would,
m general terms, define the objectives of social development and _th_e methods and means of achieving them,
and to submtt 1t to the General Assembly for consideration at its twenty-third session at the latest ;
4. Calls further upon the Economic and Social Council to arrange for the specialized agencies to be consulted at appropriate stages in the preparation of the
draft declaration ;
5. Re_quests t~e Secretary-General, the Economic
and_ Social Counc1l and through it the Commission for
Socia~ Development, in co-operation with the specialized
agencies, to ensure that the periodic reports on the
world social situation reflect the over-all social situation
and social trends in different regions of the world and
in countries with differing economic and social systems, taking into account the clase interrelation between
economic and social factors, and to submit these reports,
together with practica! conclusions and recomendations
for the substantial improvement of the programmes
related to the social situation, to the General Assembly
for consideration every three years ;
6. Further requests the Se<:retary-General to prepare
a report on the implementation of Economic and Social
Council resolution 1139 (XLI) and of the present resolution and to submit to the Council, and to the General
A~sembly for consideration at its twenty-second session,
th1s report, together with the revised programmes of
the Commission for Social Development and any recom1º General Assembly resolution 2218 A (XXI) of 19 December 1966, p. 42.
11 By this resolution, the Economic and Social Council
inter alia, decided that the Social Commission should be re~
designated the Commission for Social Development
12 Official Records of the Geneml Assembly T~enty-first
Session, Annexes, agenda item 54, documents AÍ6409, A/6434
and A/C.3/L.1419.

61

mendations made, in co11sultation with the Administrative Committee 011 Co-ordination, for strengthening
the co-ordination of the programmes of the United
N ations with those of the specialized agencies in thc
interests of greater conce11tration of efforts on priority
targets;
7. Decides to accord high priority to the consideration of the world social situation at its twenty-second
sess1on.
1498th plenary meeting,
19 December 1966.

2216 (XXI). Freedom of information
The General Assembly,
Considering that because of the elaboration of thc
International Covena11ts 011 Human Rights the Third
Committee was unable to consider the draft Convention
on Freedom of Information and the draft Declaration
on Freedom of Information at the twenty-first session,
Reiterating that freedom of information forms an
important part of the human rights and fundamental
freedoms to the promotion of which the United Nations
is dedicated,
Decides to take up at its twenty-second session the
consideration of the ítem on freedom of information.
1498th plenary meeting,
19 December 1966.

2217 (XXI). International Year for Human Righl8
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1961 (XVIII) of 12 December 1963 and 2081 (XX) oí 20 December 1965 on
the International Y ear for Human Rights,
l. Approves the further programme of measures and
activities envisaged for Member States, the United
_Nations, the specialized agencies and national and other
mternational organizations, which has been recommended by the Commission on Human Rights and is
set out in the annex to the present resolution;
~- lnvi_tes Member States, the specialized agencies,
r~g10nal mtergovernmental organizations and the nat10nal and international organizations concerned to
devote the year 1968 to intensified efforts and undertakings in the field of human rights, including the
measures set out in the above-mentioned programme,
and to keep the Secretary-General informed oí their
plans and preparations;
3. Invites the Secretary-General to make any necessary arrangements to facilitate the co-operation of compete?t regional intergovernmental organizations in observmg _196~ as International Year for Human Rights,
as prov1ded m General Assembly resolution 2081 (XX);
4. Requests the Se<:retary-General to co-ordinate the
rneasur~s and a~tivities undertaken by Member States,
the U:mt1;d Nat10ns, the specialized agencies, regional
or~amzations and the national and international organizat1?ns concerned, and in particular to collect and dissemmate at regular intervals information on activities
contemplated or undertake11 by them in connexion with
the International Year for Human Rights;
5. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit
to ~he C?eneral Assembly at its twenty-second session
an mtenm report on the plans, preparations, arrange-

62

General A11sembly-Twenty-fir11t Session

ments, measures and activities referred to in paragraphs

2, 3 and 4 above.

1498th plenary meeting,
19 December 1966.
ANNEX
International Year for Human Rights: further programme
of measures and activities recommended by the Commission on Human Rights
RECOMMENDATION

A

It is recommended that in December 1967 the President of
the General Assembly should issue a special message on the
International Year for Human Rights, to be released on 1
January 1968. It is further recommended that the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, the executive heads of the
specialized agencies, the Executive Director of the United
Nations Children's Fund and the executive secretaries of the
regional economic commissions should issue similar messages
during 1968 at the time they deem most appropriate, and that
such messages should be widely circulated by all communications media.
RECOMMENDATION

B

l. It is recommended that the Secretary-General should:
(a) Make arrangements for the issuing of human rights
postage stamps and first-day covers on 1 January 1968, and for
special cancellations during 1968;
( b) Promote, specifically for the I~tern3: tiona! Ye~r ~or
Human Rights, the widest and most mtens1ve d1ssemmahon
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights;
(e) Prepare and publish a special pamphlet on the Declaration, specifically for the International Y ear for Human Rights;
(d) Prepare for general distribution a radio documentary
script on the Declaration and encourage and assist broadcasting and television organizations to produce documentary or
dramatic programmes relating to human rights;
(e) Make available to States Members of the United Nations or members of the specialized agencies and the lnternational Atomic Energy Agency a special design symbolizing the
concept of human rights and freedoms, so that posters may
be reproduced and distributed nationally during the International Year for Human Rights;
(f) Direct United Nations officers at Headquarters and in
information centres and regional offices to give lectures and
write articles on the Declaration and to co-operate with information media and educational authorities in various countries in organizing the celebration of the International Year
for Human Rights;
(g) Request the distributors of United Nations publications
to prepare a special display of relevant United Nations documents for exhibition during the months of N ovember and
Deccmber 1968.
2. For Human Rights Day, 1968, it is recommended that
the United Nations should:
(a) Organize at Headquarters a special meeting of the
General Assembly on 10 December 1968, in commemoration of
the twentieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Governments should be invited to include in their
delegations to the special meeting, whenever possible, persons
who participated in the drafting of the Declaration;
(b) Organize a concert at United Nations Headquarters on
that day to celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the Declaration, and obtain the widest possible radio and television coverage for the concert.
RECOMJlo.ENDATION

C

(a) When a pri:::e or prizes in the field of human rights
should be awarded. It is recommended that a prize or prizes
should be awarded, for the first time, on 10 December 1968, on
thc occasion of the celebration of the twentieth anniversary of
thc Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Thereafter, prizes
1hould not be awarded more often than at five-year intervals.

(b) Number of prizes to be awarded. It is recommended
that no more than five prizes should be awarded at a time.
If one prize only is to be awarded, it should be for outstanding
achievements in the field of human rights. If two prizes are to
be awarded, one should be for outstanding achievements in thc
promotion and protection of civil and política! rights, and the
other for outstanding achievements in the promotion and protection of économic, social and cultural rights. lf more than
one prize is awarded, ali prizes should be equal in every way.
(c) Nat11re of the pri::es. lt is recommended that a metal
plaque bearing the United Nations sea! and an artistic design,
and engraved with an appropriate citation, should be presented
to each winner of a prize as a concrete and lasting token of
the award.
(d) Procedure to be fo/lowed in selecting winners. It is
recommended that a special committee, composed of the President of the General Assembly, the President of the Economic
and Social Council, the Chairman of the Commission on Human Rights, the Chairman of the Commission on the Status of
W ornen and the Chairman of the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, should be
entrusted with selecting the winners of the human rights prize.
The committee would establish its own procedure for receiving
nominations, it being understood that nominations might be
sought from Member States, specialized agencies and nongovernmental organizations in consultative status and from othcr
appropriate sources. The assistance of the Secretary-General
would be available to the special committee at every stage in
the process of se!ection.
(e) Criteria to be applied in the selection of winners. It is
recommended that on the occasion of the celebration of the
twentieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights in 1968, a maximum of five prizes should be awarded
to persons who have made outstanding contributions to thc
promotion and protection of the human rights and fundamental
freedoms embodied in the Declaration and in other instruments of the United Nations relating to human rights sincc
the proclamation of the Declaration on 10 December 1948.
Thereafter, the prize or prizes would be awarded at five-year
intervals and would be given to individuals who had made
outstanding contributions to the promotion and protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms.
RECOMMENDATION

D

It is noted that in paragraph 4 of resolution 1961 (XVIII)
of 12 December 1963 the General Assembly invited ali Member States to intensify their domestic efforts in the field of
human rights, with the assistance of their appropriate organizations, in order that a fuller and more effective realization
of these rights and freedoms might be achieved and might be
reported at the proposed international review of such achievement in 1968 and thereafter. This proposed intensification of
national domestic effort has been considered, bearing in mind
the fact that an intensive programme of activity in this field,
in which the United Nations, the specialized agencies, national
Governments and non-govenmental organizations are already
involved, is now in progress. It can be assumed that each
Member State, within the framework of its national legislation
and policy, and according to available means, will wish to
respond in its own way to the invitation expressed in paragraph 4 of the above-mentioned resolution.
In consideration of the fact that a wide variety of measures
should not be added by Member States to their existing programmes, it is recommended instead that the General Assembly
should be asked to invite ali Member States to make a special
effort during the period, within the framework of national
legislation and policy and according to available means, in
two particular spheres:
(a) In the sphere of their national legislation;
(b) In the sphere of education, towards a fuller rcalization
of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
It is agreed that the intensification of efforts on the national
leve! does not exc!ude an intensification of efforts by Membcr
States on an international scale, for example, within the United
Nations and its agencies.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee
R.ECOMMENDATION E

lt is recommended that Governments should be invited to
qonsider adopting the following programme, under which they
would:
(a) Formally proclaim 1968 to be the International Year for
Human Rights and observe it as such;
(b) Issue, during the International Year for Human Rights,
in the name of Heads of State or Government, special messages
reaffirming their faith in the dignity and worth of the human
person and their dedication to the implementation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights;
(e) Either appoint an ad hoc committee to co-ordinate the
national celebrations for the International Year for Human
Rights within their countries, or entrust the organization of
the celebrations to an existing institution;
(d) Seize the opportunity of the lnternational Year for
Human Rights to redouble their efforts to bring about the
signature and ratification, or the acceptance in another form,
of ali the existing international conventions or treaties designed to protect human rights and fundamental freedoms in
particular spheres ;
(e) Consider the possibility of commemorating the International Year for Human Rights by the establishment of public
service or socially useful institutions, such as schools, hospitals
community centres, creches and recreational parks, or by th~
designatio:i of existing institutions to commemorate the Year;
(/) Consider the possibility of establishing one or more national awards to honour their nationals who have made distinguished contributions to the promotion of human rights, and
make these awards during the lnternational Year for Human
Rights;
(g) Maintain contact with the specialized agencies and
particípate in any regional conferences and seminars which the
latter may wish to organize;
(h) Issue human rights postage stamps and first-day covers
on 1 January 1968, and arrange for special cancellations during
1968;
( i) Prornote the widest and rnost intensive possible dissemination of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, in
as rnany languages and dialects as possible, by means of printed
posters, leaflets and pamphlets issued during 1968;
(j). Examine the possibi_lity of holding a special meeting
of the1r Parhament or Nahonal Assembly, in order to cornmernorate the twentieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, preferably on 10 December 1968.
RECOMMENDATION

F

lt is recommended that the specialized agencies whose work
is connected with the promotion of respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms should be invited:
(a) To proceed with the planning of their individual programmes of celebrations;
( b) To communicate directly with the Governments of
Member States and with prívate, national and international
organi~tions, so as _to co-operate•with them in the organization
of nahonal and reg10nal programmes of celebrations for 1968;
(e) To inform the Secretary-General as soon as possible of
the programmes they have formulated.
RECOMMENDATION

G

It is recommended that other organizations having an interest
in the promotion of respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms, including non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council nongovernmental organizations in contact with the United Nations
Office of Public Information, United Nations associations
research institutions, universities and other institutions of
higher learning, and other appropriate organizations should
be invited to participate fully in the celebration of the 'rnternational Year for Human Rights and to organize special activities
?f their º"".n during 1968. The. invitation to the organizations
m consultahve status and to those in contact with the Office of
Public Information would be issued by the Secretary-General,

63

while the invitati-on to national organizations would be issued
by the Governments of the countries concerned.
Within the framework of their respective programmes, in
order to develop further and to guarantee political, civil, economic, social and cultural rights and to end all discrimination
and denial of human rights and fundamental freedoms on
grounds of race, colour, sex, language or religion, and in
particular to permit the elimination of apartheid, the various
organizations mentioned above are invited to consider, for
the year 1968:
(a) Adopting the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
or articles thereof, as appropriate, as the theme of their annual
conference far 1968 or of special conferences held during
that year;
( b) Organizing commemorative ceremonies on the Declarati·on during the International Year far Human Rights, and
particularly on Human Rights Day, 10 December 1968;
(e) Printing and distributing the text of the Declaration,
and preparing public pamphlets, leaflets and posters on the
Declaration;
(d) Organizing community projects, such as panel discussions on local human rights problems, children's parades, and
the display of the United Nations flag on school buildings and
business pre mi ses ;
(e) Encouraging local communities to establish a list of
questions with a view to investigating and sounding out public
opinion as to the community's effectiveness in promoting the
principies of the Declaration;
(!) Publishing, during the International Year for Human
Rights, historie declarations, famous bilis, and great orations
and speeches on human rights, with appropriate commentaries
or annotations;
(g) Encouraging radio and television networks to carry
special programmes, encouraging newspaper editors to publish
editorials on the Declaration which could be printed or reprinted
in whole or in part, and encouraging book-publishing firms
to issue special publications, including books and booklets, on
human rights problems designed to publicize the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights; and encouraging other media
of infonnation to organize public debates on great issues
concerning freedom;
(h) Inviting appropriate bodies in Member States to hold
special services and observances of a cultural and traditional
nature, in celebration of the twentieth anniversary of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
RECOMMENDATION H
It is recommended that the programme of measures and

activities should include activities by the United Nations, the
specialized agencies, Member States, and international· and
national organizations. Far an effective year of observances,
sorne degree of co-ordination of these separate activities will
be required. Sorne of the recommended activities are set out
precisely and in reasonably full detail; far others, no more than
the broad outlines of the proposal can be given at this stage,
.-.nd the details remain to be worked out. When these details
have been settled, it will be desirable that infarmation about
them be communicated to a central organization or office. It
is likely that individual Member States will have new ideas
in regard t•o activities they may wish to undertake in connexion with the International Y ear for Human Rights, and
that they will wish to communicate sorne of these ideas to
other Member States. It is agreed that all these activities should
be co-ordinated and it is recommended that the co-ordinating
and clearing-house function should be discharged by the
Secretary-General. It is important that the Secretary-General's
efficiency in discharging his present responsibilities in the field
of human rights should not be impaired by this additional
task which it is proposed to entrust to him.

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2081 (XX) of 20 December
1965 concerning the observance of the Intemational

General Assembly-Twenty-fint Session

64

Year for Human Rights and the convening of an lnternational Conference on Human Rights in 1968,
Emphasizing the great importance of putting into
practice the principles relating to the protection of
fundamental human rights which are laid down in the
Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and
the United Nations Declaration on the Elimination of
All Forros of Racial Discrimination and the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forros of
Racial Discrimination,
Convinced that the continuing violation of fundamental human rights in certain countries, particularly
in the colonial and dependent countries, may endanger
friendly relations between States and universal peace
and security,
Emphasizing the importance of the achievement by
the International Conference on Human Rights of the
purposes specified in General Assembly resolution
2081 (XX),
Calls upon the Governments of all countries and the
peoples of the world to intensify the struggle to safeguard fundamental freedoms and human rights and to
ensure the complete and immediate elimination of such
violations of human rights as racial discrimination and
the policy of apartheid.
1498th plenary meeting,
19 December 1966.

to include among their representatives eminent persons
whose qualifications in the field of human rights would
enable them to make valuable contributions to the work
of the Conference;
4. Invites the competent specialized agencies to send
observers to the Conference;
5. Requests the Preparatory Committee to continue
its work in accordance with paragraph 14 of resolution
2081 (XX), taking into account such observations as
it may receive from the Commission on Human Rights
and the Commission on the Status of Women and
bearing in mind the discussions at the twenty-first
session of the General Assembly, the decisions taken
in the present resolution and the adoption of the International Covenants on Human Rights, and .to report
further on the progress of the preparation of the Conference to the General Assembly at its twenty-second
session;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to arrange for
the staffing and other facilities which will be required
for the Conference ;
7. Expresses the hope that the Conference will be
an important step forward in the further promotion
and development of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms and consequently a contribution to
the strengthening of peace throughout the world and
to the promotion of friendship among peoples.
1498th plenary meeting,
19 December 1966.

e

D

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1961 (XVIII) of 12 December 1963 designating the year 1968 as International
Year for Human Rights,
Recalling also its resolution 2081 (XX) of 20 December 1965 on the International Year for Human
Rights, in which it decided, inter afia, that an International Conference on Human Rights should be convened
during 1968, defined the purposes of the Conference,
established a Preparatory Committee for the International Conference on Human Rights to complete the
preparation for the Conference, and requested the
Secretary-General to appoint an Executive Secretary
for the Conference,
Having considered the first progress report of the
Preparatory Committee,18
Accepting with appreciation the invitation extended
by the Government of Iran for the International Conference on Human Rights to be held at Teheran, 14
l. Takes note of the first pr'Ogress report of the
Preparatory Committee for the International Conference on Human Rights and expresses its appreciation
to the Committee for the work it has accomplished ;
2. Decides that the International Conference on
Human Rights shall be held at Teheran, preferably
during the spring of 1968, on a date to be determined
by the Secretary-General in consultation with the
Preparatory Committee and the Iranian Government;
3. Invites States Members of the United Nations,
States members of the specialized agencies, States
Parties to the Statute of the International Court of
Justice and States that the General Assembly decides
specially to invite, to participate in the Conference and

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2081 (XX) of 20 December
1965, by which it requested the President of the General Assembly to appoint the members of the Preparatory Committee for the International Conference on
Human Rights,
Recognizing the significance of the proposed Conference and the importance of the preparatory work
to the success of the Conference,
l. Decides to enlarge the membership of the Preparatory Committee for the International Conference
on Human Rights from seventeen to twenty-three;
2. Requests the President of the General Assembly_
to appoint six additional members of the Preparatory
Committee-two from African countries, two from
Asian countries and two from Latin American countries.
1498th plenary meeting,
19 December 1966.

18 A/6354.
14 A/C.3/602.

The President of the General Assembly, in pursuance of
paragraph 2 of resolution D above, appointed the following
Member States: COLOMBIA, KENYA, LE.BANON, MAURITANIA,
PAKISTAN and PANAMA.15
As a result, the Preparatory Committee for the lnternational
Conference on Human Rights will be composed of the following
Member States: CANADA, CoLOMBIA, FRANCE, INDIA, lRAN,
}TALY, JAMAICA, KENYA, LE.J!ANON, MAURITANIA, NEW 2EALAND, NIGERIA, PAKISTAN, PANAMA, PHILIPPINES, POLAND,
SOMALIA, TUNISIA, UNION OF SOVIET SocIALIST REPUBLICS,
UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN JRELAND,
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, URUGUAY and YUGOSLAVIA.

111 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first
Session, Plenary Meetings, 1498th meeting.
