United Nations

S/PV.6138

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6138th meeting
Tuesday, 9 June 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. İlkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Turkey)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Tiendrébéogo
Mr. Du Xiaocong
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Lacroix
Mr. Okuda
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Heller
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Williams
Ms. Germain
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
The situation in Burundi
Fifth report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated Office
in Burundi (S/2009/270)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-36337 (E)

*0936337*

S/PV.6138

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.

specific configuration on Burundi of the Peacebuilding
Commission.

Adoption of the agenda

It is so decided.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Burundi
Fifth report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi
(S/2009/270)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Burundi, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nahayo
(Burundi) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to Mr. Adolphe Nahayo,
Director of the Department of International
Organizations at the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of
Burundi.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Youssef Mahmoud, Executive Representative of
the Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Burundi.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Mahmoud to take a seat at the
Council table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Per Örnéus, Deputy Permanent
Representative of Sweden to the United Nations, who
will speak on behalf of the Chairperson of the country-

2

I invite Mr. Örnéus to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/270, which contains the fifth report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Integrated Office in Burundi.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings from Mr. Youssef Mahmoud and His
Excellency Mr. Per Örnéus. I now give the floor to
Mr. Mahmoud.
Mr. Mahmoud: It is an honour for me to present
the fifth report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Integrated Office in Burundi (BINUB)
(S/2009/270). The report before the Council provides
an account of the main advances over the past six
months and the challenges that lie ahead for the people
and the Government of Burundi. It also describes the
main activities of BINUB in support of the
Government’s peace consolidation efforts, in
accordance with the mandate entrusted to it by the
Council. Moreover, it provides a summary of the
recommendations of the technical assessment mission
to Burundi, led by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations in March.
The period under review was marked by
significant progress achieved in the implementation of
the Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement and in laying
the foundations for the preparations for the 2010
elections. A decisive step forward was taken in April as
the last rebel movement, the Forces nationales de
libération (FNL), formally disarmed and was registered
as a political party. The FNL’s renunciation of armed
struggle is an important development that paves the
way for its participation in the democratic process in
Burundi.
Regarding
the
implementation
of
the
Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement, at a landmark
meeting of the Political Directorate in Pretoria on
8 April, chaired by the South African Facilitation, the

09-36337

S/PV.6138

Government and the FNL agreed on a road map for the
integration of the FNL into civil and military
institutions and for the demobilization of its
combatants, with special consideration afforded to
women in accordance with the letter and the spirit of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). I am sure that
a separate report on the activities of BINUB in
pursuance of the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) should be before the Council or should have
been distributed earlier — as we have customarily done
in connection with previous briefings.
Since mid-April, important advances have been
achieved in the implementation of that road map. A
total of 3,500 FNL elements have been integrated into
the military and police. Unserviceable FNL weapons
have been destroyed and the remaining serviceable
weapons have been handed over to the Government. As
of yesterday, 8 June, over 5,000 of the 11,000 adults
associated with the FNL combatants had been
registered, issued with return kits, paid the first
instalment of return assistance and transported to their
home communities. Between 20 and 22 May, another
batch of prisoners, this time 103 persons, was released,
based on an April ordinance from the Ministry of
Justice.
By 29 May, the South African Facilitation had
completed the verification process for the 5,000 FNL
combatants who will be demobilized within the next
few months as part of the World Bank-supported
national transitional demobilization and reintegration
programme. A total of 340 children, including six girls,
who had been separated from the FNL during April,
were reunited with their families between 13 and
20 May.
In early June, the Government issued several
decrees nominating around 24 FNL leaders to senior
civil service positions, including ambassadorial posts
and governorships. The remaining posts that are to be
allocated to FNL leaders require further consultation
within the Government. The FNL Chair was appointed
as director of the National Institute for Social Security.
The South African Facilitation ended its mission
on 31 May. One hundred elements from the African
Union Special Task Force VIP Protection Unit will,
however, remain in Burundi until 31 December to
continue protecting FNL leaders while training a newly
created joint FNL-Government protection police unit.

09-36337

The residual tasks of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process were handed
over to the Government of Burundi, while the African
Union, with the support of BINUB, took over the
responsibility for following the process.
With the withdrawal of the Facilitation, the
leaders of the Regional Initiative for Peace
recommended that a successor mechanism be
established to continue to monitor the peace process, to
contribute to an enabling environment for the period
leading up to the elections, and to provide early
warning to Regional Initiative leaders. This successor
mechanism, the Partnership for Peace in Burundi, was
launched on 27 May by the Facilitation. It is composed
of the Political Directorate, the Executive Secretariat
of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region and BINUB. BINUB will also serve as its
secretariat. The Peacebuilding Commission and the
special envoys for the Great Lakes region will act as a
support network for the Partnership. The Partnership
will be coordinated and chaired by South Africa. It is
envisaged that the Partnership for Peace will end in
December, subject to review by the Regional Initiative
leaders and, of course, the Government of Burundi.
As indicated in the Secretary-General’s report,
the political climate in Burundi saw some undeniable
improvements during the past six months. Most
notably, the Government established, after lengthy
internal but inclusive debate, the Independent National
Electoral Commission.
The 2010 elections have become a major focus
for Burundian political actors, particularly after the
establishment of the Electoral Commission. On
11 May, President Nkurunziza addressed a letter to the
Secretary-General requesting United Nations support
for the electoral process. On 25 May, the Electoral
Commission held its first official meeting with
representatives of the international community during
which it outlined its needs in terms of technical,
logistical and financial assistance. In response to the
request addressed to the United Nations, a needs
assessment mission will be dispatched to identify, in
close collaboration with the Electoral Commission,
areas for support.
In addition, the Government registered yesterday
the Mouvement pour la solidarité et la démocratie of
Alexis Sinduhije after a rather lengthy waiting period.

3

S/PV.6138

This registration brings the number of registered
political parties in Burundi to 43.
Despite the previously mentioned improvement in
the political climate, concerns have continued to be
expressed about persistent disruption of the activities
of opposition political parties and, in some cases,
violence against their members by the police and,
allegedly, by members of the national intelligence
services and local officials. This situation has created a
malaise among the political class and civil society
activists, and therefore everyone urged the Government
to ensure that pluralism and tolerance be guaranteed. In
his report, the Secretary-General also urges the
Government to treat all political parties equally under
Burundian law and to ensure the respect for the right to
freedom of expression and assembly enshrined in the
Constitution and international human rights instruments
ratified by Burundi.
The Secretary-General has also noted in his
report that much remains to be done for Burundians to
enjoy the full exercise of their human rights. The
Secretary-General has also urged the Government to
move quickly to establish an effective and credible
Independent National Human Rights Commission in
compliance with international standards, as well as
other relevant institutions aimed at consolidating
national reconciliation and the rule of law.
Despite delays, preparations have advanced for
the holding of national consultations on the
establishment of transitional justice mechanisms. In
particular, I would like to mention the holding on 22
and 23 May of a pilot exercise in two localities in
Bujumbura to test the questionnaires to be used in the
national consultations process scheduled to begin on
15 June. As the report of the Secretary-General
mentions, these national consultations have as their
aim to seek the views of Burundians on how they think
it best to establish the twin mechanisms for
reconciliation, namely, a Truth and Reconciliation
Commission and a Special Tribunal attached to the
justice system in Burundi.
In the current context, the two most immediate
challenges are the conclusion of the demobilization and
reintegration process and the sustainable socio-economic
reintegration of former combatants, including those from
the last rebel movement, the FNL, and other segments of
the population most affected by the conflict.

4

It is urgent that the international community do
everything possible to ensure progress in the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
process and provide the necessary resources for its
timely completion. BINUB is supporting national
efforts to develop a strategy that will complement the
DDR process by focusing on the sustainable socioeconomic reintegration not only of demobilized FNL
combatants, but also of other former combatants and
demobilized soldiers. This strategy will be consistent
with the goals and objectives of the security sector
reform and will go a long way towards stabilizing the
situation ahead of the 2010 elections.
While the security challenges are the most
immediate ones, Burundi also faces other important
challenges, including a difficult socio-economic
situation, weaknesses of the justice system and within
the police force, continuing human rights violations
and impunity. In this regard, the Government is urged
to put an end to these violations, to see to it that justice
is done and to keep the public informed. In this
connection, I welcome the statement of the Minister of
Public Security at his press conference yesterday
regarding the actions taken by the Government to address
some of these violations, including the follow-up to the
assassination of the Vice-President of the Observatoire de
la lutte contre la corruption et les malversations
économiques, a non-governmental organization dealing
with the fight against corruption. I commend him for
coming forward publicly and informing us of what the
Government is doing in these areas.
Working in an integrated approach with the
United Nations system in the country, BINUB has
continued to support the Government and the people of
Burundi in addressing these challenges. The projects
funded by the Peacebuilding Fund have brought hope
by contributing to certain reforms and by engaging the
population from the grass roots up in peace consolidation
efforts. Various capacity-building initiatives in the areas
of administrative and political governance, justice and
human rights, the fight against impunity, security sector
reform and the empowerment of women and civil society
have begun to show some tangible results. The ongoing
national dialogue processes will help restore a measure of
social trust after decades of mistrust.
I should also like to commend the role played by the
Peacebuilding Commission, in particular the Chair of the
Burundi country-specific configuration, Ambassador
Lidén, for maintaining constructive dialogue with the

09-36337

S/PV.6138

Government and its national partners. The Chair’s
frequent visits have been a source of encouragement for
all of us.
Despite the progress achieved, the situation in
Burundi that I have just outlined remains fragile, and
the processes of consolidating peace and security are
still incomplete. Robust and sustained efforts by
national and international stakeholders are needed to
ensure that progress cannot be easily reversed,
particularly as the country prepares for the upcoming
electoral process. An immediate priority is to help the
Government of Burundi to address the precarious
socio-economic situation and some budgetary problems.
As can be seen from the “Observations” section
of the report, the Secretary-General has endorsed the
recommendation of the recent technical assessment
mission to Burundi that BINUB’s mandate remain
unchanged through the end of 2009, with a primary
focus on political support, the facilitation of dialogue
and strategic support for peacebuilding, as well as on
tasks related to completing the peace process and, now
that a request has been made, also on electoral
assistance. As to the nature of the United Nations
presence beyond 2009, the Secretary-General intends
to consult with the Government of Burundi and to
submit recommendations in his next report to the
Security Council.
The remaining part of 2009 will be a crucial
period to safeguard what has been achieved and to
draw lessons for future peacebuilding endeavours.
The President: I thank Mr. Mahmoud for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Per Örnéus.
Mr. Örnéus: I have the honour to deliver the
following statement on behalf of Ambassador Anders
Lidén, Chair of the country-specific configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission on Burundi.
“I would like to thank you, Sir, for the
opportunity to participate in today’s meeting on
Burundi in my capacity as Chair of the Burundi
country-specific configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission. As I noted back in December, the
close collaboration between the Security Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission on Burundi is
essential, not least as peace and stability in Burundi
are a key building block for peace and stability in
the Great Lakes region as a whole.

09-36337

“I undertook a visit to Burundi just a few
weeks ago, from 25 to 27 May. The purpose of the
visit was to assess progress in the peacebuilding
process and to identify key priorities for further
engagement by the Peacebuilding Commission,
including in the elections in 2010. I met with
national and international stakeholders, including
the President of the Republic, the Independent
National Electoral Commission and the South
African Facilitator, as well as representatives from
civil society, political parties and international
partners.
“Peacebuilding in Burundi has clearly entered
a new phase. There has been impressive progress in
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) process. All children formerly associated
with the Forces nationales de liberation (FNL) have
been released and reunited with their families, and
the FNL will participate in the upcoming elections
as a political party. I congratulate the Government
of Burundi and the FNL on these achievements.
“At the same time, there are remaining
challenges related to the peace process, in
particular the completion of the DDR process. I
welcome the Partnership for Peace in Burundi
and I encourage continued leadership by South
Africa, the Regional Initiative and the African
Union in order to sustain achievements made and
to ensure a successful peace process.
“In view of Burundi’s entering a new chapter
in its peacebuilding process, the Peacebuilding
Commission can now start to shift its attention
towards support to longer-term socio-economic
reintegration and to the challenges related to the
elections in 2010. Many ex-combatants and other
demobilized people will need assistance for their
long-term socio-economic reintegration. Such
efforts should also target other groups affected by
the war, including returnees and internally displaced
people. The Peacebuilding Commission will help to
mobilize support once the comprehensive strategy
for durable socio-economic reintegration has been
finalized by the Government, in consultation with
partners.
“During my visit, I witnessed a firm
commitment by the Government and all national
stakeholders to free and fair elections in 2010. At
the same time, concern was raised about insecurity

5

S/PV.6138

in the electoral process. There are recent reports of
politically motivated violence. In this regard, there
is a pressing need for support to further
professionalize the police and to strengthen the
justice sector.
“The
Independent
National
Electoral
Commission enjoys broad support and trust among
Burundians, but it urgently needs basic equipment,
as well as further political, technical and financial
support. Other national partners, such as the media,
civil society, women’s organizations and national
observers, are also in acute need of support.
“There is broad agreement in Burundi that
the international community needs to support and
accompany the electoral process. In this regard, I
particularly welcome the request of the Government
of Burundi to the United Nations for support before,
during and after the elections. The Peacebuilding
Commission can help set the agenda for
international support to the elections, contribute to
the coordination of international efforts and ensure
that support is demand-driven, as well as mobilize
additional resources when gaps emerge. A thematic
meeting of the Peacebuilding Commission will soon
be organized to discuss the support required and the
conditions necessary for free and fair elections, as
well as to further identify the role of the
Commission in support of the elections.
“Sustained international attention and support
are crucial to consolidating peace and to
contributing to long-term development in Burundi.
In order to further enhance the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission, I have encouraged
relevant stakeholders in Bujumbura to activate a
local platform of the Commission. A stronger link
between the processes at the country level and here
in New York will further improve the effectiveness
and relevance of our support.
“Finally, allow me to commend the
Government of Burundi and all national
stakeholders for their constructive engagement in
the peacebuilding process. Let me also use this
occasion to recognize the important role of the
United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi in
support of the peace process and of the broader
peacebuilding agenda. The integrated United
Nations presence in Burundi, together with the
strategic leadership of the Executive Representative

6

of the Secretary-General, will continue to be vital to
effective support for peacebuilding.”
The President: I thank Mr. Örnéus for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Adolphe Nahayo,
Director of the Department of International Organizations
at the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Burundi.
Mr. Nahayo (Burundi) (spoke in French): On the
occasion of the presentation of the fifth report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/270) on the United Nations
Integrated Office in Burundi (BINUB), the
Government of the Republic of Burundi takes this
opportunity to thank the Organization for its tireless
ongoing assistance to my country in finally
overcoming its socio-political crisis. The Government
of Burundi also expresses its gratitude to Mr. Youssef
Mahmoud, Executive Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Burundi, for his continued engagement in
implementing BINUB’s mandate.
My Government appreciates the recognition
expressed in the fifth report on BINUB of the progress
that has been made in most areas towards the ultimate
stabilization of the country. Examples of such progress
include the creation of the Independent National Electoral
Commission, the implementation of the political
agreements with the former rebel movement Parti pour la
libération du peuple Hutu-forces nationales de libération
(Palipehutu-FNL), the Government’s commitment to the
disarmament policy, the reintegration of returnees, the
establishment of the conditions necessary to reach the
completion point under the Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries initiative, the improved cooperation between
the media and the National Communication Council, the
release of some prisoners previously held in provisional
detention, and the collection and destruction of thousands
of small arms and light weapons previously held by the
civilian population. I could cite further examples.
The Government also shares several of the
concerns set out in the report with regard to human
rights and the protection of children, the status of
women, the persistence of corruption and providing
security for the population. Nevertheless, the
Government believes that it is unfair to say that it is
not doing anything to improve the situation in those
areas. The Government has put in place, or is in the
process of doing so, appropriate mechanisms in all
those areas. The process of establishing the
Independent National Human Rights Commission is

09-36337

S/PV.6138

also under way. Contrary to the report’s assertion, the
Government is in the process of incorporating the Paris
Principles into the draft law prior to submitting it to the
Parliament for consideration and adoption.
I should like to make two observations with
regard to homosexuality, whose criminalization under
Burundi’s new penal code has galvanized various
partners. On the one hand, it is not up to the executive
branch to issue edicts to the legislative branch with
regard to the provisions of the law, as some partners
have called upon the Head of State to do. The principle
of the separation of powers must be respected. On the
other hand, the position of Parliament, an institution
that embodies the aspirations of the people of Burundi,
on this issue clearly illustrates how cultural diversity
can lead to divergent choices with respect to the
adoption of certain international legal instruments and
their acceptance by the people, even when authorities
are disposed to incorporate universal principles into
national law. In spite of that fact, human rights can still
be taken into account in dealing with this matter.
With regard to the situation of women, the penal
code’s criminalization of sexual and gender-based
violence has established an environment conducive to
combating such crimes. All national partners must now
be educated about the importance to society of
combating such offences. Civil society has already
embarked upon that process. The programme to raise
awareness among security and defence personnel, as
well as the disarmament of civilians, should allow for
progress in combating sexual violence. However,
success will not be possible unless the families and
relatives of victims ultimately understand that keeping
silent under the pretext of protecting their honour will
in fact encourage impunity.
With regard to the protection of children, the
Government has established a task force to protect
minors. However, we have not yet succeeded in
securing resources. Also in that regard, the efforts of
the judicial system and the police should be
complemented by those of civil society. With regard to
albinos in particular, intensive efforts by the police and
the legal system have resulted in the arrests of some 10
persons implicated in the murder of albinos. The
prosecutor has already called for severe penalties for
those persons.
With regard to former FNL child combatants, 340
children who were formerly associated with the Forces

09-36337

nationales de libération have been released to their
families from the Gitega demobilization centre,
situated in the central part of the country. Those
children are to receive long-term support in order to
ensure their permanent reintegration into their
communities of origin. The Government would like to
recall that it was even prepared to demobilize and
reintegrate the 40 other children associated with
dissidents. Unfortunately, having been misled, they
refused to come to the assembly point in the hope that
they would ultimately be admitted into the police or the
army. The Government was in the end able to explain
to them that it was in their interests to be demobilized
and reintegrated into civilian life. Given that the Gitega
demobilization centre is occupied by FNL adults, the
Government has relocated those children to Magara, in
Bujumbura Rural province, so as to begin demobilizing
them in order to return them to their families.
The Government of Burundi takes this
opportunity to inform the Security Council that the
issue of political prisoners has been resolved. The
confusion in the report in that regard is due to the facts
that some prisoners were released before they were
claimed by the former rebel movement Palipehutu-FNL
and that some had been registered under aliases.
The Government is aware that corruption hinders
development, as it deprives the State and local
authorities of necessary resources to implement
programmes for the public good. It is for that reason
that the Government has established an office of the
State Inspector General, an accountability court and an
anti-corruption task force and court. We will soon set
up a private body responsible for collecting all State
revenues. It goes without saying that it will be
necessary to strengthen the capacity of all those bodies
and to educate the people in order to persuade
Burundians to stop tolerating acts of corruption. A
programme to support anti-corruption mechanisms is
being developed in the context of our priority
peacebuilding plan. Although anti-corruption bodies
have already begun their work, it will be necessary to
strengthen their effectiveness through the cooperation
of the people, who should condemn this scourge of
which they are the victims.
The report also expresses concern about ongoing
insecurity. The Government of Burundi shares that
concern. To that end, we have launched a policy to
disarm civilians and to raise awareness among defence
and security forces so as to eradicate armed violence.

7

S/PV.6138

The Minister for Public Security regularly reports on
the punishments meted out to its agents who are found
to have committed acts of violence or human rights
violations. Recently, on 3 June 2009, the national
intelligence service, also known as Documentation,
held an open-house event to share with the public its
new professional code of ethics and associated training
programme. Clearly, however, such administrative
efforts will not be enough. In order to prevent crime,
the police will require adequate equipment to enable
them to respond in a timely manner and the genuine
cooperation of the people.
Following 14 years of civil war, during which
some rebel movements splintered and fought each
other, trust between civilians and law enforcement
personnel cannot be established overnight. Moreover,
the inclination to always see political motives behind
acts of violence is extremely corrosive. It would be
useful to take a sociological approach to crime in
Burundi. Now that the last rebel movement has joined
the peace process, the Government hopes that the
security situation will improve noticeably.
I would like to say in passing that the Government
cannot contain its bitter surprise at certain baseless
allegations made in the report, which in essence claims
that the Government is continuing to waver with respect
to the non-applicability of amnesty for genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes. That issue has already
been resolved. The report also asserts that our National
Security Council does not exist, even though it has now
been functioning for more than half a year. In addition,
the report says that the Government of Burundi has yet to
request electoral assistance, although our country’s
President made that request of the Secretary-General on
11 May 2009. Moreover, a serious report such as this
should correctly identify such national institutions as the
National Communication Council — rendered in the
French version as the Conseil national des
télécommunications — and the National Commission for

Land and Other Assets, which is referred to as la
Commission nationale des biens fonciers et autres biens.
A substantial section of the fifth report of the
Secretary-General is devoted to the technical
assessment mission that was carried out in Burundi at
the beginning of March 2009. The Government had
requested that the mission’s proposals be discussed
before the publication of the report, but this request
was not taken into account.
The fact is that, four months after the mission, the
reality on the ground is no longer the same. The best
proof of this is the decision by South Africa to put an
end to its facilitation activities after a well-executed
mission and an agreement with the Regional Initiative
for Peace in Burundi, the African Union, the Executive
Secretariat of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, all the special envoys and the
Peacebuilding Commission.
At this stage, the Government simply takes note
that it will be consulted by the Secretary-General with
regard to the United Nations presence beyond the
expiration of the BINUB mandate in December 2009.
In the meantime, the Government of Burundi remains
grateful for the support of the United Nations and
would like to see this continue, as will be agreed.
Allow me, before concluding, to also thank the
Regional Initiative, the African Union, the Executive
Secretariat of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, the South African Facilitation, the
special envoys and the Peacebuilding Commission for
their contribution to the progress achieved in the peace
process in Burundi.
The President: There are no further speakers on
my list. In accordance with the understanding reached
in the Council’s prior consultations, I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

8

09-36337
