S/2017/784

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 September 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan
(covering the period from 2 June to 1 September 2017)
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2327
(2016), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) until 15 December 2017 and requested me to report on
the implementation of the mandate every 90 days. It covers political and security
developments from 2 June to 1 September 2017, the humanitarian situation, and
progress in the implementation of the Mission mandate. It also provides a review of
progress made by the parties in ceasing hostilities, returning to the path of dialogue
and achieving inclusiveness within the Government.

II. Political and economic developments
2.
There has been minimal progress in the implementation of the Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan (the peace
agreement). The Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) has been
leading efforts to hold a high-level revitalization forum in what it sees as a final
attempt to bring the peace process back on track. Meanwhile, various other
initiatives are now under way which are also aimed at finding a political solution to
the conflict, including the national dialogue and an initiative by the Presi dent of
Uganda, Yoweri Museveni, to reunify factions of the Sudan People ’s Liberation
Movement (SPLM).
3.
To date, however, these initiatives have yet to show tangible progress towards
reducing the conflict or enhancing implementation of the peace agreeme nt. The
Government has prioritized efforts towards reconciliation through the national
dialogue and has stated its intent to hold elections within the timeline outlined in the
peace agreement. Opposition figures outside the country remain reluctant to enga ge
in the national dialogue, arguing that the conditions are not ripe for genuine
dialogue, and the modalities for including the opposition and “estranged groups” in
the IGAD process are still being discussed. Meanwhile, the economic situation
remains dire and continues to fuel public frustration, despite some Government
efforts to put in place fiscal austerity measures.

17-15472 (E)

200917

*1715472*

S/2017/784

National political developments
4.
On 9 July, in a message to the nation on the occasion of the sixth anniversary
of independence, the President, Salva Kiir, emphasized his Government’s efforts to
promote peace and security, recalled his unilateral ceasefire declaration and issued a
general amnesty. He stressed that the peace agreement and the ongoing national
dialogue were the only way forward to attain peace. However, neither the ceasefire
nor the peace agreement have been broadly respected or genuinely implemented.
5.
The Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission convened plenary meetings
on 12 July and 24 August. The Commission’s six technical working committees
submitted status reports on progress in implementing each of the peace agreement ’s
thematic chapters to inform plenary discussions. In particular, committee members
called on the Government to expedite the enactment of a bill providing amendments
required to align the Transitional Constitution of 2011 with the peace agreement.
The bill was submitted by the National Constitutional Amendment Committee to the
Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs on 13 April but is sti ll under review.
Meanwhile, the National Constitutional Amendment Committee started amending
the relevant national security laws and conducted preliminary consultations on
revisions to the Political Parties Act and the National Elections Act of 2012.
6.
On 17 July, President Kiir replaced six members of the Transitional National
Legislative Assembly linked to SPLM in Opposition under the former First
Vice-President, Riek Machar, with new appointees allied to the faction of the First
Vice-President Taban Deng Gai, further consolidating the latter ’s presence in the
Government. On 14 and 27 July, Riek Machar announced the appointment of new
governors for 9 of the 21 federal states that his faction has proposed.
7.
The National Dialogue Steering Committee conducted plenary meetings from
29 May to 22 June. On 8 June, the plenary created 15 subcommittees to conduct
thematic and local-level consultations. Two special delegations reached out to
opposition leaders residing outside the country, including in Khartoum a nd Nairobi.
The Steering Committee Co-Chair led a special delegation to reach out to Riek
Machar on 28 June in South Africa, but they were unable to meet with him.
Delegations also travelled to Khartoum, Addis Ababa and Nairobi to continue their
outreach. From 3 to 28 July, the Steering Committee conducted a seminar on
international lessons learned in managing dialogues for its members, with technical
support provided by the United Nations and other partners. On 28 July, the Steering
Committee announced preparations to commence subnational consultations in
September.
8.
On 15 June, the members of the voluntary civil society task force on the
implementation of the peace agreement issued a common position on the national
dialogue process in which they expressed concern that the process could be
compromised by limitations to the freedom of expression, the non -participation of
opposition groups, continuing hostilities, the composition and partiality of the
Steering Committee, failure to release political detaine es, and lack of confidence in
the parties to the conflict. The task force called for the national dialogue to focus on
national concerns, such as vision, identity and unity, security sector and economic
reforms, historical grievances, distribution of natur al resources, and governance.
9.
Given the continuing lack of women’s participation in the peace process, on
29 June a civil society group named the South Sudan Women ’s Monthly Forum
issued a gender gap analysis of the implementation of the peace agreement . It
highlighted the fact that the 25 per cent quota for women ’s participation in the
executive had not been met and recommended that more women be appointed to key
government positions.

2/17

17-15472

S/2017/784

Regional engagement
10. The Intergovernmental Authority on Development held its thirty-first
extraordinary summit on South Sudan on 12 June in Ethiopia and resolved to
convene a high-level revitalization forum of the parties to the peace agreement,
including estranged groups, to restore a permanent ceasefire and implement the
peace agreement. On 23 and 24 July, the IGAD Council of Ministers, at its meeting
in Juba, noted the positive response of the Government to the establishment of the
forum and welcomed the commitment by President Kiir to collaborate and
implement the decisions of the 12 June summit. On 16 and 17 August, IGAD
convened a meeting of experts in Ethiopia to provide an opportunity for
independent South Sudanese who will not formally participate in the forum to make
recommendations for the revitalization process.
11. On 16 June and 20 and 27 July, the President of Uganda facilitated three
meetings between SPLM factions in Uganda in the context of the implementation of
the 2015 Arusha Agreement on the reunification of SPLM. The pro -Taban Deng
faction of SPLM in Opposition was present. SPLM in Opposition led by Riek
Machar was invited to send representatives to the meetings, but declined the offer.
On 27 July, SPLM in Government, the SPLM faction led by First Vice -President
Taban Deng Gai, and a faction of the former detainees led by Rebecca Nyandeng
Garang signed a declaration resolving to establish a working group to operationalize
the implementation of the Arusha Agreement, and called upon Riek Machar and
other SPLM factions to join the reunification process. On 27 July, the pro-Machar
faction criticized the talks in Uganda as a “mockery” of the SPLM reunification
process.
12. The African Union High Representative for South Sudan, the former President
of Mali, Alpha Oumar Konaré, visited Juba twice, from 22 to 25 June and from
27 August to 1 September. During the visits, he met senior government officials,
including President Kiir, key officials involved with the national dialogue, members
of the diplomatic community, and UNMISS to discuss the overall situation in South
Sudan and the African Union’s contribution to restoring peace and stability in the
country.
Other political developments
13. On 11 July, the Speaker of the Transitional National Legislative Assembly
appointed new leaders for the 25 standing committees of the Assembly, of which
seven committee Chairs and eight Deputy Chairs are women. Seventeen Chairs and
17 Deputy Chairs were allocated to SPLM in Government, six Chairs and six
Deputy Chairs to the pro-Taban Deng SPLM in Opposition, one Chair and two
Deputy Chairs to the other political parties and one Chair to the SPLM leaders. The
appointments resolved a prolonged impasse in the Assembly following disputed
changes to the committee leadership made by the Speaker in March, which had
largely paralysed parliamentary affairs for three months.
14. In response to the ongoing judicial strike called by the General Assembly of
Justices and Judges in May, on 12 July, President Kiir removed 14 judges from
office, invoking a constitutional provision that allows for the removal of judges for
“misconduct” and other grounds based on the recommendation of the National
Judicial Service Commission. Striking judges demanded adequate financial and
logistical support to the judiciary, salary increment, and the res ignation of the Chief
Justice. A government committee established by President Kiir in April to look into
the judges’ grievances submitted its findings to the President in June, rejecting all
demands.

17-15472

3/17

S/2017/784

Economic developments
15. South Sudan continues to face serious economic challenges. Government
revenue remains limited, owing mainly to relatively low oil prices and low net oil
production, currently at around 118,000 barrels per day, whereas it stood at 130,000
barrels per day in the previous quarter. Inflation and persistent salary backlogs have
further weakened household purchasing power, compounded by the weakening of
the South Sudanese pound against the United States dollar. The annual consumer
price index increased 154.6 per cent from July 2016 to July 2017, mainly driven by
high food prices. Agricultural production continues to be hampered by insecurity
and displacement, particularly in the greater Equatoria region. On 28 August,
Parliament adopted the national budget for the fiscal year 2017/18; it totals
SSP 46.487 billion with amendments, which exceeds available resources by
SSP 16.8 billion. During the deliberations, parliamentarians discussed the country ’s
economic outlook, the lifting of the fuel subsidy, adjustment of tax rates and other
sources of revenue. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development
announced the formation of a secretariat to spearhead the process of designing and
executing a three-year national development strategy aimed at stabilizing the
economy.

III. Security situation
16. Despite the unilateral ceasefire declared by President Kiir in May and calls for
all armed groups to respect the cessation of hostilities agreement, the security
situation did not improve during the reporting period, and almost all areas of the
country were affected by the conflict. Military operations continued in parts of
greater Upper Nile and some areas of the Equatorias, while tensions pers isted in the
greater Bahr el-Ghazal region. On 29 August, the Minister of Defence was cited in
local media warning that the general amnesty announced by the President was not
“open ended” and on 31 August, in an interview with UNMISS Radio Miraya, he
confirmed his official directives to grant rebel forces a 30 -day ultimatum to declare
their willingness to consider ceasefire arrangements or else face Government
attacks.
Greater Upper Nile region
17. The security situation in greater Upper Nile remained volatile, with clashes
between the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) and the pro-Machar SPLA in
Opposition in Renk County, on 7 and 14 June in Babounge and Atham villages and
on 5 July in Gostabun. In Manyo County, the SPLA and opposition forces clashe d in
Kola and Kuek towns on 13 June and in Kaka on 18, 20 and 26 July. SPLA
operations to push further into opposition-held areas continued, with clashes
between SPLA and SPLA in Opposition forces on 29 June in Mathiang causing
civilian displacement. On 6 and 7 July, 25 humanitarian workers were relocated
from Pagak because of insecurity in the area. Clashes continued as SPLA forces
arrived in Maiwut and, on 8 August, both SPLA and the pro -Machar SPLA in
Opposition confirmed to UNMISS that SPLA had captured Pagak on 6 August.
However, the opposition reportedly managed to regain control over parts of Pagak
on 10 August. Both sides remain present in the area of Pagak and both have since
claimed to be in control of Pagak.
18. The security situation in Unity was tense, with reports of localized conflict and
insecurity. UNMISS continued to receive reports of forced recruitment by the
pro-Taban Deng SPLA in Opposition in Guit County, including attempts to forcibly
recruit national humanitarian workers. On 22 June, SPLA and pro-Machar SPLA in
4/17

17-15472

S/2017/784

Opposition forces exchanged gunfire in Gear, Leer County. In Kuerguini, Guit
County, UNMISS observed a military parade of the pro -Taban Deng SPLA in
Opposition on 4 July, during which the Deputy Minister of Defence and Veteran
Affairs highlighted the Government’s plan to reintegrate pro-Taban Deng SPLA in
Opposition forces into SPLA. The SPLA Division IV Commander also reported the
withdrawal of SPLA forces from Pilling, Leer County. Clashes between SPLA and
pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition forces continued in Leer County, however.
19. In Jonglei, the security situation remained unstable. The SPLA Brigade
Commander in Pibor reported that most of the SPLA soldiers statione d in Rate,
Pochala County, had abandoned their barracks, owing to lack of food and salary
arrears. On 13 June, SPLA soldiers denied a United Nations agency aircraft
permission to take off from the Pochala airfield, citing grievances over the
non-payment of salaries, and temporarily held the aircraft, crew and passeng ers,
who were released on 14 June. The pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition Commander in
Lankien claimed that, on 10 July, Government forces in Waat attacked Walgak in
Akobo County but were reportedly pushed back by opposition forces.
Greater Equatoria region
20. The security situation in some areas of the Equatorias was tense, with reports
of clashes between the SPLA and opposition forces, as well as the killing of
civilians and ambushes along major roadways. In Eastern Equatoria, the situation
was particularly tense around Torit, with confrontations between SPLA and the
pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition. On 8 June, a convoy of vehicles escorted by SPLA
was ambushed, leading to the deaths of at least 18 civilians, including seven
women, and SPLA soldiers. The pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition reportedly
claimed responsibility for the attack. On 13 June, armed men reportedly fired upon
the vehicle of the Governor of Imatong on the Torit-Katire road. The following day,
SPLA conducted a military operation against pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition
elements south of Torit, reportedly causing civilian casualties. Further clashes were
reported on 20 June.
21. In Central Equatoria, there were continued reports of clashes between the
SPLA and opposition forces. On 29 June, a pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition official
claimed that SPLA forces from Kaia clashed with opposition forces in Yoldu,
Morobo County, resulting in civilian casualties. Insecurity along the roads also
continued. On 7 June, armed men reportedly opened fire on a non -governmental
organization vehicle along the Yei-Lainya road, injuring one person. On 10 June,
three persons were killed and two others injured when armed men ambushed two
commercial vehicles between Kenyi and Loka. On 13 June, an officer of the
National Police Service was reportedly killed in an ambush on the Terakeka Mingkaman road. Armed violence has continued to hamper free movement on the
principal arteries connecting Juba to Bor and Juba to Pibor. On 26 August, an
American journalist reportedly embedded with pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition
forces was killed in clashes with SPLA in Kaia, Central Equatoria. Both sides have
accused the other of initiating the fighting.
22. In Western Equatoria, localized insecurity continued, while the government of
Gbudwe continued its efforts to integrate surrendered armed elements. On 2 June,
local authorities reported that an armed group attacked the local police station in
Yeri Payam, Mvolo County. On 13 June, two officers of the National Police Service
were reportedly killed and two others injured when armed men attacked the police
station in Maridi. There were also localized tensions in Yambio County, with reports
of incidents at an internally displaced person camp in Bangasu and tensions between
the Azande and Jur-Beri communities. On 29 June, one person was reportedly killed
and two persons were abducted when armed men attacked members of the Jur -Beri
17-15472

5/17

S/2017/784

tribe in the area. On 3 July, six houses of members of the Azande community were
burned in Yambio County, along the Bazungua road.
Greater Bahr el-Ghazal region
23. The security situation in greater Bahr el-Ghazal was also tense, with reports of
intermittent clashes and security incidents involving Government forces and armed
groups. Tensions continued between SPLA and opposition elements south of Wau.
On 15 June, SPLA claimed to UNMISS that clashes had occurred between SPLA
and opposition elements in the Bazia area. According to some civilians, SPLA
clashed with the pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition in the Bagari area on 20 June. In
Boro Medina in Western Bahr el-Ghazal, there were clashes between SPLA and
pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition forces on 5 and 6 July, resulting in at least
17 casualties on both sides, and SPLA subsequently claimed to have regained
control of Boro Medina. In Northern Bahr el-Ghazal, SPLA clashed with an armed
group near Aweil East and the border with the Sudan, on 12 June. UNMISS
conducted a patrol to Baac County to follow up on alleged attacks on SPLA
positions in Adol Payam on 28 June. County officials claimed that Misseriya
nomads from the Sudan carried out the attack, resulting in civilian casualties.
24. In Lakes, several security incidents were reported. The Rumbek County
Commissioner reportedly sustained minor injuries in an ambush in Rumbek C entre
County on 14 June. In Rumbek East County, armed men reportedly robbed a senior
SPLA member and three bodyguards along the road to Aduel Payam, Rumbek East
County. Meanwhile, organized forces conducted forced disarmament in Rumbek
town on 28 June. According to an official of Western Lakes, the disarmament
process would be extended to cattle camps there.
Intercommunal conflict
25. In parallel to the broader national conflict, intercommunal tensions also
affected the security environment in different areas of the country. Tensions between
the Bor Dinka and Murle communities continued in Jonglei, despite a cessation of
hostilities signed in May. On 15 July, Kolmerek was attacked by members of the
Murle community, which left at least 31 persons killed, 20 injured, several children
abducted and reportedly 7,000 cattle stolen. The violence produced significant
levels of destruction, including the burning of several homes. An investigative
commission established by First Vice-President Taban Deng Gai has yet to publish
its findings.
26. In greater Bahr el-Ghazal, cycles of intercommunal violence escalated in June
and July between the Apuk and Aguok communities of Gogrial and spilled over to
parts of neighbouring Tonj, Wau and Aweil East. As a consequence, President Kiir
on 17 July declared a three-month state of emergency in Gogrial and in some parts
of Tonj, Wau and Aweil East. On 23 July, in Lakes, intercommunal violence among
the Dinka subclans resulted in 19 civilian casualties.

IV. Humanitarian situation
27. Conflict and hunger continued to drive displacement: more than 3.9 million
South Sudanese have been forced to flee their homes, and 1.9 million internally
displaced persons and over 2 million refugees have been hosted by the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, Kenya, the
Sudan and Uganda. As at 18 August, Uganda alone hosted more than 1 million
South Sudanese refugees, the majority of them women and children. According to
the revised inter-agency refugee response plan for South Sudan, led by the Office of
6/17

17-15472

S/2017/784

the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the South Sudan
refugee crisis has become the fastest growing refugee situation in the world.
28. Humanitarian needs continued to rise because of the impact of armed conflict,
deteriorating economic conditions, disease, intercommunal violence and
displacement in many parts of the country. Food insecurity reached unprecedented
levels in South Sudan in June, and an estimated 6 million people (50 per cent of the
population) were severely food insecure in June and July, including 1.7 million on
the brink of famine. Although the mobilization of a large -scale multisectoral
humanitarian response was able to halt the localized famine declared in February in
Leer and Mayendit in Unity, 45,000 people were estimated to be facing catastrophic
food insecurity (famine) in Koch, Leer and Mayendit Counties in Unit y and also in
Ayod County, Jonglei.
29. The population continues to be more susceptible to disease owing to the
ongoing conflict and crisis. As the malaria season peaks, more than 1.3 million
cases and nearly 2,500 related deaths have been reported since January 2017. Since
June 2016, South Sudan has experienced the deadliest cholera outbreak since its
independence. Cumulatively, 19,851 cholera cases, including 355 deaths (a case
fatality rate of 1.8 per cent), were reported in 26 counties across South Sudan as at
13 August. An estimated 1,024 cases of measles, with 24 deaths, have been
reported, mostly affecting children under 5.
30. In June and July, the numbers of reported incidents of humanitarian access
restrictions were the highest in 2017, totalling 100 and 136 cases, respectively.
Partners reported a substantial rise in incidents involving violence against personnel
and assets, with 46 cases in June and 49 in July compared to 29 cases in May.
Insecurity also disrupted aid operations and forced the relocation of at least
70 humanitarian workers from areas of Upper Nile, Unity, Jonglei, Eastern
Equatoria and Western Bahr el-Ghazal. Violence against aid workers and assets
included break-ins, looting of humanitarian supplies and other assets and physical
assault. At least 18 humanitarian compounds (offices, residences and warehouses)
were broken into countrywide in June and July, resulting in the looting of
humanitarian supplies, including more than 670 tons of food items. On 27 August,
two United Nations Volunteers who had been detained for more than one week by
opposition forces were released in Central Equatoria.
31. Despite the increasingly hostile operating environment, humanitarians scaled
up their response through intensive negotiations and sustained advocacy regarding
the need for free, safe and unhindered humanitarian access. In 2017, more than
3.8 million people have been reached so far with humanitarian and protection
assistance. This includes 2.5 million people who received food assistance, more
than 1 million people who accessed improved water sources, more than 100,000
children under 5 treated for severe malnutrition and 1,629,653 children between
6 and 9 months vaccinated against measles.
32. Funding shortfalls remained a challenge: the Humanitarian Response Plan for
2017 is just 65 per cent funded, leaving a gap of $578 million.

V. Implementation of the Mission’s mandated tasks
A.

Protection of civilians
33. UNMISS continued to follow a three-tiered approach to the protection of
civilians. Under the first tier, protection through dialogue and political engagement,
my Special Representative exercised his good offices to engage national and local

17-15472

7/17

S/2017/784

authorities, and senior military officials. In those engagements, he stressed the
Government’s responsibility to protect civilians and the need for the parties to cease
hostilities and ensure unhindered access for UNMISS and humanitarian actors.
UNMISS also conducted 28 workshops at the subnational level on conflict
management, reconciliation and social cohesion through which 1,658 participants
were reached, some from UNMISS protection of civilians sites, incl uding local
government representatives, traditional leaders, youth and women.
34. In Kuacjok, UNMISS facilitated a local leadership dialogue to help to mitigate
recurrent communal violence between the Apuk and Aguok communities in Gogrial.
In Rumbek, UNMISS supported a follow-up conference to foster peaceful crossborder pastoral migration between Amadi, Gok, Eastern Lakes, Western Lakes and
Terakeka from 14 to 18 August. In Yambio, UNMISS in collaboration with Gbudwe
authorities implemented a series of community dialogues to ease tensions between
the various ethnic groups.
35. Under the second tier, protection of civilians under threat of physical violence,
as at 29 August, the Mission protected 212,969 internally displaced persons in six
UNMISS protection of civilians sites. This includes 114,683 in Bentiu, 38,448 in
Juba, 24,402 in Malakal, 651 in Melut, 1,940 in Bor and 32,845 in Wau. A
temporary protection area in Leer, southern Unity, also continued to offer refuge to
more than 1,000 displaced persons. A total of 614 persons suspected of having
committed serious security incidents within the sites were detained in the UNMISS
holding facilities in Juba, Malakal and Bentiu from January to July 2017. In order to
reinforce the civilian character of the sites, UNMISS conducted sensitization
campaigns in Bentiu, Malakal and Wau on relevant site regulations. On 28 July,
22 opposition soldiers breached the perimeter of the UNMISS Bentiu protection
site. UNMISS subsequently met with the leaders of the displaced persons to ensure
that the soldiers were escorted out of the protection site. Peacekeepers in Bentiu
have also continued to intervene to prevent attempts at forced recruitment of
civilians by armed groups immediately outside the sites; most recently, they rescued
three abducted youths on 23 August.
36. UNMISS continued to focus on pre-empting, deterring and mitigating violence
against civilians in areas beyond UNMISS protection of civilians sites. Efforts
included continued proactive deployment and patrolling, including dismounted
integrated patrols comprising military, police and civilian personnel to facilitate
engagement with host communities and displaced persons. During the reporting
period, 6,853 patrols were conducted. UNMISS continued regular patrols outside
the protection of civilians sites in Juba, Bentiu, Bor, Malakal and Wau. Despite the
poor condition of the roads during the rainy season, UNMISS undertook significant
outreach activities to the conflict-affected areas of Kajo-keji and Yei in Central
Equatoria, Magwe in Eastern Equatoria, Raja and Deim Zubeir in Western Bahr
el-Ghazal, Mayendit in Unity, Manyabol, Pochala and Jalle in Jonglei, and Kodok,
Tonga and Aburoc in Upper Nile. UNMISS conducted a series of mounted patrols
along the Juba-Nimule road in Central Equatoria in order to improve the security
situation along the route. In July, UNMISS swiftly reinforced its base in Torit,
Eastern Equatoria, in response to heightened insecurity.
37. In order to address incidents of conflict-related sexual and gender-based
violence against displaced women and girls, UNMISS enhanced integrated and
active patrolling in areas where women and girls were most at risk. In the protection
of civilians sites in Bor and Bentiu, sensitization campaigns reminded w omen to
adhere to the firewood patrols to avoid sexual assaults. The United Nations team
supported the SPLA Taskforce on Sexual Violence in developing an action plan on
sexual violence crime prevention and response. UNMISS also organized events in

8/17

17-15472

S/2017/784

the protection of civilians sites in Juba on prevention of sexual violence with 400
participants, 305 women and 95 men.
38. Under the third tier, establishment of a protective environment, UNMISS
continued to engage with national and local authorities and civil s ociety to create a
more conducive environment for combating impunity for abuses and violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law by all parties to the conflict. In Bor
and Malakal, UNMISS organized a series of workshops to hear views of
representatives of women and youth on the minimum conditions for return and
reintegration. In response to the interest in return expressed by displaced persons in
Melut, UNMISS and humanitarian partners conducted consultations to explore
possible solutions. In Wau, UNMISS engaged with local authorities to promote a
protective environment outside the protection site that would allow displaced
populations to return to their areas of origin.
39. Within the framework of the Global Open Days on Women, Peace and
Security, UNMISS, with United Nations agencies, organized a national conference
at which 136 women deliberated on key areas such as peace and security and
participation of women in conflict resolution. UNMISS also continued to host
sensitization workshops for community members and local and national actors on
gender equality and sexual and gender-based violence, including conflict-related
sexual violence. UNMISS drew attention to the linkage between dowry and gender based violence in addition to sensitizing members of the SPLM Youth League on the
Mission’s mandate and work on gender equality, women’s empowerment and ending
violence against women and girls.
40. UNMISS enhanced its communications outreach through multimedia content
production. Radio Miraya added 10 hours of weekly programming focused on
promoting dialogue and peace initiatives and combating hate speech.

B.

Monitoring and investigating human rights
41. The human rights environment in South Sudan remained fragile, primarily
because of the ongoing conflict in various parts of the country. Conflict -related
violence continued, including a high level of sexual violence, as well as
extrajudicial killings, arbitrary detention and ill-treatment, road ambushes, and
intercommunal violence. During the reporting period, UNMISS recorded the killing
of 110 civilians, including 39 women, and the wounding of 45 others, although the
actual number of casualties is likely to be much higher. The Mission ’s ability to
monitor and verify alleged human rights violations and abuses, including sexual
violence by militias, armed youth and elements of security forces, is greatly
hampered by the continued insecurity and restrictions of movement to locations of
alleged violations and of access to state institutions, incl uding places of detention.
42. Allegations of human rights violations continued to be made mainly against
SPLA and in some instances against armed opposition groups, including SPLM/A in
Opposition. For instance, of the 26 cases of conflict-related sexual violence
documented in June and July, 11 were attributed to SPLA and pro -Government
forces, and 7 to SPLA in Opposition and its affiliated groups, the rest being
attributed to unidentified perpetrators. In Wau, Western Bahr el -Ghazal, UNMISS
received information that, in order to avoid detaining suspects, police increasingly
mediate minor criminal cases, thereby excluding the possibility of judicial review.
On 27 June, two young men previously sentenced to death, and believed to be
minors at the time of the committed crime, were executed in Juba, raising concerns
about the continuing implementation of the death sentence in South Sudan, despite
the stated moratorium on the death penalty. Physical conditions in many detention

17-15472

9/17

S/2017/784

centres and prisons remained poor, and cases of prolonged, arbitrary and proxy
detention were common across the country.
43. The Special Tribunal formed by the General Court Martial held hearings,
which started on 30 May, for the trial of 12 SPLA soldiers accused of committing
crimes and human rights violations, including rape, murder, damage to property and
theft, on 11 July 2016 at the Terrain Hotel compound in Juba. On 9 August, the
Special Tribunal granted the prosecutor ’s application to allow victims unwilling or
unable to travel to South Sudan to provide statements via videoconference. The
court has also allowed the use of closed sessions to protect the identities of
witnesses. Observers, including UNMISS, remain concerned about other aspects of
the hearings, however, and are monitoring the proceedings to assess compliance
with national and international human rights standards, including the right of
victims to an effective remedy, the right to fair trial and respect for due process of
the accused.
44. A challenging environment persists for media workers in South Sudan. On
7 June, the Media Authority publically disclosed that it had declined to accredit
20 foreign journalists for reportedly producing unsubstantiated reports or allegedly
inciting hate. On 10 July, the National Security Services arrested the television
Director of the South Sudan Broadcasting Corporation for allegedly having failed to
provide live coverage of President Kiir ’s speech on the anniversary of
independence. Released on 19 July, the Director was subsequently dismissed from
his position. On 17 July, the South Sudan National Communication Authority
blocked the websites of four news outlets for reportedly disseminating messages
perceived as hostile by the Government. The decision was condemned by several
civil society activists, and by national and international media organizations.
45. Incidents involving hate speech continued to threaten and incite violence. On
28 June and 4 July, the Bor Community Youth Association sent letters to a United
Nations agency based in Bor, Jonglei, warning Equatorians working for
non-governmental organizations and United Nations agencies to immediately leave
Bor or face consequences. In response, on 4 July, a document purporting to be a
press release originating from the United States o f Equatoria in the Republic of
South Sudan characterized the threats as a declaration of war against Equatorians
and urged displaced Bor Dinka within the Equatorias to leave. Condemnation by
national authorities and civil society groups contributed to defu se tensions. In
connection with the letters, 16 individuals were arrested and subsequently released.
On 20 June, the Media Authority released a memorandum prompting media
organizations to avoid the dissemination of statements that threaten, insult, ridicul e
and abuse the identity of a tribe or community and to avoid using derogatory words
that have the potential to incite violence. Through regular engagements with
authorities, civil society and journalists, UNMISS continued to promote greater
understanding of permissible restrictions to freedom of expression so that the
curbing of hate speech is not used as a pretext to deter political activism and
suppress dissenting voices.
46. During the reporting period, 103 incidents of grave violations against c hildren
were reported. Of those, 61 incidents affecting 3,015 children (1,382 boys, 933 girls
and 700 whose sex is unknown) were verified. These included incidents of killing
and maiming, recruitment and use of children, and attacks on schools and hospitals.
To date, 45 schools (37 verified and 8 unverified) remain occupied and are being
used for military purposes. The United Nations continues to advocate at different
levels for the armed actors to vacate the schools. In August 2017, as a result of the
engagement of the country task force on monitoring and reporting with the Taban
Deng faction of SPLA in Opposition in Jonglei, the United Nations and the National
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Commission verified reports of
10/17

17-15472

S/2017/784

recruitment and use of 313 boys associated with SPLM/A in Opposition aligned
with Taban Deng Gai in Pibor, Jonglei. As part of its child protection
mainstreaming, UNMISS conducted 36 training sessions on child protection for
1,374 participants (833 UNMISS personnel, 425 SPLA members, and 116 SPLA in
Opposition members).

C.

Creating the conditions conducive to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance
47. UNMISS continues to provide force protection for food delivery, convoys and
other humanitarian activities. Patrols aimed at accessing areas where violence,
displacement and human rights violations had been reported and where
humanitarians were providing services continued to face frequent obstructions,
however, despite continued actions by UNMISS to persist through roadblocks and
other restrictions.
48. In response to heavy gunfire approximately 18 km from Bunj town on 6 and
11 July, an UNMISS quick reaction force was dispatched, and relocated
18 non-governmental organization staff to the UNMISS base. Also on 11 July,
UNMISS relocated 13 humanitarian workers because of an exchange of fire
between an armed group and SPLA soldiers near the UNMISS temporary operating
base in Leer. In Pibor, UNMISS evacuated 13 members of a non -governmental
organization from their compound when it was attacked on 12 July.
49. The United Nations Mine Action Service deployed 33 mine action teams to
survey and clear roads, airstrips and helicopter landing sites to enable security and
humanitarian access. During the reporting period, 1,345,612 m 2 were surveyed and
released; a further 5,377 explosive hazards and 33,963 rounds of small arms
ammunition were removed and destroyed. In Aburoc, Upper Nile, the Service
conducted mine action awareness campaigns and surveyed over 30 km of road to
facilitate movement by UNMISS and humanitarian actors to respond to the
immediate needs of internally displaced persons.

D.

Supporting the implementation of the peace agreement
50. UNMISS continued to host regular forums for international partners and the
“Friends of South Sudan” group to support the work of the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission and align the positions of the international community prior
to the Commission’s plenary meetings. My Special Representative also continued to
exercise his good offices to advocate for implementation of the peace agreement,
including through regular meetings with the President and other national leaders in
Juba, and in the field through regular interactions with state and local leadership.
51. UNMISS supported the operations of the Ceasefire and Transitional Security
Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism by providing force protection and logistical
and administrative assistance to the Mechanism’s monitoring and verification teams
during their field visits to critical areas. UNMISS also provided support for the
establishment of new monitoring and verification team sites at Bunj and Renk,
raising the number of sites in South Sudan to 16. UNMISS is also monitoring
progress towards the establishment of cantonment sites by participating in regular
meetings of the Joint Military Ceasefire Commission and, on 15 June, the United
Nations Mine Action Service completed the survey and clearance of the cantonment
site in Juba identified by the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commissio n.

17-15472

11/17

S/2017/784

52. In support of the establishment of the Joint Integrated Police, UNMISS
continued to work with the Joint Management Team comprising officers from the
South Sudan National Police Service and the SPLM/A in Opposition faction led by
First Vice-President Taban Deng Gai. On 17 June, 1,230 of the 1,253 Joint
Integrated Police recruits designated by the ministerial order graduated at a
ceremony presided over by President Kiir. Of the 1,230 graduated recruits, 917
successfully completed the training supported by the United Nations police, and 336
are currently undergoing remedial training.
53. On 20 and 21 July in Juba, almost two years after the Hybrid Court was first
mandated, a delegation from the African Union Commission held the first meeting
with the Government concerning its establishment. The Under-Secretary-General
for Legal Affairs and United Nations Legal Counsel participated in the meeting at
the invitation of the Acting Legal Counsel of the African Union Commission. The
African Union Commission delegation and the Government agreed on a joint road
map for the establishment of the Hybrid Court for South Sudan. A follow -up
meeting was held from 8 to 11 August in Addis Ababa, during which representatives
of the Government and the Office of the Legal Co unsel of the African Union
Commission discussed and agreed, at the technical level, the content of the legal
instruments for the establishment of the Hybrid Court. The Office of Legal Affairs
of the United Nations Secretariat provided technical assistance during the meeting.
The legal instruments will now be submitted for internal review and approval within
the Government and the African Union Commission.

VI. Mission staffing and status of deployment
54. As at 29 August, the strength of UNMISS civilian personnel stood at 2,621,
comprising 861 international staff members (including 223 female members
representing 26 per cent), 1,372 national staff members (including 193 female staff
members representing 14 per cent) and 388 United Nations Volunteers (in cluding
121 female volunteers representing 31 per cent).
55. The police strength as at 29 August stood at 1,672 of the authorized 2,101
officers, including 614 individual police officers (with 107 female officers
representing 17 per cent), 986 personnel in formed police units (with 127 female
officers representing 13 per cent) and 72 corrections officers (with 20 female
officers representing 28 per cent). The arrival of a Ghanaian formed police unit of
170 officers in Wau and the deployment of the all-female Rwandan formed police
unit in Juba is expected in October/November.
56. The UNMISS troop strength stood at 12,817 military personnel, including 186
military liaison officers (with 8 female officers representing 4 per cent), 378
military staff officers (with 28 female officers representing 7 per cent) and 12,253
military contingent personnel (with 411 female officers representing 3 per cent).
The 378-strong contingent of military engineers and medical staff from the United
Kingdom completed its deployment in June. Following the arrival late in February
of a 255-strong advance party of the incoming Bangladeshi infantry battalion in
Wau, the main body of a 595-strong Bangladeshi battalion is now in the Mission. It
is expected that a 200-strong Ghanaian contingent will be deployed to Aweil in
October.
57. The regional protection force continued its deployment to South Sudan, which
will proceed gradually over the coming months. The Bangladesh construction
engineering company and the Nepalese high-readiness company are now in the
Mission area, and an advance company of the Rwandan battalion arrived on
5 August. As the planning for the full deployment of the regional protection force
12/17

17-15472

S/2017/784

progresses, critical issues and decisions have yet to be resolved, including cont inued
government resistance to the force’s mandated role to support the protection of Juba
International Airport.
58. UNMISS has intensified efforts to raise awareness of the United Nations
standards of conduct and to implement the Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse, including the new approach outlined in his
report of February 2017 (A/71/818). UNMISS continued to implement the threepronged approach of prevention, enforcement and remedial action and sought to
strengthen its enforcement efforts through an expanded pool of conduct and
discipline focal points. UNMISS also partnered with the United Nations country
team in revamping the Inter-Agency Task Force on Protection against Sexual
Exploitation and Abuse.

VII. Violations of the status-of-forces agreement, international
humanitarian law, and security of United Nations personnel
59. During the reporting period, UNMISS recorded 43 violations of the status -offorces agreement, at least seven of which were incidents involving violations by the
Government of its obligation to ensure the safety and security of UNMISS, both
staff and property. Of particular concern were the explosion of a rocket -propelled
grenade above the UNMISS base in Bor fired from a Government-controlled
location; an incident in which SPLA soldiers pointed their weapons at and advanced
towards UNMISS forces inside the weapon-free zone outside the UNMISS
protection sites in Juba; the firing of bullets near the UNMISS temporary operating
base in Leer on two occasions; the firing of a heavy machine gun by an SPLA
soldier in close proximity to the UNMISS Tomping compound in Juba; and an
incident in which a National Security Services officer pointed a gun at an UNMISS
member in Bor.
60. Other violations recorded by UNMISS included 14 incidents involving
restriction of movement affecting UNMISS operations; one incident involving
disregard for the inviolability of UNMISS premises; two cases of interference with
the implementation of the UNMISS mandate; and 10 cases of arrest and detention of
UNMISS members, seven of whom were released after periods of detention ranging
from one day to one week. One staff member who was arrested on 23 August is still
detained in Juba. Two other staff members who were arrested in 2014 have never
been charged and UNMISS has been denied access since 2015. Four incidents were
also recorded involving violations of the obligation to facilitate entry into and
departure from South Sudan by immigration officials at Juba International Airport.
61. An increasing number of UNMISS personnel and international contractors
have been harassed, threatened with deportation and/or asked to pay visa fees.
Furthermore, the Government continued to impose immigration procedures specific
to UNMISS staff and international contractors contrary to what has been agreed in
the status-of-forces agreement. This has caused disruptions and significant delays to
UNMISS flight operations and frequent backlogs of personnel awaiting clearance to
enter the country.
62. Four incidents involving SPLA in Opposition were recorded, three of which
entailed violations of freedom of movement, while one involved disregard for the
inviolability of UNMISS premises. The Mission continues to notify the Government
of violations through notes verbales and at meetings with relevant officials. A
monthly matrix of incidents is also shared with the Government.

17-15472

13/17

S/2017/784

63. UNMISS continues implementing a series of security risk management
measures aimed at enhancing the safety and security of United Nations personnel,
adopted by the security management team following the crisis of July 2016. Review
and assessment of the security situation and the use of an alert state system
continue, addressing the prevailing security situation in a timely manner.
64. Despite the Government’s stated consent to the deployment of the regional
protection force, authorities continue to reject any activities related to protection of
the Juba airport, which they maintain would be an infringement of national
sovereignty. The arrival of the Rwandan advance company of the regional
protection force late in August at the Tomping base adjacent to the airport prompted
the Government to ground all UNMISS flight operations in the c ountry for a period
of three days. The issue was resolved following engagement by my Special
Representative, and the subsequent relocation of the company to the Mission ’s base
at the United Nations House on the outskirts of Juba. However, on 28 August, a
company of Nepalese peacekeepers on a rotation from Wau to Juba was also denied
access to the Tomping base by SPLA. UNMISS leadership continues to engage with
the Government, the National Security Services and military hierarchies to address
these obstructions and to clarify the mandate of the regional protection force.

VIII. Financial aspects
65. The General Assembly, by its resolution 71/308 of 30 June 2017, appropriated
the amount of $1,071,000,000 for the maintenance of the Mission for the period
from 1 July 2017 to 30 June 2018.
66. As at 1 September 2017, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special Account
for UNMISS amount to $609.6 million. Total outstanding assessed contributions for
all peacekeeping operations at the same date amount to $4,188.9 million.
67. Reimbursement of troop and formed police unit costs has been made for the
period up to 30 April 2017, while reimbursement of t he costs of contingent-owned
equipment has been partially made for the period up to 31 March 2017, in
accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

IX. Observations and recommendations
68. Despite repeated calls from the international community, including the
Security Council, there has been very limited progress made by the parties to cease
hostilities and return to the path of dialogue and implementation of the peace
agreement. As described in this report, hostilities have continued on the ground
between SPLA and the Riek Machar faction of SPLA in Opposition, as well as other
armed opposition groups. Of particular concern are the significant hostilities that
have occurred in the Upper Nile region, where SPLA has undertaken major military
offensives against opposition strongholds of strategic and symbolic significance.
Conflict has also persisted between SPLA and various armed groups in Jonglei,
greater Equatoria and greater Bahr el-Ghazal. This sustained level of conflict, well
into the usually more calm rainy season, has had dire humanitarian consequences
for civilians in the affected areas and disrupted life -saving humanitarian operations.
The climate is also marked by abhorrent abuses of human rights, which continue
unabated.
69. In the light of the ongoing fighting in different parts of the country, I urge the
parties to honour their commitment to immediately cease hostilities and for the
Government to restore the political freedoms necessary for peace. I call on the
14/17

17-15472

S/2017/784

Government to ensure respect for human rights and accountability for human rights
violations, including through the establishment of all the transitional justice
mechanisms under the peace agreement, and in this regard I am encouraged by the
Government’s willingness to engage with the African Union on the establishment of
the court.
70. While I am encouraged by the increased engagement of IGAD towards
revitalizing the peace agreement, questions remain over the commitment of the
Government and the precise scope of the revitalization initiative. IGAD and
Government officials have stressed that the revitalization initiative is designed to
enhance the implementation of the peace agreement and is not a forum for
renegotiation. Opposition leaders appear divided about the initiative, however, w ith
some advocating a revision of the peace agreement to reflect the evolution and
expansion of the conflict since the signing of the agreement, and others requesting a
new process entirely outside the auspices of IGAD.
71. In parallel, the SPLM reunification talks in Uganda facilitated by President
Museveni to recommit various SPLM factions to implementing the Arusha
Agreement have been described by the participants as well as by IGAD as
complementary to the IGAD revitalization initiative. Meanwhile, auth orities within
the Government of Kenya are consulting with opposition leaders with a view to a
separate reconciliation initiative. The success of these various initiatives will
depend on their ability to restore inclusivity in the implementation of the pea ce
agreement and its core elements within a credible timeline, and coordination
between regional and international partners will be essential to ensure their
effectiveness.
72. While the National Dialogue Steering Committee has made efforts towards a
more broadly representative and participatory dialogue process, key opposition
leaders continue to voice scepticism about the credibility and inclusivity of the
process. In public statements responding to requests of the Steering Committee
leadership for meetings, Riek Machar and General Thomas Cirilo Swaka of the
National Salvation Front/Army welcomed a national dialogue process in principle,
but stated that the current environment is not conducive to a genuine and
participatory dialogue and that a negotiated peace process is needed first in order to
end the ongoing violence. I welcome the announcement on 10 August of the release
of 30 political detainees, and call on the Government to take further steps to ensure
the release of remaining detainees and ensure that enabling conditions for a credible
national dialogue are put in place. This includes enabling freedom of expression and
of the media. I strongly condemn the continuing harassment and even killing of
journalists as heinous acts which have no place in a d emocratic society.
73. I commend the efforts of UNMISS in the extensive consultations it has
undertaken at the subnational and national level, with women representing a wide
spectrum of stakeholders, including community and faith -based organizations,
national and subnational parliaments and women’s groups in UNMISS protection of
civilians sites. I call upon the Mission to continue such dialogue, and I urge all
partners to ensure that women, youth and elders continue to be part of the peace and
political processes in South Sudan.
74. I must reiterate my calls on the Government to abide by its commitments to
remove obstructions to UNMISS and humanitarian operations, including its consent
to the full deployment of the regional protection force. While I was en couraged to
see that the recent issues relating to the arrival of the Rwandan advance company
were swiftly addressed, I remain concerned that some members of the Government
continue to publicly question the intent of the force, and that these
misunderstandings continue to result in significant obstructions. These actions,
17-15472

15/17

S/2017/784

along with continued movement restrictions and other violations of the status -offorces agreement, as well as the shockingly high number of obstructions and
incidents of harassment of humanitarian workers, undermine the ability of the
United Nations and the international community to fulfil their mandates. I call on
the Government to work with the United Nations and the humanitarian community
in a spirit of partnership towards the common goal of bettering the lives of the
people of South Sudan.
75. I wish to convey my sincere appreciation for the steadfast commitment of
UNMISS military, police and civilian personnel, who, under the leadership of my
Special Representative, David Shearer, continue to work courageously to protect
hundreds of thousands of civilians, safeguard human rights, facilitate the work of
humanitarians and promote an inclusive political process. I particularly thank the
troop- and police-contributing countries that have provided much-needed uniformed
personnel and assets to the Mission. I further commend the United Nations country
team and non-governmental organization partners for their tremendous courage and
sacrifice in providing vital humanitarian assistance to the pop ulation, under
increasingly arduous and challenging conditions. I thank my Special Envoy,
Nicholas Haysom, for his support to the peace process at the regional level and
I commend the steadfast commitment of the Chair of the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission, President Festus Mogae, and the African Union High
Representative, President Alpha Oumar Konaré, to address the plight of the civilian
populations of South Sudan in partnership with the United Nations.

16/17

17-15472

17-15472

S/2017/784

17/17
