S/PRST/2016/18

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 December 2016
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7826th meeting of the Security Council, held on 5 December 2016, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo”, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“Following the visit of the Security Council to the Democratic Republic
of Congo from 11 to 13 November, the President of the Security Council made
the following statement on behalf of the Council, regarding the situation in the
country:
“The Security Council is monitoring very closely the recent political
development in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and remains
concerned about the risk for destabilization of the country and the region as a
whole, as illustrated by the violence of 19-20 September 2016, in the absence
of a swift and consensual resolution to the current political crisis.
“The Security Council thanks the Government of the DRC, the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) and all its interlocutors for the fruitful discussions that
have taken place during this visit.
“The Security Council acknowledges the political agreement reached on
18 October 2016, and takes note of the appointment of the new prime minister.
The Security Council is encouraged by the unanimous commitment of
Congolese actors to prevent destabilization and to continue inclusive
discussions in order to reach a broad consensus towards free, fair, credible,
inclusive, transparent, peaceful and timely presidential and leg islative
elections leading to a peaceful transfer of power, in accordance with the
Congolese Constitution, for the stability, development and consolidation of
constitutional democracy in the DRC. The Security Council further calls on
political groups that did not sign the political agreement to remain engaged in
dialogue. The Security Council welcomes commitments to respect and
preserve the constitution in letter and spirit and looks forward to the
implementation of further confidence building measures to e ase tensions and
build consensus.
“The Security Council welcomes the ongoing mediation efforts led by
the Conférence épiscopale Nationale du Congo (CENCO) and calls on all

16-21499 (E)

061216

*1621499*

S/PRST/2016/18

political actors to continue working in good faith and in a spirit of compromise
towards a swift political solution, before 19 December 2016, that paves the
way for peaceful, credible, inclusive and timely elections as soon as possible
in the DRC. The Security Council further encourages the region to pursue its
efforts in support of the mediation.
“The Security Council urges the government as well as all relevant
parties to ensure an environment conducive to a free, fair, credible, inclusive,
transparent elections, as recalled in Security Council resolution 2277 (2016),
which includes free and constructive political debate, freedom of opinion and
expression, freedom of assembly, equitable access to media including State
media, safety and freedom of movement for all candidates, as well as for
election observers and witnesses, journalists, human rights defenders and
actors from civil society, including women.
“The Security Council calls on the authorities to respect human rights
and fundamental freedoms, especially the right of peaceful assembly, and to
exercise maximum restraint in their response to protests, and also calls upon
the opposition forces, on their side, to show responsibility by ensuring the
peaceful character of their demonstrations.
“The Security Council reiterates its call upon all political parties, their
supporters, and other political actors to exercise maximum restraint in their
actions and statements, to refrain from violence, violent speeches or other
provocations and to address their differences peacefully. The Security Council
calls on the Government of the DRC to hold accountable those responsible for
the killings on 19-20 September 2016 and all violations and abuses of human
rights. The Security Council takes note of the recent visit to DRC of the Office
of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court.
“The Security Council stresses the importance for the Government of the
DRC and its national partners to take all steps to accelerate preparations for
the elections without further delays, including by e xpediting the update of the
voter registry.
“The Security Council is also deeply concerned by the humanitarian
situation that continues to severely affect the civilian population in eastern
DRC and the persistence of violence in eastern DRC, in particular in North
Kivu Province where nearly 840,000 people were internally displaced as of
September 30, 2016 and more than 700 civilians have been killed since
October 2014. The Security Council urges authorities to hold accountable
those deemed responsible for the violence.
“The Security Council calls on the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to take further action, in accordance with international
law, including international humanitarian law and international human rights
law, as applicable, and with the support of MONUSCO in accordance with its
mandate, to end the threat posed by the ADF, the FDLR and all other armed
groups operating in the DRC. The Security Council encourages further
cooperation between the Forces Armées de la République Dé mocratique du
Congo (FARDC) and MONUSCO in tackling this violence and their efforts to
neutralize armed groups operating in Eastern Congo.

2/3

16-21499

S/PRST/2016/18

“The Security Council reiterates its full support to MONUSCO and its
appreciation for the Special Representative’s leadership in trying to ease
tensions. The Security Council urges MONUSCO to fully implement its
protection of civilians mandate, including to respond to current and ongoing
security threats and reminds troop and police contributing countries of the
need for a comprehensive approach and to take all necessary measures to carry
out MONUSCO’s mandate as set forth in resolution 2277.
“The Security Council welcomes the regional initiatives and efforts by
regional states to promote peace, stability and democrac y in the DRC, to
enhance cooperation towards the neutralization of armed groups in eastern
DRC, including the establishment by the DRC, Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda
of a Joint Follow-up Mechanism, and encourages further action. The Security
Council extends its thanks to Angola, chair of the International Conference of
the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR), for the fruitful discussions held in Luanda
on 14 November 2016. The Security Council also welcomes in that regard the
reform of the governing mechanisms of the PSC Framework, including the
decision to hold one annual high-level meeting of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism in a signatory State, with a view to strengthening regional
ownership of the framework.
“The Security Council expresses its determination to co ntinue to closely
follow the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular the
security conditions on the ground and the efforts to successfully conclude the
electoral process.”

16-21499

3/3
