S/2020/1019

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 October 2020
Original: English

Situation in Abyei
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 33 of Security Council
resolution 2497 (2019), in which the Council requested to be informed of progress in
implementing the mandate of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA). It covers the period since the issuance of my previous report ( S/2020/308),
from 16 April to 15 October 2020. The report provides updates on, inter alia, po litical
developments, the security situation, the operating environment and intercommunal
dynamics. The report also provides updates on progress in the implementation of the
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism.

II. Abyei
Political developments
2.
The reporting period was marked by a continued improvement in bilateral
relations between the Sudan and South Sudan. On 24 September 2020, the two
countries agreed to form a joint technical committee to resume oil production in U nity
State and at other key oil fields. The South Sudanese authorities also facilitated the
negotiation process that led to the initialling, on 31 August, of a peace agreement
between the transitional Government of the Sudan, the Sudanese Revolutionary Fro nt
and the Sudan Liberation Army led by Minni Minawi. The peace agreement was
signed in Juba on 3 October.
3.
In parallel, in Juba, on 27 August 2020, senior officials of the Sudan and South
Sudan expressed their willingness to relaunch the political proce ss on the final status
of Abyei. At the request of the President of South Sudan, Salva Kiir, the Presidential
Adviser for National Security, Tut Gatluak, the Minister for East African Affairs,
Deng Alor, and the Co-Chair for South Sudan of the Abyei Joint Oversight
Committee, Deng Arop, travelled to Khartoum during the third week of September
and met with the Sudanese authorities to discuss the final status of Abyei and other
border areas.
4.
Notwithstanding the continued rapprochement between the Sudan an d South
Sudan, the peace process has made little progress in Abyei. The main developments
at the local level were the appointment by the authorities in Juba and Khartoum of the
countries’ respective chief administrators. On 29 June 2020, the President of S outh

20-13251 (E)

191020

*2013251*

S/2020/1019

Sudan appointed Lieutenant General Kuol Diem Kuol as Chief Administrator for the
Abyei Special Administrative Area. On 20 August, the Chair of the Sovereign Council
of the Sudan, Lieutenant General Abdel Fattah Abdelrahman al-Burhan, signed a
decree appointing Gumaa Dawood Musa Hamdan as Chief Administrator for the
Abyei Administrative Area. This is the first time that Abyei has two chief
administrators.
5.
As part of his familiarization tour, the acting Head of Mission/Force
Commander visited Khartoum from 6 to 10 September 2020. In addition to
introducing himself and the incoming Chief of the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism to relevant counterparts, he discussed issues raised during the
expanded Joint Political and Security Mechanism meeting held in Juba on
19 February. These included the operationalization of the Athony airstrip, measures
to enhance security in Abyei and the resumption of the meetings of the Abyei Joint
Oversight Committee.
6.
On 8 September 2020, the acting Head of Mission/Force Commander met with
the Chair of the Sovereign Council of the Sudan. The Chair welcomed the role played
by UNISFA in ensuring security and stability in the Abyei Area and gave assurances
that UNISFA had the support of the Chief Administrator appointed by the Sudan for
its efforts on the ground. He also noted that the appointment of a civilian Deputy Head
of Mission would go against the spirit of the 2011 Agreement, as would the
operationalization of the Athony airstrip, and announced that a t eam would be
established to study the matter.
7.
On 8 and 9 September 2020, the acting Head of Mission/Force Commander met
with the new Co-Chair for the Sudan of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee, retired
Major General Ezedin Osman. The Co-Chair gave the assurance that he fully
supported the rapid resumption of Committee meetings and of the peace conferences
that UNISFA had proposed to organize at the local level with representatives of the
Ngok Dinka and Misseriya communities.
8.
The acting Head of Mission/Force Commander visited Juba from 21 to
25 September 2020, where he interacted with the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Beatrice Wani Noah, the Minister of Defence, Angelina Teny, and the Chief of Staff
of the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces and the South Sudanese Deputy Co-Chair
of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee. UNISFA welcomed the discussions being
held in Khartoum between the parties on the future of Abyei and noted its continued
availability to facilitate similar discussions at the local lev el. The interlocutors
expressed confidence that the visit by the Presidential Adviser for National Security
and the Minister for East African Affairs to Khartoum would pave the way for a timely
agreement on the final status of Abyei and other border areas, including the 14 Mile
Area. In their view, with the signing of the peace agreement in Juba on 3 October, the
conditions were in place for fruitful discussions on Abyei to be held.
9.
UNISFA reminded its interlocutors of the decisions arising from the meet ing of
the Joint Political and Security Mechanism held on 19 February 2020, some of which
were pending, including the call for the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee to resume
regular meetings. UNISFA noted that some of those pending decisions could usefully
be addressed within the Committee, as could more recent matters, in particular the
appointment of two chief administrators for Abyei and the need to agree on how they
would work together in the interest of the local communities. UNISFA also reiterated
its invitation to South Sudan to take part, alongside Sudanese counterparts, in the
development of a road map for the establishment of the Abyei police service in early
October. Lastly, UNISFA announced its intention to convene a peace meeting before
the end of the year between community representatives in Abyei, in part to ensure a

2/17

20-13251

S/2020/1019

peaceful upcoming migration cycle, and called upon the parties to support those
efforts.
10. On 29 September 2020, the acting Head of Mission/Force Commander engaged
virtually with the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Horn of Africa,
Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, to debrief him on the security and political situation in
Abyei and on his meetings in Khartoum and Juba. The peace process was also
discussed, as was the need for enhanced engagement with the African Union Highlevel Implementation Panel.
Conflict dynamics and the security situation
11. The general security situation in Abyei over the reporting period remained tense.
Of the 40 recorded incidents, 8 are of particular concern and subject to subsequent
investigations: 4 attacks against UNISFA personnel and 4 instances of intercommunal
violence, including armed attacks on villages. There were seven incidents of
particular concern during the previous reporting period.
12. The first two assaults on UNISFA occurred on 24 April 2020, when armed
Misseriya attacked UNISFA troops in Sector Centre. The first attack occurred in the
general area of Nainai and the second at the Alal temporary operating base. Two
Misseriya were killed in the attacks when UNISFA troops returned fire in self defence. The third attack occurred on 12 May, when two soldiers from the Force
Protection Unit assigned to the headquarters of the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism in Kadugli were fired upon while driving from the Kadugli
base to the Murta water point. While their vehicle was damaged, the soldiers were
unharmed and returned safely to the Mechanism’s headquarters. Lastly, on 24 June,
an unknown armed group opened fire on a UNISFA convoy between Goli and Todach
in Sector North, injuring three peacekeepers, one of them critically. He was airlifted
for treatment to Addis Ababa, where he is in stable condition.
13. An incident of intercommunal violence that had a significant impact durin g the
reporting period occurred on 13 April 2020. A group of armed men, suspected to be
Misseriya, attacked the village of Mabok, Sector South, killing four Ngok Dinka,
including the village chief, kidnapping two minors, burning some 50 tukuls and
rustling more than 100 goats. On 8 August, some 70 armed men, suspected to be Ngok
Dinka, attacked fellow Ngok Dinka employed as domestic workers for the Misseriya
residents of Ibrahim village, located between Goli and Todach in Sector North. Three
people died in the incident: a 4-year-old boy whose parents were Ngok Dinka
domestic workers and two of the armed attackers. Four of the domestic workers,
including two women, suffered gunshot wounds. A clash occurred at Meiram, just
outside the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone in the general area of the Sumayah/War
Abar team site of the Mechanism, between the Misseriya and the Ngok Dinka on
30 April. Three Ngok Dinka and two Misseriya were killed, while a number of
residents fled to nearby villages for safety. Lastly, on 1 2 May, violent ethnic clashes
in Kadugli left 26 people dead and 19 injured, while five World Food Programme
staff were evacuated from Kadugli town to the UNISFA/Mechanism headquarters for
safety. No instances of intercommunal violence linked to the revers e migration of the
Misseriya through Abyei were reported.
14. Criminal acts and the presence of armed elements remained a source of concern
during the reporting period. Acts of violence included cattle rustling, kidnapping and
armed attacks on civilians along the main supply route in Abyei. On 5 July 2020, a
45-year-old Ngok Dinka man was shot dead in an armed attack suspected to have
been carried out by Misseriya at Kolbul, in Sector Centre. On 28 July, about 20 head
of cattle belonging to the Ngok Dinka community were rustled by an armed group,
suspected to be Misseriya, in the Banton area in Sector South. On 13 July, a local
20-13251

3/17

S/2020/1019

employee of Imdad Total Site Services, contracted by UNISFA, was shot dead on the
Kadugli-Dilling-El Obeid road, some 3 km from the headquarters of the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism.
15. Despite the restrictions imposed because of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, UNISFA strove to contain the security situation and to
maintain Abyei as a weapon-free zone, using its rapid response mechanism and
presence in the most sensitive areas. These efforts were supported by the continued
engagement of the United Nations police and the Community Liaison Office with
Abyei residents and the mentorship of members of the community protection
committees. To enhance its security coverage and ensure the protection of civilians,
UNISFA interacted with the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) on
matters of mutual concern within the inter-mission working group. In that context,
the acting Head of Mission/Force Commander met in Juba with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for South Sudan, David Shearer, and the
Deputy Force Commander of UNMISS on 23 September 2020.
16. Further to the agreement reached between the parties during the expanded
meeting of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism held on 19 February 2020,
UNISFA operationalized the Joint Military Observer Committee and the joint military
observer team mechanisms. As a result, two joint grou nd monitoring missions
comprising both South Sudanese and Sudanese national monitors were deployed in
Athony (Sector South) and Diffra (Sector North), respectively. The latter deployment
drew protests from young Misseriya in Diffra who opposed the deployme nt of South
Sudanese monitors in the northern part of the Abyei Area. The full activation of the
Joint Military Observer Committee/joint military observer team is yet to be
completed. In addition, further to the agreement, four permanent checkpoints were
established, at Agok (Sector South), Dokura (Sector Centre), Todach (Sector North)
and Farouk (Sector North), to search for weapons and ammunition.
17. The planned reduction of troops in line with Security Council resolution 2469
(2019) is ongoing and expected to be completed by the end of the troop rotation under
way. Once it is completed, UNISFA will maintain the authorized troop ceiling of
3,550, including individual uniformed personnel for both UNISFA and the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism.
Intercommunity dialogue
18. During the period under review, UNISFA continued to engage with the Ngok
Dinka and Misseriya authorities and community leaders to further the local -level
peace process. As indicated in my previous report of 16 April 2020 ( S/2020/308) and
in my letter to the President of the Security Council dated 29 July 2020 ( S/2020/767),
the incidents in Nainai and Kolom on 19 and 22 January, respectively, as well as the
incident in Mabok on 13 April, compounded intercommunal tensions and negatively
affected peace efforts at the local level. The Ngok Dinka were reluctant to engage
with the Misseriya, demanding that the Misseriya recommit to the agreements arrived
at between the two communities in the dry season of 2016, including a return to
traditional practices of collaboration and dispute settlement. UNISFA efforts to have
community representatives engage within the joint community peace committee were
unsuccessful. Owing largely to the COVID-19 outbreak, attempts by UNISFA to
reactivate dialogue at the level of traditional leaders following two inconclusive
meetings in Diffra in March and April did not bear fruit.
19. On 22 April 2020, UNISFA met with the Misseriya members of the joint
community peace committee in Goli and on 25 April with the head of the Abyei file
appointed by South Sudan, the Co-Chair for South Sudan of the Abyei Joint Oversight
Committee and the Chief Administrator appointed by South Sudan to push for the
4/17

20-13251

S/2020/1019

resumption of the peace dialogue. Similar calls were made on 22 June and 21 July
during meetings with, respectively, the outgoing and incoming chief administra tors
appointed by South Sudan and again on 22 July during a meeting in Diffra with the
Co-Chair for the Sudan of the Committee. Lastly, shortly after his arrival, the
incoming acting Head of Mission/Force Commander of UNISFA also pressed for a
resumption of the dialogue during his introductory meeting with the Ngok Dinka on
19 August and, again, during his meeting in Diffra on 15 September with Misseriya
traditional leaders.
20. The overtures made by the Misseriya Paramount Chief, Nazar Mukhtar Babo
Nimr, to resume engagement at the level of joint community peace committees were
unsuccessful, as the Ngok Dinka requested that agreement be reached at the level of
traditional leaders beforehand. Furthermore, in addition to the COVID -19 mitigation
measures, two other issues hindered the resumption of dialogue. The first was a
disagreement over the way in which to refer to the Misseriya in written agreements.
The Ngok Dinka insisted to use the term Misseriya “Ajaira” to denote those Misseriya
clans whose transhumance falls within the Abyei Area, whereas the Misseriya were
against that use. The second issue was the alleged rift within the Misseriya, which
affected the credibility of their leaders. The Ngok Dinka outreach was affected by the
replacement of the Chief Administrator appointed by South Sudan on 29 June 2020,
as the new Chief Administrator needed time to settle in.
21. Despite these disagreements, UNISFA managed to bring both sides together
during three ad hoc joint community peace committee meetings, the principal purpose
of which was to manage efforts led by non-governmental organizations (NGOs) to
prevent the spread of COVID-19 at the Amiet common market. While UNISFA
participated in the COVID-19 working group of the Abyei administration appointed
by South Sudan, there was no equivalent forum in the north of Abyei. This prompted
UNISFA to bring together Misseriya stakeholders in Diffra on 14 July 2020 to forge
a joint front against COVID-19.
22. UNISFA efforts notwithstanding, the absence of joint forums at the local level
was particularly problematic following the Ngok Dinka attack on Ibrahim village on
8 August 2020, after which the Misseriya refused to allow the remains of two Ngok
Dinka perpetrators to be removed. The increased hostility between the tw o
communities was also evident when the Ngok Dinka blocked the transfer to Diffra of
a vehicle gifted by UNISFA to the Misseriya to conduct activities to prevent the
spread of COVID-19. The matter was resolved when the mission leadership
interceded with the Chief Administrator appointed by South Sudan, who was of the
view that any UNISFA interaction with the Misseriya administration should be
conducted only in Muglad, outside the Abyei Area.
23. On 31 August 2020, to resume the peace process, UNISFA and United Nations
system agencies, funds and programmes drafted a peace agenda that included
intra-community consultations, meetings at the level of traditional leaders and
pre-migration conferences along the three migration corridors when the dry season
starts.
24. Despite the pandemic, UNISFA continued to implement quick-impact projects
to support the local population impartially and bolster the implementation of the
mission’s mandate. Funds allotted for those projects were distributed equally across
the Abyei Area. With the exception of the Kolom water yard project, where a slight
delay has been incurred because of the attack of 22 January 2020, all 15 quick -impact
projects implemented in 2019–2020 have been completed. The focus of the projects
remained on water, health, traditional justice and the rule of law, community and
social development, and women’s empowerment and education. The projects
comprised the construction of or improvements to solar water yards (deep boreholes),
20-13251

5/17

S/2020/1019

primary schools, a hospital, a meeting hall, a community hall and one facility at the
Amiet common market run by the community protection committee. A quarter of the
projects was focused on facilities used jointly by the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya at
the Amiet common market and in Todach.
Rule of law issues
25. UNISFA continued to promote the rule of law, human rights and the
administration of justice in line with international standards and best practices.
UNISFA visited the customary courts to observe their proceedings and provide
guidance pertaining to international fair trial and due process standards. United
Nations police conducted 35 visits to detention centres to advise and mentor members
of the community protection committees and the joint protection committee on
international standards for the treatment of detainees. With the outbreak of
COVID-19, UNISFA encouraged customary judges to rapidly review the cases of
some of the detainees to decongest the detention centres. In addition, 63 detainees
suspected of minor or bailable offences, including nine female prisoners and seven
juveniles, were released.
26. United Nations police, in collaboration with the International Organization for
Migration (IOM), strengthened the capacity of community protection committees for
dispute resolution through two separate training events on mediation and dispute
resolution for 10 committee members, including six women in Agok and 10 male
members in Abathok, conducted from 1 to 3 June 2020, and through an advanced
training event for the same participants conducted from 5 to 9 June. The training was
focused on conflict mediation and resolution in community policing and on the
analysis and handling of emerging disputes during the pandemic, including those
involving sexual and gender-based violence.
27. Owing to COVID-19 mitigation measures and impassable roads, the public and
community outreach activities conducted by United Nations police were limited.
Some planned activities, including co-location activities, patrols and visits to
detention centres, were reduced. Nevertheless, United Nations police conducted 159
joint patrols, 23 independent security observation patrols, 117 co -location activities,
40 visits to sites for internally displaced persons and seven air reconnaissance patrols
in collaboration with military observers and national monitors from both the Sudan
and South Sudan. United Nations police also conducted 25 crime awareness
campaigns, 16 COVID-19 awareness campaigns and 10 outreach workshops. UNISFA
troops and United Nations police continued to collect information from community
members through the community protection committees to improve the timeliness of
interventions. A total of 837 criminal acts were recorded during the reporting period,
compared with 759 during the previous period. However, those statistics may not
adequately reflect actual crime levels, as access restrictions posed by COVID -19 and
impassable roads did not allow for optimal coverage. Nonetheless, United Nations
police coverage expanded to three additional team sites in N oong and Tejalei,
increasing to seven the number of team sites covered.
28. The current strength of the United Nations police stands at 35 officers – 11
women and 24 men – against an authorized strength of 640 police personnel,
comprising 148 individual police officers and 492 formed police unit personnel.
Hence, as at 26 August 2020, women accounted for 31.43 per cent of the police
component. Three seconded police officers are holding the senior positions of Deputy
Police Commissioner, Chief of Operations and Sexual and Gender-based Violence
Crime Adviser. The police component submitted to the Sudan 108 visa applications
for individual police officers, comprising 30 officers in the prioritized group (10
women, 33.33 per cent) and 78 in the general group (22 women, 28.21 per cent). The

6/17

20-13251

S/2020/1019

selection of the UNISFA Police Commissioner has been finalized and onboarding is
under way.
29. The process for generating and deploying the three authorized and identified
formed police units has been hampered by the travel restrictions related to COVID-19
and the non-issuance of entry visas to the Sudan for the officials from those identified
police-contributing countries intending to visit the mission for mandatory force
generation activities. Nonetheless, the Secretariat com pleted the predeployment
inspection and assessment of one of those units and is currently waiting for the
Sudanese authorities to issue entry visas for their personnel and customs clearance
for their equipment. Reconnaissance teams for the deployment of th e two other
formed police units are expected in Abyei in November 2020.
30. UNISFA has completed the draft reform documents for the establishment of the
Abyei police service. The mission has sent three invitations and a reminder to both
parties to attend the joint integrated planning exercise with a view to developing a
road map for the establishment of the service. In the absence of a response from South
Sudan, the meetings were not held. UNISFA has sent another invitation to both
Governments proposing to hold the joint meeting in Abyei, or online, from 5 to
8 October 2020. Neither party has responded.
Humanitarian situation and recovery activities
31. Humanitarian and recovery needs in the Abyei Area remained significant. Since
April 2020, the Area has been facing increased small-scale clashes coupled with an
increase in the number of armed people, which has affected planned and ongoing
humanitarian and recovery activities in the Area. In addition, the lockdowns imposed
in the neighbouring areas of South Sudan and the Sudan and in other countries
because of the COVID-19 pandemic affected humanitarian and recovery activities
such as the pre-positioning of food for the rainy season, the vaccination and treatment
of Misseriya cattle, and basic social services including health-care, nutrition,
education and water, sanitation and hygiene activities.
32. Despite the pandemic, pockets of insecurity and poor road conditions, the
agencies, funds and programmes, in coordination with NGOs, continued to provide
humanitarian and recovery assistance to 210,000 vulnerable people within the Area,
comprising 92,000 people from the Ngok Dinka community, 19,000 internally
displaced persons from the Ngok Dinka community in southern Abyei and Abyei
town, 9,000 people displaced from the neighbouring states in South Sudan, 39,000
people from the Misseriya community, 6,500 other South Sudanese (mainly Nuer),
39,000 seasonal Misseriya pastoralists and 5,500 Fallata nomads who left Abyei in
early June 2020 and are expected to return late in October.
33. Agencies, funds and programmes, as well as partners, were engaged mostly in
COVID-19 preparedness and response during the reporting period. In accordance
with the Abyei joint COVID-19 response framework, the humanitarian partners
supported point of entry and screening activities by establishing screening points for
passengers and truck drivers at the Amiet common market and by conducting
screening at health-care facilities. Likewise, awareness-raising activities were carried
out by airing messages about COVID-19 on Abyei FM radio. Home health promoters,
supported by international NGOs, reached out to the communities in southern Abyei
with awareness-raising messages. Households were reached through the integrated
community mobilization network and public address systems. Posters and pamphlets
with awareness-raising messages in Arabic and Dinka were distributed and placed in
key locations. The United Nations and NGOs supported three isolation centres,
located in Agok, Abyei town and Goli, and a quarantine centre at the Amiet common
market. Personal protective equipment and supplies were distributed to health -care
20-13251

7/17

S/2020/1019

facilities. In addition, the aid community supported the collection, transport and
testing of COVID-19 samples.
34. More than 115,000 vulnerable people benefited from food assistance-related
activities, including general food distribution for internally displaced persons and
school meals for children in central and southern parts of the Abyei Area. Efforts to
support community livelihood activities continued, with over 100,000 livestock
vaccinated against various diseases and over 15,000 livestock treated, benefiting
more than 5,000 households. Vocational training events were held throughout the
Area, targeting the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya communities.
35. As regards health and nutrition, 13 primary and two secondary health -care
facilities throughout the Abyei Area remained operational. Of those, four in the north
were reoperationalized. A plan is under way to operationalize two mo re clinics, one
in Goli and one at the Amiet common market. Those two facilities are currently being
used as COVID-19 isolation centres. In addition, humanitarian organizations
provided routine immunization health support by holding consultations and provi ding
essential drugs, which benefited some 130,000 people. Per month, nutrition screening
and support for patients with moderate and acute malnutrition in the Area were
provided to an average of 12,000 children under 5 years of age and to 1,200 pregnant
and lactating women. At most facilities, the health-care and nutrition services
continued to be supported by awareness-raising and capacity-building activities,
on-the-job training for clinical staff, training of elementary health -service personnel
at the village level and training sessions on health given to community members and
health-care facility staff.
36. The installation of six new handpumps and the rehabilitation of five existing
handpumps in the south of Abyei improved communities’ access to clean w ater. Three
broken water yards were repaired in Abyei town, and 11 handpumps were upgraded
to mini-solar water yards in the north of Abyei and at public facilities in Abyei town.
These efforts benefited 19,000 people, including newly internally displaced p ersons
in Abyei town and at public and social facilities. In addition, sanitation and hygiene
kits were made available in villages at high risk of experiencing a COVID -19
outbreak. The activities were supplemented with water management and technical
training on the basic maintenance of water taps and generators.
37. Under the school meals programme, meals continued to be distributed to over
23,000 children in 34 primary and secondary schools in southern and central Abyei.
Psychosocial support continued to be given to schoolchildren, and schools in the north
of the Abyei Area continued to be upgraded. Two new classrooms were constructed
in Makines to accommodate the increased number of children in the village. Given
school closures as a result of COVID-19, arrangements were made for distance
learning by radio. Once the lessons are recorded, they will be played on Abyei FM
radio.
38. Protection, in particular of children and against gender-based violence,
remained the key challenge because of the limited resources available to address the
needs in the Area.
Women and peace and security
39. The implementation of the women and peace and security mandate continued,
albeit with reduced activities owing to COVID-19. The pandemic fostered alternative
and creative approaches and strengthened the mission’s partnerships with women and
other stakeholders on the continued implementation of the mandate.
40. The UNISFA leadership continued to engage with local authorities to promote
decision-making by women. A positive outcome was the call made by the Co-Chair
8/17

20-13251

S/2020/1019

appointed by South Sudan of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee during a meeting
with UNISFA on 28 April 2020 for the participation of women in peace processes.
The new Chief Administrator appointed by South Sudan similarly highlighted the
importance of women’s empowerment during a public address that he delivered upon
his arrival in Abyei on 20 July. UNISFA leveraged the demonstrated commitment of
local leaders to engage with women leaders from the Ngok Dinka community to
advocate the appointment of female personnel in the local administration. The efforts
resulted in the identification and nomination of competent women for possible
appointment.
41. To further strengthen the role of women and youth associations in confl ict
prevention and resolution, UNISFA is working with an NGO, Concordis International,
on the involvement of women and young people in conflict analysis, as well as a
capacity-gap assessment for women and youth associations in the Abyei Area. The
findings will facilitate the development of a project to strengthen the capacity of the
associations to contribute to conflict resolution and prevention. Their participation
will contribute to shifting dynamics and broadening perspectives, which will in turn
build buy-in among the communities in local peace processes.
42. On 23 March 2020, the Secretary-General launched an appeal for a global
ceasefire in response to COVID-19, which presented an opportunity for women to
play their role as an important constituency by calling for peace in Abyei. On 12 May,
UNISFA engaged on the appeal with the Abyei Women’s Association from the Ngok
Dinka community, after which the Association issued a press statement in which it
called upon all armed elements to observe a ceasefire. Women have, moreover, played
a major role in their communities as conduits of information on COVID -19 and its
gendered effects. With joint support from UNISFA and IOM, women’s associations
from the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya communities engaged in the local production and
free distribution of 30,000 cloth facemasks to persons identified as vulnerable in
Abyei, thus playing a crucial and visible role in local-level COVID-19 prevention.
43. UNISFA engaged with local communities, including community protection
committees and women leaders, on sexual and gender-based violence, and continued
to monitor and follow up on allegations of human rights abuses, particularly those
committed against women and children, and advocate their prevention. UNISFA also
engaged with local communities on sexual and gender-based violence by carrying out
awareness-raising activities, with United Nations police conducting 89 sensitization
events throughout Abyei and UNISFA advocating the prevention of such violence.
The engagement resulted in the release of two underage girls who had been detained
unlawfully by community protection committees for not consenting to arranged
marriages.
44. During the reporting period, UNISFA recorded nine cases of alleged sexual and
gender-based violence involving nine survivors, including four minors, an increase
compared with the five cases reported during the same period in 2019. There were
five cases of rape involving five victims, including one minor, and one case of
attempted rape involving one minor, while two other cases involved underage and
arranged marriages that could amount to statutory rape. There was one case of
domestic violence involving one victim. To strengthen the response to and prevention
of sexual and gender-based violence, UNISFA, on 1 September 2020, held a training
event on that topic in collaboration with the Abyei Women’s Association for nine
women and four men from the Ngok Dinka community representing the local
administration, the women’s association and the community protection c ommittee.
Bringing the various stakeholders together was beneficial, as it created collaboration
among them on response and prevention. A positive outcome was the establishment
of a joint community protection committee, a women’s association and an office and

20-13251

9/17

S/2020/1019

service desk of the local administration for sexual and gender-based violence
equipped with a victim hotline.
Operations of the Mine Action Service
45. Travel and face-to-face contact were limited owing to COVID-19. This affected
mine action activities, some of which had to be cancelled. In March 2020, regular
direct risk education on explosive remnants of war in the local communities was
suspended and, on 4 May, the clearance and disposal of explosive ordnance was
interrupted because it was uncertain that clearances for medical evacuations could be
obtained in a timely fashion. Although the four team sites of the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism remained operational, planned ground
monitoring missions were cancelled. Nonetheless, Mine Action Service clearance
teams remained available to UNISFA for emergency response and ad hoc support so
as to facilitate the unhindered movements, access and deployment of UNISFA, the
Mechanism, humanitarian actors and civilians.
46. Mine Action Service teams recovered and destroyed, in controlled demolitions,
six explosive remnants of war, five AK-47 assault rifles and 272 rounds of small arms
ammunition confiscated by UNISFA troops. A total of 18,415 square metres of land
in the Abyei Area was assessed as being safe from explosive hazards, including a
helicopter landing site, an area previously contaminated with landmines and two
secondary routes that supported UNISFA force mobility. On 8 June 2020, in support
of a United Nations police community interaction initiative, 77 men, women, boys
and girls living in the Abyei Area received explosive ordnance risk awareness
training. In addition, five sessions on safety awareness regarding explosive remnants
of war were delivered to 40 UNISFA personnel, including 6 women, as part of their
induction training. The Mine Action Service provided support to the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism by fully deploying patrol support teams and
having personnel present at all the Mechanism’s sites to ensure effective and timely
assistance when required. As a result, nine ground monitoring missions were
supported with mine-protected vehicles at team site 11 (Kiir Adem) following the
resumption of patrolling on 27 July.

III. Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism:
progress on benchmarks
47. On 13 January 2020, the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
established its fourth team site, in Abu Qussa. This completed the initial operating
capacity phase of the Mechanism’s deployment mandate. Currently, the Mechanism
has four team sites: Safahah/Kiir Adem, Sumayah/War Abar, Tishwin and Abu Qussa.
48. During the reporting period, minimal progress was recorded in relation to the
benchmarks of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism and the
decisions of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism owing to the pandemic. This
in turn affected progress towards the opening of the crossing corridors that had been
agreed upon in the resolution of the Joint Political and S ecurity Mechanism of
18 March 2019 and in the border demarcation activities carried out by the Joint
Border Commission and the Joint Demarcation Committee. The Joint Political and
Security Mechanism was unable to hold meetings as scheduled, and planned
operational activities and meetings of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism were suspended. Aerial and ground monitoring missions were put on hold
because of restrictions imposed by the host countries to curb the spread of COVID -19.
While ground monitoring missions resumed on 27 July 2020, the onset of the rainy
season rendered most areas inaccessible.
10/17

20-13251

S/2020/1019

49. Team site 22 (Abu Qussa) remains non-operational owing to the absence from
the location of South Sudanese national monitors, caused in tur n by the presence of
elements of the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition
(SPLM/A-IO) in the general area of Abu Qussa/Wunkur. The deployment of national
monitors to Abu Qussa had been authorized at meetings between the Chief of the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism and the senior national monitor for
South Sudan, and during a subsequent meeting in Juba. A reconnaissance flight for
the senior national monitor to Abu Qussa is expected to be conducted in the first week
of November 2020, and it is hoped that South Sudanese national monitors will deploy
soon thereafter. Furthermore, together with the acting Head of Mission/Force
Commander, the Chief of the Mechanism engaged with officials in Khartoum and in
Juba between 6 and 10 September, and between 21 and 25 September, respectively.
During the visits, UNISFA urged its interlocutors to resume the meetings of the Joint
Political and Security Mechanism so that further progress could soon be made on all
seven measures listed in paragraph 3 of Security Council resolution 2497 (2019). It
is expected that meetings of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism and the
activities of the Joint Border Commission and Joint Demarcation Committee will
resume as soon as possible.

IV. Administrative aspects and mission support
50. UNISFA remains the most remote mission headquarters. It is located in an
extremely non-permissive environment in which challenges posed by long and
difficult supply chains must be overcome by perseverance, creativity and a flexible
approach to problem-solving. Force mobility, the environmental footprint, living
conditions, real-life support (water, rations and fuel) and improved connectivity
remain the focus of the mission support component.
51. As at 15 September 2020, UNISFA had 155 international civilian staff against
an authorized total of 177, 76 national civilian staff against an authorized total of 85
and 32 United Nations Volunteers against an authorized total of 36. The vacancy rate
stood at 12.43 per cent for international staff and 10.59 per cent for national staff.
Women comprised 18 per cent of civilian staff. As at 7 September, the visa approval
rate was about 50 per cent: of the 350 visas requested for UNISFA personnel and
visitors, the Government of the Sudan had granted 177, while 173 remained pending
(8 for international staff members, 8 for military personnel, 109 for police personnel,
12 for official visitors, 10 for consultants and 26 for oth er contractors).
52. Company operating bases remained deployed at Farouk, Diffra, Goli and Todach
(Sector North); Dokura/Rumajak, Noong, Highway and Abyei (Sector Centre); and
Marial Achak, Athony, Banton, Tejalei and Agok (Sector South). Temporary operati ng
bases for dry season deployment were established at Shegeg (Sector North); Alal
(Sector Centre); Rumamer and Leu (Sector South); and Aganitok (quick reaction
force). With the start of the rainy season, the temporary operating bases in Aganitok,
Shegeg and Alal were closed. UNISFA also provided support for team sites 11
(Safahah/Kiir Adem) and 12 (Sumayah/War Abar) in sector 1 (Gok Machar), and to
team sites 21 (Tishwin) and 22 (Abu Qussa/Wunkur) in sector 2 (Kadugli).
53. Infrastructure and environmental installations were upgraded at all UNISFA
camps. The waste management yard in Abyei is operational in accordance with the
recommendations contained in the environmental strategy of the Department of
Operational Support. Phase 1 of the implementation of field remote infrastructure
monitoring has been completed and will now be implemented in the sectors and at the
team sites. Security-related installations such as guard posts have been constructed at
all team sites in the Abyei Area. During the reporting period, the level II hospital was

20-13251

11/17

S/2020/1019

being renovated and 50 hybrid solar air conditioning units were installed. The new
mission headquarters was fully operationalized and the former headquarters
reconfigured to accommodate the expanded police component. The i mpact of floods
on accommodation camps in Abyei was minimized with the construction of concrete
footpaths between accommodations and office areas. A temporary flood discharge
sump is operational and earthen drainage channels have been excavated.
Accommodations for civilian and uniformed personnel were expanded and improved
as new prefabricated buildings were built and secondary roofing constructed.
54. The expansion of the Tejalei and Noong team sites to accommodate United
Nations police was completed. To address the often-impassable road conditions,
UNISFA contracted a third-party operator service for its heavy equipment in order to
augment the military engineering unit capabilities to increase the mission’s capacity
to improve accessibility and force mobility. The effort was a significant success and
the mission has further increased its capacity for force mobility by transferring heavy
equipment from the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
Negotiations to obtain a site for test-firing of weapons were put on hold owing to
issues related to COVID-19.
55. As regards the installations of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism, mission support is rehabilitating the accommodation facilities at all team
sites, as well as access routes. The erection of permanent accommodation structures
is in progress at team sites 12 and 22, while engineering works are taking place at
team sites 11 and 21.
56. The mission continued to face shortages of laterite, gravel and other materials,
and its contractors were subjected to delayed road clearances from the Sudan, leading
to the suspension of additional infrastructure work.
57. Information and communications technology coverage continued to be
expanded to assist troop mobilization. Tetra radio coverage was expanded at the team
sites in Tejalei and Noong. Wi-Fi access points were doubled in number at all team
sites, which significantly increased the availability of wireless Internet service. To
mitigate the impact of the weather on the low-Earth orbit satellite-based primary
Internet service during the rainy season, the UNISFA Field Technology Services team
increased the capacity of its alternate Internet service provider to ensure
communications at all sites even in inclement weather. To enhance informationsharing with the local community and act as an early warning system, the team worked
with United Nations police to provide means of communication to local communities.
58. Starting in early April 2020, air operations were reduced owing to COVID -19
restrictions and the closure of international flights and air space. The number of flight
hours projected for patrols, logistics and administration tasks was significantly
reduced. The rotation of troops was postponed to ensure that incoming troops had
time for the mandatory quarantine. Crew rotation was equally affected. The mission
continued to operate without military helicopters, instead utilizing commercial
helicopters until the military helicopters are replaced. The replacement of the third
fixed-wing aircraft is also pending.
Culture of performance
59. UNISFA tracks and reports mission performance through metrics and targets
that it has developed as part of a performance management system. The mission
measures and improves outcomes related to force mobility, environment,
infrastructure development and mandate implementation. Results are regularly
reported to the mission leadership, managers, relevant end users and Headquarters.
The metrics used are specifically designed to better inform decision -making on such
matters as infrastructure, environmental issues and force deployment. Indicators of
12/17

20-13251

S/2020/1019

performance include mobilizing road repairs in four major patrol and resupply routes
simultaneously within one week of rains subsiding, reducing risk from waterborne
disease from moderate to minimal in the dry season and high to minimal in the wet
season, reducing water consumption by 50 per cent across all locations, reducing
latency by improving force mobility through enhanced horizontal engineering
capacity (improvement of 25 per cent) and reducing the downtime of m ajor plant
infrastructure in remote locations through telemetry, automation and predictive
analysis (improvement of 73 per cent).
COVID-19 measures
60. In compliance with the instructions of the Secretary-General, UNISFA
established a COVID-19 task force on 11 March 2020 whose aim is to assist with the
development of the mission’s emergency preparedness and contingency planning.
Using situation-based planning, a risk matrix and trigger points, the task force has
charted a contingency plan and a medical plan, enabling the mission to enhance its
resilience and agility, and be better prepared for the pandemic. As at 30 September,
there had been 52 confirmed cases of COVID-19 in the local community, with two
confirmed deaths from COVID-19. UNISFA had 12 positive cases, based on the
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test, and one death suspected to be from COVID -19.
Of the 12 PCR-positive cases, 6 were international staff, 2 were international
contractors, 2 were uniformed personnel and 2 were troop-contributing country
personnel. The rotation of troop-contributing country personnel resumed on 16 July.
A quarantine facility with 220 beds where incoming personnel from troop contributing countries are quarantined before being dispatched to their locations has
been established in Kadugli. To monitor compliance with COVID -19 measures and
guidelines, the task force has a subcommittee on compliance that conducts checks at
all mission camps, company operating bases and team sites. The findings are
presented to the task force and subsequently submitted to the mission leadership for
decision-making. The mission has circulated compliance measures using posters,
news briefs and broadcasts to enhance the awareness of personnel and inform them
of possible disciplinary action and other consequences in cases of non-compliance.
To support the local community, UNISFA has gifted two ambulances and personal
protective equipment kits. UNISFA will sign a memorandum of understanding to
support local hospitals once they are operational.
61. UNISFA acquired ventilators and adequate personal protective equipment
through the global systems contract of the Global Service Centre. As an interim
measure, whenever the mission encountered supply chain challenges, it procured
personal protective equipment on local markets in Khartoum and Entebbe, Uganda.
The task force has a subcommittee on supply that holds weekly meetings to discuss
stock levels, reorder and plan the distribution of the equipment to UNISFA personnel.
Given the mission’s limited medical capabilities, supportive medical care can be
provided to patients with mild and moderate cases of COVID -19 only. There is no
level III intensive care facility within the mission or in the local community and
therefore there is no capability to handle severe and critical cases. All such cases,
especially those with underlying comorbidities, are to be evacuated to specialized
designated centres in Addis Ababa or Nairobi. In the absence of PCR testing
capability, UNISFA has utilized antibody testing in an effort to project the hot-spot
groups and categories and prioritize personnel who required more intensive infection
control and preventive measures. From the beginning of the pandemic, the mission
counselling unit has provided input for the contingency plan on ways to address the
psychosocial aspects of the pandemic. UNISFA personnel who were outside the
mission and not able to return are now able to do so, as Khartoum airport is partially
operational. Prior to the reopening of Khartoum airport, the mission had made a stopgap arrangement through Addis Ababa.
20-13251

13/17

S/2020/1019

62. Owing to the remoteness of the mission and the non-permissive operational
environment, UNISFA faces many challenges that affect the timely provision of
effective medical care to both COVID-19 and non-COVID-19 patients. There is no
airport in Abyei for fixed-wing aircraft that could be used for urgent medical and
casualty evacuation. The lack of night flying capability can add several hours of delay
in life-threatening emergencies. No higher-level medical facilities with level III
intensive care capability are available nearby to handle emergencies. The nearest such
facilities are in Khartoum, Nairobi, Addis Ababa and Kampala, which require more
than five hours to reach during daylight. Flight clearance s must be secured from the
relevant Governments and, over the past six months, the mission has experienced
several delays in obtaining clearance for medical evacuation flights as well as normal
passenger and cargo flights with medical supplies. Furthermore, the World Health
Organization is not represented in the mission area. Logistics and customs clearance
procedures are difficult and lengthy. The mission is dependent on the Sudan, South
Sudan or Uganda for clearance of goods and supplies. The restriction on air and
surface transport is affecting the mission’s supply chain and operation, as well as the
movement of personnel within the areas of operations. The lack of diagnostic testing
capability for both the community and the mission, in particular the lac k of PCR and
diagnostic testing equipment, makes it difficult to realistically assess the impact of
the pandemic in Abyei.
63. UNISFA recorded no allegations of sexual misconduct during the reporting
period. As part of the conduct and discipline strategy, as well as of its COVID-19
contingency plan, UNISFA continued to conduct community outreach activities and
provide reminders to staff members of the heightened need to maintain the highest
standards of integrity, professionalism and respect for diversity.

V. Financial aspects
64. By its resolution 2519 (2020) of 14 May 2020, the Security Council extended
the mandate of UNISFA until 15 November. The General Assembly, by its resolution
74/283 of 30 June, appropriated the amount of $263.8 million for the maintenance of
the Force for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021. As at 28 September 2020,
unpaid assessed contributions to the special accoun t for UNISFA amounted to
$70.2 million. Should the Council decide to extend the mandate of UNISFA beyond
15 November, the cost of maintaining the mission would be limited to the amounts
approved by the Assembly. The total outstanding assessed contributions for all
peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to $3,606.5 million.
Reimbursements of troop costs has been made for the period up to 30 June, while
reimbursement of the costs of contingent-owned equipment and self-sustainment has
been made for the period up to 31 March in accordance with the quarterly payment
schedule.

VI. Observations and recommendations
65. I am encouraged by the continued improvement in relations between Juba and
Khartoum, as demonstrated by the key role played by South Sudan in facilitating the
talks between the Sudan, the Sudanese Revolutionary Front and the Sudan Liberation
Movement/Minni Minnawi, which led to the signing on 3 October 2020 in Juba of a
peace agreement. It is my hope that the Sudan and South Sudan can build on this
collaboration and give new impetus to a political process that would lead to an
agreement on the final status of Abyei and the demarcation of the border. In that
connection, I am further encouraged by discussions on Abyei and other border areas
conducted by the parties in Khartoum in the second half of September and hope, in
14/17

20-13251

S/2020/1019

the interest of the people of Abyei and of the two parties, that those will soon bear
fruit.
66. While I am also encouraged by the continued rapprochement between the two
countries and by the recent discussions on Abyei held between the parties in
Khartoum, I urge the parties to also resume discussions within the Abyei Joint
Oversight Committee, as provided for in the decisions taken at the meeting of the
Joint Political and Security Mechanism of 19 February 2020. I believe that the
Committee could be an appropriate forum to discuss and come to an agreement on the
modalities for cooperation between the chief administrators recently appointed by
South Sudan and the Sudan. In the same vein, I urge the timely resumption of the
Mechanism’s meetings to follow up on some of the decisions made at those meetings,
including those referred to by the presidencies. Those include not only the issue of
protection of the Diffra oil fields, but also the formation of a joint investigative team
formed by both countries to investigate the attacks that occurred in Nainai and Kolom
on 19 and 22 January. In the light of the COVID-19 restrictions, such meetings could
be held online, if necessary.
67. I am concerned that no progress has been made towards the operationalization
of the Athony airstrip or the issuance of outstanding visas for three formed police
units and 108 individual police officers. I note that, if no visas are issued by
15 October 2020, the United Nations police strength will remain at 35 police officers,
16 of whom will be in the process of checking out of the mission, thus opening the
prospect of a serious gap in police staffing and leaving most team sites with no
personnel. I also regret that no progress has been made on the deployment of a civilian
Deputy Head of Mission.
68. I call upon both parties to accept the offer made by UNISFA to convene meetings
to jointly draft a road map for the establishment of the Abyei police service. I also
encourage engagement with the Sudanese and South Sudanese authorities regarding
the deployment of human rights expertise to UNISFA in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, which would give the mission additional expertise and
would let local authorities and communities benefit from technical assistance that
would help them to prevent and better address human rights violations and abuses.
69. I note with concern that, despite my appeal for a global ceasefire, Abyei
continues to suffer numerous episodes of violence against residents. Moreover, Abyei
communities remain bereft of basic social services. The status quo cannot continue. I
also condemn the recent trend of targeting United Nations troops and contractors. I
call upon the parties to actively work to defuse tensions at the local level and to raise
community awareness of the need to facilitate the implementation of decisions made
at the meeting of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism of 19 February 2020,
including the establishment of checkpoints and the reactivation of the Joint Military
Observer Committee and the joint military observer te am.
70. As the Security Council considers the renewal of the mandate of UNISFA, I
recommend an extension of six months in order to address issues affecting the Abyei
Area, provide the opportunity to my new acting Head of Mission/Force Commander
to further engage with the parties, and, together with my Special Envoy for the Horn
of Africa, engage with the African Union on the political situation. In that regard, I
remain fully committed to supporting the African Union High -level Implementation
Panel and its efforts to facilitate an agreement between the parties on the future of
Abyei. I count on the political mediation of the African Union, including through
possible support to the parties in resuming the meetings of the Abyei Joint Oversight
Committee by the end of 2020. In addition, I stress the need for the publication of the
report on the killing of the Ngok Dinka Paramount Chief in 2013.

20-13251

15/17

S/2020/1019

71. I commend UNISFA for its handling of the pandemic and the support that it has
provided in that regard to the communities in Abyei. UNISFA will continue to work
closely with humanitarian and other actors to facilitate assistance to the most
vulnerable.
72. In conclusion, I wish to extend my gratitude and appreciation to the acting Head
of Mission/Force Commander of UNISFA, Major General Kefyalew Amde Tessema,
and all UNISFA personnel for their tireless efforts to maintain peace and security,
often under very difficult conditions. I also commend my Special Envoy for the Horn
of Africa, Mr. Onanga-Anyanga, the African Union, including the African Union
High-level Implementation Panel, and the Government of Ethiopia for their active
engagement in support of the stabilization of the Abyei Area.

16/17

20-13251

20-13251

S/2020/1019

17/17
