29

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

ARTICLE 111
Each of the Parties to this Convention undertakes to refrain from assisting, encouraging or inducing any State, group
of States or international organizations whatsoever to carry
out activities that violate the provisions of the Convention,
as well as to refrain from participating either directly or indirectly in such activities carried out by other States or international organizations.
ARTICLE IV
Each Party to this Convention undertakes, in accordance
with its own constitutional procedures, to adopt the necessary
measures to prohibit and preven! any activity carried out in
violation of the provisions of the Convention anywhere whatsoever within its jurisdiction or under its control.
ARTICLE V
Nothing in this Convention shall impede the economic or
scientific and technological development of the Parties to the
Convention or international economic and scientific co-operntion in the utilization, preservation and improvement of the
environment for peaceful purposes.
ARTICLE VI
l. Any Party to this Convention that learns that any other
Party to the Convention is acting in violation of the obligations flowing from the provisions of the Convention may lodge
a complaint with the Security Counci-1 of the United Nations.
Such a complaint shall contain ali possible evidence to support the grounds for the complaint, together with a request that
it be considered by the Security Council.

2. Each Party to this Convention undertakes to co-operate
in carrying out any investigations that the Security Council
may undertake in accordance. with the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations on the basis of the complaint
received by the Council. The Security Council shall inform
the Stales Parties to the Convention of the results of such
investigations.
ARTICLE VII
Each Party to this Convention undertakes to furnish or
support assistance provided in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations to any Party to the Conveniion that
may make such a request, in the event that the Security
Council adopts a decision to the effect that that Party h36
been subjected to danger as a ,result of the violation of the
Convention.
ARTICLE VIII
l. Any Party may propose an amendment to this Convention. Each proposed amendment sha}l be submitted to the
de,positary Governments and shall be transmitted by them to
ali Parties to the Convention, which shall inform the depositary
Governments of the adoption or rejection of the amendmenl
at the earliesl possible date after receiving it.

2. The amendment shaH enter into force for each Party
accepting it after its adoption by the majority of Parties to
the Convention, including the depositary Governments, and
subsequently for each remaining Party on the day on which
it adopts that amendment.
ARTICLE IX
Five years after the entry into force of this Convention, or
before that date, if the majority of Parties to the Convention
so request by submitting a proposal for that purpose to the
depositary Governments, a conference of States Parties to the
Conve,ntion shaU be convened in . .
for the purpose
of conside.ring the operation of the Convention, in order to
ensure that its provisions are being implemented. During such
consideration, accounl shall be take,n of al•l new scientific and
technological achievements that may relate to the Convt'.ntion.

- - - - - - ~ - - - - - - - -------

ARTICLE X
1. This Convention shall be of a permanent nature.

2. Each Party to this Conventio•n shaH have the right,
within the context of the realization of its own State sovereignty. to withdraw from the Convention, if it decides that
exceptiona•l ci.rcumstances connected with the content of the
Convention have threatened the supreme interests of its country. lt sha-ll notify ali other States Parties to the Convention
and the Security Council of the United Nations three months
prior to its withdrawal. Thc notification shall contain an
account of the exceptional circumstances which, in the view
of that Party, have threatened its su¡){'eme interests.
ARTICLE XI
J. This Convention shaH be open to a-11 States for signature. Any State that does not sign the Convention b:fore its
entry into force ;n accordance with paragraph 3 of this article
may accede to it at any time.
2. This Convention shall be subject to ratification by
signatory States. Jnstruments of ratification and accession
shall be deposited with the Governments of . . . , which are
hereby designated the depositary Govemments.
3. This Convention shall enter into force after the deposit
of the instruments of ratification by
Governmeots,
including Governments designated the depositary Governments
of the Convention.
4. For States whose instruments of ratification or accession
are deposited after the entry into force of this Convention,
it shall enter into force on the da-te of the deposit of their
instruments of ratification or accession.
5. The depositary Governments shaM promptly notify a-11
States that sign or accede to this Convention of the date of
each signature, the date of de,posit of each instrumenl of ratification or accession, the date of the entry into force of the
Convention and the receipt by them of other information.
6. This Convention shall be registered by the depositary
Governments in accordance with Article 102 of the Charter
of the United Nations.

ARTICLE XII
This Convention, of which the Chinese, English, French,
Russian and Spanish texts are equaHy authentic, shall be deposited in thc archives of the depositary Governments. Duly
certified copies of the Convention shaU be forwarded by the
depositary Govemments to the Governments of the signatory
or acceding States.
IN WITNEss WHEREOF the undersigned, duly furnished with
ful! powers, have signed this Convention.
DONE in
. day
copies at
on the
of

3265 (XXIX). Declaration and establishment of
a nuclear-free zone in South Asia

A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1378 (XIV) of 20 Novembcr 1959, which established the goal of general and
complete disarmament under effective international
control,
Convinced that the 'highest priority should be accorded to measures in the field of nuclear disarmament,
Recalling its resolutions 1652 (XVI) of 24 November 1961 entitled "Consideration of A frica as a denuclearized zone", 1911 (XVIII) of 27 November 1963
entitled "Denuclearization of Latin America", 2033
(XX) of 3 Decembcr 1965 entitled "Declaration on
the denuclearization of Africa" and 2286 (XXII) of

General Assembly-Twenty-ninlh Seuion

30

5 December 1967 entitled "Treaty for the •Prohibition
uf Nuclear Weapons in Latin America",
Recognizing that conditions and procedures for the
creation of such zones differ from region to region,
Recognizing further that, in appropriate regions and
by agrcement among the States concerned, the creation
of nuclear-weapon-free zones could promote the cause
of general and complete disannament under effective
international control,
Considers, therefore., that the initiative for the creation of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the appropriate
region of Asia should come from the States of the region concerned, taking into account its special features
and geographical extent.
2309th plenary meeting
9 December 1974

B
The General Assembly,
Recognizing the right of States to harness nuclear
energy far peaceful purposes and as an instrument of
development and progress,
Realizing, at the same time, the dangers of diversion to military purposes inherent in the development
of nuclear energy,
Recalling its resolution 2456 B (XXMI) of 20 December 1968 concerning the establishment of zones
free from nuclear weapon~s,
Expressing the conviction that the establishment of
such zones in various regions of the world is one of the
measures which can contribute most effectively to halting the proliferation of nuclear weapons and to promoting progress towards nuclear disarmament as a
step towards general and complete disarmament under
effcctive international control, with the ultimate goal
of total destruction of all nuclear weapons and their
mcans of delivery,
Believing that the establishment of nuclear-weaponfree zones will strengthen the security of regional States
against nuclear threat,
Recalling the Antarctic Treaty of 1959, 46 the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa adopted by
the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity in 196447 and the Declaration adopted by the Foreign Ministers of the Association of South East Asían Nations in 1971,
Bearin,? in mind that the establishment of a nuclearw-:apon-free zone would, inter alia, cntail:
(a) Commitments by the Sta tes con cerned to use
exclusively for peaceful purposes nuclear materials
and facilities under their jurisdiction and to prevent the
testing. use, manufacture, production, acquisition or
staragc of any nuclear weapons or nuclear launching
dcviccs.,
( h) An equitable and non-discriminatory system of
v•:ri!ication and inspection to ensure that nuclear progr;u11mes are in conformity with the foregoing comrnitP1c!1 I,,
i e') Undertakings by nuclear-weapon States not to
,. , _, (1[ thrcaten to use nuclear weapons against the
'>t:1i :·; uf tll\' rcgion,
;,; Unilcd Nations, Treaty SC'ries, vol. 402, No. 5778, p. 72.
See Ofj,, ial Rccords of the Ge11('1·a/ Assl'mhly, Twentieth
1·
;,. •
4•11'""'º .,,.e.,,h it,·m 1(\~ do,:nmcnt A '5975.
H

Having considered the question of the establishment
of a. nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia without
prejudice to the extension of the zone to include such
other regions of Asia as may be practicable,
Desirous of preventing such a zone or any wider
area as contemplated in the preceding paragraph from
becoming involved in a ruinous nuclear arms race,
Considering that the Treaty for the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons in Latin America48 could serve as a
model to be emulated with advantage by other regions,
l. Takes note of the affinnation by the States of
the region not to acquire or manufacture nuclear weapons and to devote their nuclear programmes exclusively
to the economic and social advancement of their
peoples;
2. Endorses, in principie, the concept of a nuclearweapon-free zone in South Asia;
3. Invites the States of the South Asian region and
such other neighbouring non-nuclear-weapon States as
may be interested to initiate, without delay, necessary
consultations with a view to establishing a nuclearweapon-free zone and urges them,, in the interim, to
refrain from any action contrary to the achievement
of these objectives;
4. Expresses the hope that all States, in particular
the nuclear-weapon States, will lend their full cooperation for the effective realization of the aims of
the present resolution;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to c!onvene a
meeting for the purpose of the consultations envisaged
in paragraph 3 above, to render such assistance as may
be required for the purpose and to report on the subject to the General Assembly at its thirtieth session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirtieth session the item entitled "Declaration and
establishment of a nuclear-free zone in South Asia".

2 309th plenary meeting
9 December 1974
3332 (XXIX). lmplementation of the Dttlaration
on the Strengthening of International Se•
curity
The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled ",Implementation
of the Declaration on the Strengthening of .Jnternational
Security",
Bearing in mind the Declaration on the Strengthening
of lnternational Security49 and recalling the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly concerning the
implementation of the Dcclaration,
Noting with grave concern the continuing existence of
focal points of crisis and tension in various regions, endangering international peace and security,
Emphasizing that acts of aggression, the threat or
use of force, foreign occupation and alíen domination,
and in particular attempts to interfere in the interna!
affairs of othcr States, as well as the existence of colonialism, neo-colonialism, racial discrimination and
apartheid, remain the main obstacles to the strengthening of international peacc and of the security of all
States,
4 s United

Nations,

Treafy Series,

p. 326.
49 Resolution

2734 (XXV).

vol.

634, No. 9068,
