S/2018/60

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 January 2018
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016) and
2393 (2017)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the forty-seventh submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of resolution 2165 (2014),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2191 (2014), paragraph 5 of resolution 2258 (2015),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2332 (2016) and paragraph 6 of resolution 2393 (2017), in
which the Council requested the Secretary-General to report, every 30 days, on the
implementation of the resolutions by all parties to the conflict in the Syrian Arab
Republic.
2.
The information contained herein is based on data available to agencies of the
United Nations system 1 and from the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and
other relevant sources. Data from agencies of the United Nations system on their
humanitarian deliveries have been reported for the period from 1 to 31 December
2017.

__________________
1

18-00842 (E)

Inputs provided from the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
the United Nations Children’s Fund, the International Organization for Migration, the World
Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Re fugees
in the Near East, the United Nations Population Fund, the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic, the
United Nations Mine Action Service, the Department of Politi cal Affairs and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat.

240118

*1800842*

S/2018/60

II. Major developments
Box 1
Key points: December 2017
1.
During the reporting period, military activity in parts of the country had a
significant impact on the humanitarian situation, including further damage to civilian
infrastructure such as hospitals and schools, affecting the ability of United Nations
agencies and their partners to deliver much-needed humanitarian support.
2.
The humanitarian situation continued to deteriorate for the 393,000 people
living in besieged eastern Ghutah, in Rif Dimashq, with daily shelling on several
areas. While 29 urgent medical cases were evacuated on 30 December, more than
600 additional individuals inside eastern Ghutah continued to wait for medical
evacuations.
3.
During the reporting period, there were reports of shelling on Damascus, which
resulted in civilian deaths and injuries as well as the destruction of civilian
infrastructure. People trapped in the besieged towns of Fu‘ah and Kafraya continued
to call for winter clothing and medicine to address urgent needs.
4.
Hostilities between forces of the Government of Syria and non-State armed
opposition groups intensified considerably in the northern countryside of Hama
Governorate and in southern Idlib Governorate during the reporting period. This
resulted in civilian deaths, the destruction of civilian infrastructure and the
displacement of tens of thousands of people.
5.
Death and injury due to landmines, unexploded ordnance and improvised
explosive devices continued to be reported with alarming frequency in Raqqah city.
According to partners on the ground, more than 220 civilians have died or have been
injured in blasts since the city was retaken from ISIL in October 2017.
6.
In December, United Nations humanitarian assistance reached millions of
people in need in the Syrian Arab Republic, including more than 3 million who
received food assistance through regular deliveries. Some 60,000 were reached
through two United Nations humanitarian inter-agency cross-line convoys in hard-toreach areas. None of the people besieged in the Syrian Arab Republic were reached
in December through inter-agency convoys. More than 800,000 were reached through
cross-border convoys.
7.
The United Nations estimates that some 2.9 million people are living in hard-toreach and besieged locations in the Syrian Arab Republic. This number includes
417,566 people living in nine besieged locations throughout the country.

3.
The Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria held the eighth round of
intra-Syrian talks in Geneva between 28 November and 14 December 2017. The round
was focused on the full implementation of Security Council resolution 2254 (2015),
with particular emphasis on the constitutional process and United Nations -supervised
elections.
4.
The Special Envoy continued diplomatic engagement in Washington, D.C.,
Moscow and Astana to maintain the momentum in support of United Nations-led
intra-Syrian talks in Geneva. On 22 December in Astana, the guarantors of the
memorandum on the creation of de-escalation areas in the Syrian Arab Republic of

2/20

18-00842

S/2018/60

4 May, Iran (Islamic Republic of), the Russian Federation and Turkey, agreed on two
documents: an agreement to form a working group on the release of
detainees/abductees, the handover of bodies and the identification of missing persons;
and a joint statement on humanitarian mine action. The Astana guarantors also issued
a joint statement that expressed support for the convening of a Syrian national
dialogue congress in Sochi, Russian Federation, describing it as an initiative to
complement United Nations intra-Syrian talks in Geneva.
5.
During the reporting period, military activity in parts of the country had a
significant impact on the humanitarian situation, causing further damage to civilian
infrastructure such as hospitals and schools and affecting the ability of United Nations
agencies and their partners to deliver life-saving humanitarian assistance. At the same
time, in areas where local agreements had been reached between the Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic and non-State armed opposition groups, relative calm was
reported. Military activities, including air strikes, continued in Aleppo, Dayr al-Zawr,
Idlib, Hama, Rif Dimashq and other governorates.
6.
The humanitarian situation continued to deteriorate for the estimated 393,000
people living in besieged eastern Ghutah, in Rif Dimashq. Daily shelling on severa l
areas of eastern Ghutah, including Harasta, Nashabiyah, Duma, Ayn Tarma, Irbin,
Zamalka, Saqba, Misraba and Bayt Nayim, resulted in civilian deaths and internal
displacement within the besieged area. Schools were closed in eastern Ghutah as a
result of the level of the hostilities. The prices for basic goods decreased owing to
sporadic commercial access to the area, but remained some 30 times higher than in
neighbouring Damascus city, far beyond the purchasing power of most residents of
eastern Ghutah. The humanitarian situation inside the besieged enclave was further
compounded by the inability of United Nations humanitarian convoys to reach the
besieged area during the month. Residential neighbourhoods of Damascus city were
also reportedly attacked from eastern Ghutah during the reporting period, resulting in
death, injury and material damage.
7.
From 26 to 28 December, the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and the International
Committee of the Red Cross evacuated 29 urgent medical cases from eastern Ghutah,
together with 56 family members. Evacuees were taken to hospitals in Damascus for
treatment. Under an agreement reportedly reached between the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic and the Army of Islam, the latter was to release captives. The
United Nations was not party to the agreement or the negotiations. While the United
Nations takes note of the medical evacuation of 29 cases, hundreds of other
individuals inside eastern Ghutah continue to wait for their medical evacuations.
Furthermore, some 18 people — including 4 children — are reported to have died
without receiving required medical care over the past two months.
8.
The besieged enclave of Bayt Jinn in Rif Dimashq, including the towns of Bayt
Jinn, Mazra‘at Bayt Jinn and Mughr al-Mir, has an estimated population of 3,646. In
late December, following a period of prolonged siege and intensified military attacks,
including air strikes, a local agreement was reached between the non -State armed
opposition groups and the Syrian authorities in the area. On 30 December, 10 buses
left the area, carrying 270 fighters and civilians, for Dar ‘a and Idlib Governorates.
The United Nations was not a party to the agreement or the negotiations leading up
to it.

18-00842

3/20

S/2018/60

Figure I
Key dates in December 2017

Abbreviation: INGO, international non-governmental organization .

9.
Hostilities between forces of the Government of Syria and non-State armed
opposition groups intensified considerably in the north-eastern countryside of Hama
Governorate, the southern and south-eastern countryside of Idlib Governorate, and
the southern countryside of Aleppo Governorate, resulting in civilian deaths and the
destruction of civilian infrastructure, as well as large-scale displacement. From
1 November to 24 December, a total of 60,310 people were reportedly displaced from
Si‘in, Uqayribat and Hamra’ Districts, in northern Hama, as well as Tamani‘ah and
Sanjar Districts, in southern Idlib. At least 22 sites for internally displaced persons
and more than 6,000 residences were reported to have been abandoned. Displacement
continued to increase towards the end of the reporting period. Many of those forced
to flee had already been displaced. Of the 1.7 million people in need in Idlib
Governorate, more than 1 million had been internally displac ed before the recent
escalation in violence.
10. During the reporting period, an additional 14,000 civilians returned to Raqqah
city, where some 34,000 civilians were reported to have returned in previous months.
Exact numbers remain difficult to verify, as some people return to Raqqah merely to
check on their houses and subsequently leave, while others stay. Returns are also
taking place to neighbourhoods that constituted the last stronghold of Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). These houses are particularly heavily mined and riddled
with deadly booby traps. Deaths and injuries due to explosions continue to be reported
at alarming frequency; trauma cases have nearly doubled in recent months. According
to partners on the ground, more than 220 civilians have died or have been injured in
blasts since Raqqah city was retaken from ISIL in October 2017. Each week, between
30 and 50 civilians continue to arrive at international non-governmental organization
trauma stabilization points in Raqqah city, in need of trauma care. Demining activities
are reportedly progressing slowly, owing in part to the large amount of destruction
and the complexity of some of the devices left behind by ISIL. Humanitarian agencies
therefore continue to emphasize that, owing to the high prevalence of landmines,
booby traps and explosive remnants of war, Raqqah city is not safe for civilian returns.
11. In addition to the threat posed by unexploded ordnance, up to 80 per cent of all
buildings in Raqqah city are severely damaged and at risk of collapse. The Raqqah
Civil Council has conducted cleaning and rubble removal campaigns in many
neighbourhoods; however, the level of destruction means that such work will take
some time. Unconfirmed reports have been received that dead bodie s remain under
the rubble. Returnees also reportedly face additional challenges in view of a shortage
of basic necessities and services. For example, water through the network remains
unavailable in most of the city’s neighbourhoods, and small-scale water-trucking

4/20

18-00842

S/2018/60

services provided by local authorities fall short of meeting current needs. Electricity
is available in a few neighbourhoods and only through communal generators, as the
electrical network requires extensive repairs. The availability of health ser vices in the
city remains very limited, with only a few health clinics currently operational.
12. Fighting between ISIL and forces of the Government of Syria in southern rural
Dayr al-Zawr Governorate continued along the western bank of the Euphrates Rive r
in December. An estimated 229,700 people within Dayr al-Zawr were displaced
between July and mid-December, with more than 60,000 currently displaced in camps
located in Raqqah and Hasakah Governorates. At the same time, the Syrian
Democratic Forces (SDF) reportedly continued to advance along the eastern bank of
the Euphrates River. The ongoing military operations reportedly continued to lead to
civilian deaths and injuries. The threat of explosive ordnance to civilians was also of
major concern in Dayr al-Zawr, particularly to those returning to their areas of origin
following the expulsion of ISIL.
13. The Department of Defense of the United States of America publicly reported
that in December, the United States-led coalition had carried out 177 strikes against
ISIL targets in Dayr al-Zawr, Hasakah and Homs Governorates. More than 95 per cent
of those were reported to have been near Albu Kamal, in Dayr al -Zawr Governorate.
In addition, the coalition publicly reported that it had conducted air strikes in t he
middle Euphrates River Valley region on 1 December, as well as operations with
coalition-partner forces near Tanf on 13 December and in the Hamad desert on
23 December.
14. On 7 December, the Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation publicly
reported on support operations carried out during the previous week in Albu Kamal
and on the western shore of the Euphrates River, as well as joint operations carried
out on 3 December on the eastern shore of the Euphrates, to eradicate ISIL and
re-establish government control of the Syrian/Iraqi border. On 11 December, the
President of the Russian Federation, Vladimir Putin, ordered the partial withdrawal
of Russian troops from the Syrian Arab Republic.
15. The Ministry of Defence of the Syrian Arab Republic publicly reported that
government forces and their allies had conducted operations against the Nusrah Front
on 10 December in Hama Governorate and on 6, 11 and 14 December in Dayr al -Zawr
Governorate, retaking many towns and villages and confiscating weap ons and
improvised explosive devices left behind by ISIL.
Protection
16. Air and ground-based strikes continued to kill and injure civilians and damage
and destroy civilian infrastructure throughout the month. Explosive weapons continue
to be fired into populated areas, indiscriminately killing and injuring civilians,
destroying and damaging vital infrastructure and leaving communities littered with
explosive remnants of war that continue to kill and injure civilians and impede
humanitarian access. The large number of civilian casualties and the scale of civilian
destruction remain a strong indication that violations of the fundamental rules of
distinction, proportionality and precaution, and of the resulting prohibition on the
launching of indiscriminate attacks, are continuing. Children are particularly affected
by the fighting.
17. Fighting continued to affect civilian infrastructure, including medical facilities,
schools, markets and places of worship. On the basis of information received by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR),

18-00842

5/20

S/2018/60

civilian casualties occurred in various governorates (see annex), in possible violation
of international humanitarian law. OHCHR has documented alleged incidents
perpetrated by parties to the conflict, including government forces and their allies,
non-State armed opposition groups and their allies, and Security Council -designated
terrorist groups.
18. Despite the call made to the Syrian authorities by the Human Rights Council in
its resolutions S-18/1 and 19/22 to cooperate with OHCHR, including through the
establishment of a field presence with the mandate to protect and promote human
rights, OHCHR reporting remains limited, as the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic has not granted access to the country.
19. In addition to violations documented by OHCHR, the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic provided OHCHR with information on alleged violations. In a note
verbale received on 8 January, the Permanent Mission of the Syrian Arab Republic to
the United Nations Office at Geneva and specialized institutions in Switzerland
provided OHCHR with a list of reported victims and injured civilians between
22 November and 21 December in the governorates of Damascus, Rif Dimashq,
Dar‘a, Suwayda’, Homs, Hama, Tartus, Ladhiqiyah, Aleppo, Dayr al-Zawr, Hasakah
and Qunaytirah. A total of 37 civilians, including 9 children, were reported to have
been killed, while 128 people, including 40 children, were reported to have been
injured. The casualties reportedly had resulted fro m mortars and improvised explosive
devices.
20. The United Nations and its health partners received reports of 16 attacks that
had affected health-care facilities and personnel in December. Six attacks were
reported in the eastern Ghutah region of Rif Dimashq, comprising four attacks on
primary health centres and two on health workers. Six attacks were reported in Idlib,
comprising attacks on two hospitals, one medical warehouse (in Ma ‘arrat al-Nu‘man)
and three primary health centres (in Sinjar, Khan Shay khun and Dana subdistricts).
In Homs, one paramedic was reportedly killed; in Hama, three hospitals in Kafr Zayta
were reportedly attacked; and in Dar‘a, one hospital was reportedly attacked.
21. Educational facilities also continued to suffer the impact of the fighting. One
incident occurred on 28 December, when helicopters dropped barrel bombs on a
school complex east of Babulin village, Idlib Governorate, partially destroying the
school buildings. Another incident took place on 18 December, when a morta r shell
landed in a government-owned school during the afternoon shift of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) in Dar ‘a
city. Five UNRWA students were slightly injured, and the school was evacuated. On
3 December, air strikes near the Sanabel al-Fastat School, in Hamuriyah town, Rif
Dimashq, were reported to have rendered the school inoperable and caused civilian
casualties. On 4 December, air strikes near a school in Samiriyah village, in the
southern countryside of Aleppo Governorate, reportedly injured a female teacher and
damaged the school building. Also on 4 December, air strikes near the Umm al -Amad
Primary School, in Umm al-Amad village, in the southern countryside of Aleppo
Governorate, were reported to have partially damaged the school building. On
7 December, several schools in the western countryside of Dar ‘a were reportedly
vandalized by ISIL affiliate the Khalid ibn al-Walid Army, with documents and
facilities set on fire. Ten school personnel (teachers and assistants) were reportedly
also abducted by the group and brought to Ma’arbah, in the Yarmuk Basin area. On
7 December, air strikes on southern rural Aleppo Governorate reportedly damaged
several schools in the villages of Hanutah, Hamidiyah and Umm al-Amad. The
schools were rendered inoperable. On 16 December, air strikes on Tall al -Daman

6/20

18-00842

S/2018/60

village, in southern rural Aleppo, reportedly hit the school in the village, causing
material damage. On 17 December, a shell reportedly landed on the As a’d Akil
School, in the Halab al-Jadidah neighbourhood of Aleppo city, injuring two school
staff and several students, in addition to causing material damage.
Humanitarian access
Box 2
Key points: humanitarian access
1.
In December, United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners continued to
reach millions of people in need, including from within the Syrian Arab Republic.
Regular programming reached many people in need of humanitarian assistance,
including more than 3 million who received food assistance through 1,500 deliveries.
2.
In December, two humanitarian inter-agency cross-line convoys delivered
lifesaving assistance to 60,000 people in the hard -to-reach locations of Harbinafsih,
in Hama Governorate, and Hulah, in Homs Governorate. Those deliveries were
delayed, following a reduction in the agreed number of beneficiaries by one third
compared with what initially had been approved under the access plan for October December. No inter-agency cross-line convoys to any of the besieged locations were
authorized during the month of December.
3.
Cross-border assistance remains a vital part of the humanitarian response in the
Syrian Arab Republic. Since the adoption by the Security Council of its resolution
2165 (2014) in July 2014, assistance has been delivered from Turkey to millions of
Syrians in various parts of Aleppo, Idlib, Ladhiqiyah and Hama Governorates, and
from Jordan to Dar‘a, Qunaytirah and Suwayda’ Governorates. In December, some
653 trucks in 28 convoys delivered lifesaving assistance to more than 800,000 people
in need in northern and southern areas of the Syrian Arab Republic. Although access
impediments imposed by armed actors and local authorities increased i n the northwestern part of the country, assistance continued at levels similar to those in the past.
4.
The Syrian authorities continued the removal and delisting of medical supplies
from inter-agency cross-line convoys, with supplies sufficient for more than 5,800
treatments either removed from convoys or not allowed to be loaded in December (see
table 2). This brought the total number of medical items removed or not allowed to
be loaded to more than 645,000 since the beginning of the year.
5.
The United Nations estimates that, as of December 2017, some 2.9 million
people in total were living in hard-to-reach and besieged locations in the Syrian Arab
Republic (compared with 2.98 million in October 2017). That number included
417,566 people (compared with 419,920 in October 2017) living in nine besieged
locations throughout the country and 2.49 million people living in hard -to-reach areas.
Qabun, in Damascus Governorate, has been removed from the United Nations list of
besieged locations. Ninety-five per cent of the total besieged population is besieged
by forces of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. Two per cent of the total
besieged population is besieged by non-State armed opposition groups, and 3 per cent
of the total besieged population is besieged by both government forces and non-State
armed opposition groups.

22. The delivery of humanitarian assistance to people in need remained extremely
challenging in many areas of the country as a result of active conflict, shifting conflict
lines, administrative impediments and deliberate restrictions imposed on the

18-00842

7/20

S/2018/60

movement of people and goods by the parties to the conflict. In particular, access for
the United Nations and its partners to those people living in besieged and hard -toreach locations remained a critical concern.
23. The United Nations estimates that, as of December 2017, approximately
417,566 people (compared with 419,920 in October 2017) were living in nine areas
under siege. Qabun, with a population of 2,500, in Damascus Governorate, has been
removed from the United Nations list of besieged locations, as the mov ement of
civilians has improved and commerce has been restored to a certain degree. An area
is considered by the United Nations to be besieged when it is surrounded by armed
actors, with the sustained effect that civilians, the sick and the wounded cannot
regularly exit and humanitarian assistance cannot regularly enter. Of the nine
besieged locations nationwide in the Syrian Arab Republic, six areas (accounting for
95 per cent of the total besieged population) are besieged by government forces, one
area (3 per cent of the total besieged population) by both government forces and
non-State armed opposition groups and two areas (2 per cent of the total besieged
population) by non-State armed opposition groups. In addition to those in besieged
locations, it is estimated that some 2.49 million people are living in hard -to-reach
locations. While that figure represents a decrease compared with the previous
estimate of 2.56 million, mainly as a result of access improvements in formerly ISIL held Raqqah Governorate, parts of south-western Aleppo Governorate have now been
designated as hard to reach, owing to access constraints resulting from an
intensification of the hostilities between government forces and non -State armed
opposition groups.
Table 1
Besieged locations, December 2017
Governorate

Location

Damascus

Yarmuk

12 520 Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic and non-State armed
opposition groups

Idlib

Fu‘ah

5 900 Non-State armed opposition groups

Idlib

Kafraya

2 200 Non-State armed opposition groups

Rif Dimashq/
Damascus

Irbin and surrounding area
(Irbin, Zamalka and Jawbar)

49 300 Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic

Rif Dimashq

Harasta area (Harasta, Mudayra
and Misraba)

56 535 Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic

Rif Dimashq

Duma area (Duma, Shaffuniyah
and Hawsh al-Dawahirah)

150 100 Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic

Rif Dimashq

Kafr Batna area (Kafr Batna,
Saqba, Ayn Tarma, Hammurah,
Jisrayn, Aftris, Hazzah, Hawsh
al-Ash‘ari, Bayt Siwa and
Muhammadiyah)

125 600 Government of the Syrian Republic

Rif Dimashq

Nashabiyah area (Nashabiyah,
Bayt Nayim, Salihiyah, Utaya
and Hazrama)

11 765 Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic

Rif Dimashq

Bayt Jinn

3 646 Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic

Total

8/20

Population Besieged by

417 566

18-00842

S/2018/60

24. The United Nations inter-agency convoy plan for October and November was
further extended until December. Under the plan, access to 33 locations in besieged
and hard-to-reach areas was requested, with the objective of reaching a total of
1,206,000 people. Inter-agency convoys are prepared for areas with multisectoral
needs where access is limited, to ensure that United Nations support is needs -based.
In December, only two inter-agency convoys could be dispatched, reaching some
60,000 people in need in two hard-to-reach locations (see table 2 for a list of
inter-agency convoys deployed in December). No convoys were authorized for
deployment to besieged locations. The total number of p eople reached under the
October-December plan was 398,950, or 33 per cent of the total number of people to
whom access had originally been requested under the plan. This number does not
include convoys carrying supplies delivered by other humanitarian actors.
Table 2
Inter-agency cross-line humanitarian convoys, December 2017

Date

Location

Requested target
(number of
beneficiaries)

Number of
beneficiaries
reached

14 December

Hulah

71 000

50 000

Multisectoral

14 December

Harbinafsih

18 000

10 000

Multisectoral

Type of assistance

25. Individual agencies continued to submit requests for single -agency deliveries to
locations throughout the country during the reporting period. Single -agency
deliveries are undertaken in areas where access is less challenging. In December, the
World Food Programme submitted 1,501 official requests to the authorities to obtain
facilitation letters for the transport of food assistance to locations throughout the
country, of which 1,500 were approved. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees submitted 60 facilitation letters for the movement of core
relief items and livelihood kits, of which 58 were approved and 2 were rejected, with
security concerns cited as the reason. Both international and Syrian non -governmental
organizations continued to undertake needs assessments and to provide support
(including medical, educational, psychosocial and protection services) in besieged
and hard-to-reach locations, under challenging circumstances, in accordance with
humanitarian principles.

18-00842

9/20

S/2018/60

Figure II
United Nations inter-agency cross-line humanitarian operations: percentage of
people reached each month in besieged areas, 2017

26. Humanitarian access continues to face restrictions imposed by parties to the
conflict in besieged and hard-to-reach locations. On average in 2017, only 27 per cent
of beneficiaries scheduled for assistance under specific requests were reached through
inter-agency cross-line convoys each month. Bureaucratic impediments, such as the
non-issuance of facilitation letters by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic,
continue to be a significant factor in these delays or non-deliveries, despite the
creation of a tripartite coordination mechanism to address such problems. The
mechanism met once during the reporting period, on 12 December, to discuss issues
related to the deployment of humanitarian convoys, including to besieged eastern
Ghutah, which remained inaccessible to the United Nations in December.
27. The United Nations and its partners continue to provide support to those who
have been displaced by fighting in and around Raqqah as part of a coordinated
response in the Syrian Arab Republic. United Nations agencies, through regular
programming, along with humanitarian partners, have continued to provide
multisectoral assistance to 420,000 people in need each month in Raqqah, Hasakah
and Dayr al-Zawr Governorates.

10/20

18-00842

S/2018/60

Figure III
Inter-agency cross-line humanitarian operations, December 2017

60,000 people reached
People reached in hard-to-

People reached in besieged

Cross-line convoys

reach areas

areas

60,000

0

2

2.4 %

0%

Proportion of people in hardto-reach areas reached

Proportion of people reached in besieged areas

Number of people in hard-to-reach areas: 2.49 million
Number of people in besieged areas: 417,556
28. Life-saving and life-sustaining medical items sufficient for more than 5,800
treatments were rejected or removed from convoys in December by the Syrian
authorities, according to the World Health Organization (WHO). Details regarding
the treatments and supplies removed are shown in table 3. Additional medical supplies
were scheduled to be delivered as part of the inter-agency convoy plan; however, only
two inter-agency convoys were able to proceed in December. Since the beginning of
2017, WHO has submitted 11 single-agency requests to the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic, to gain access to 14 locations in six governorates. The Government
approved nine requests, and one was rejected. One request remains pending.
Table 3
Medical supplies removed from humanitarian convoys, December 2017
Location

Harbinafsih

Hulah

Number of
treatments

5 110

690

Types of supplies

Ketamine hydrochloride; atracurium besylate; miconazole
nitrate; dobutamine hydrochloride; oxytocin injections 10 IU;
syringe 5 ml disposable
Thoracic drain bottles 700 ml; ketamine hydrochloride;
atracurium besylate; beclomethasone dipropionate;
dobutamine hydrochloride; oxytocin injections 10 IU

Humanitarian response
29. In December, United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners continued to
reach millions of people in need through all available access modalities, including:
(a) regular programming from within the Syrian Arab Republic, whereby
humanitarian deliveries reach those in need without crossing conflict lines;

18-00842

11/20

S/2018/60

(b) cross-line convoys, whereby assistance from within the country is delivered
across conflict lines; and (c) cross-border deliveries, whereby assistance is provided
from Jordan and Turkey to those in need (see table 4). In addition to the United
Nations and its partners, non-governmental organizations continued to deliver
lifesaving assistance to people in need. The Government continues to provide services
both in areas under its control and in many areas beyond its control. Local authorities
in many areas controlled by non-State armed opposition groups also continue to
provide services where possible.
Table 4
People reached by the United Nations and other organizations through all
modalities, December 2017
Organization

Number of people
reached

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

20 000

International Organization for Migration

195 000

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

2 700 000

United Nations Children’s Fund

>4 000 000

United Nations Development Programme

91 607

United Nations Population Fund

500 000

United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East

400 000

World Food Programme

>3 000 000

World Health Organization

1 890 000

30. During the reporting period, cross-border deliveries continued from Turkey and
Jordan into the Syrian Arab Republic under the terms of Security Council resolutions
2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016) and 2393 (2017) (see figure IV).
In line with those resolutions, the United Nations notified the Syrian authorities in
advance of each shipment, including its contents, its destination and the number of
beneficiaries expected to be reached.
31. Since cross-border operations began in July 2014, following the adoption of
resolution 2165 (2014), the United Nations has conducted more than 714 cross-border
consignments, with more than 18,154 trucks (12,536 by way of Bab al -Hawa and
1,821 by way of Bab al-Salam, from Turkey; and 3,797 by way of Ramtha, from
Jordan). The United Nations cross-border operations complement the aid provided by
international and Syrian non-governmental organizations that provide services to
millions more from neighbouring countries.
32. In December, the United Nations and its implementing partners delivered food
assistance for more than 520,000 people through cross-border deliveries from Turkey
and Jordan. Moreover, the United Nations conducted health and medical deliver ies,
providing more than 630,000 treatments, through the cross -border mechanism. In the
northern part of the Syrian Arab Republic, the United Nations Children ’s Fund
(UNICEF) improved water quality and sanitation for 73,000 people through the repair
and rehabilitation of water and sanitation systems and the distribution of hygiene kits,
jerry cans and water purification tablets. In addition, UNICEF screened
25,783 children and pregnant and lactating women for acute malnutrition. Of the
children screened, 197 were treated for severe acute malnutrition. UNICEF also
enrolled 4,514 children, ranging from 5 to 17 years of age, in formal education. In

12/20

18-00842

S/2018/60

addition, 428 children between the ages of 5 and 19 were enrolled in non -formal
education. In the southern governorates of Dar‘a and Qunaytirah, more than 473,000
people benefited from improved access to clean water through maintenance
operations with respect to water and sanitation systems. Of those people, 73,684 were
reached with interventions under the Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for All (WASH)
initiative, such as household water treatment, water vouchers and the rehabilitation
and repair of sanitation facilities and water systems. Humanitarian partners also
continued to provide nutrition services to more than 7, 323 people in 10 communities
in Dar‘a Governorate and in 9 communities in Qunaytirah Governorate. A total of
3,067 children under the age of 5 were screened for acute malnutrition. Of the children
screened, 89 were identified as suffering from moderate acute malnutrition and 17 as
suffering from severe acute malnutrition. Those identified and diagnosed were treated
through therapeutic and supplementary nutrition programmes at six health centres and
one mobile clinic. In addition, 889 pregnant and lactating women were screened for
acute malnutrition, of whom 117 received the necessary treatment. Moreover, during
the reporting period cross-border oral polio vaccine campaign activities in Idlib,
Aleppo, Hama and Homs Governorates were wrapped up. By the end of December,
an additional 167,338 children under the age of 5 had been vaccinated, out of a total
of 641,967 children targeted (559,695 children were vaccinated in November). The
United Nations Population Fund reached some 410,035 people with support in term s
of reproductive health, efforts to address gender-based violence, and youth
empowerment.
33. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic
continued its operations during the reporting period, monitoring 653 trucks used in
28 consignments by seven United Nations entities, confirming the humanitarian
nature of the goods on each truck and notifying the Syrian authorities after each
shipment. The United Nations provides 48-hour notice to the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic for all shipments. United Nations partners ensure that, once in
the country, shipments arrive at the designated warehouses. Independent third -party
companies contracted by the United Nations ensure independent verification of the
assistance arriving at the warehouses and also monitor the distribution and/or service
provision. The Mechanism continued to benefit from the excellent cooperation of the
Governments of Jordan and Turkey.
Figure IV
Number of targeted beneficiaries by the United Nations and its partners by
cluster through cross-border humanitarian deliveries, December 2017
(Thousands)

18-00842

13/20

S/2018/60

Table 5
Number of targeted beneficiaries through cross-border deliveries by sector and
by district, December 2017

Nutrition

Water,
sanitation
and hygiene

Education

Food

Health

Non-food
items

Bab

–

–

–

11 000

–

5 500

Aleppo

I‘zaz

–

100 160

36 965

69 332

2 625

1 000

Aleppo

Jarabulus

–

–

–

28 421

–

5 500

Aleppo

Jabal Sim‘an

–

38 270

1 960

24 650

–

12 000

Dar‘a

Sanamayn

–

–

–

–

–

38 000

Dar‘a

Dar‘a

2 400

118

63 132

22 325

1 560

440 168

Dar‘a

Izra‘

–

815

–

16 495

781

206 199

Hama

Suqaylibiyah

–

5 000

–

–

–

–

Idlib

Ma‘arrah

–

65 875

3 528

20 425

–

–

Idlib

Ariha

–

22 500

–

–

–

–

Idlib

Harim

–

239 725

35 485

7 218

10 407

9 056

Idlib

Idlib

–

42 500

2 352

129 456

–

–

Idlib

Jisr al-Shughur

–

9 240

–

99 657

–

6 750

Qunaytirah

Fiq

–

–

52 400

–

–

6 000

Qunaytirah

Qunaytirah

3 600

385

442 125

26 560

780

67 400

Governorate

District

Aleppo

34. Throughout December, the Russian Federation sent information bulletins to the
United Nations from the Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides in the Syrian
Arab Republic, which outlined the provision of bilateral relief assistance. Other
Member States also continued to provide bilateral and other forms of humanitarian
assistance.
Humanitarian financing
35. As at 31 December, the humanitarian response plan for the Syrian Arab Republic
was 51 per cent funded, with $1.7 billion of the requested $3.35 billion received under
the plan.

14/20

18-00842

S/2018/60

Figure V
Humanitarian response plan funding, 30 December 2017
(Millions of United States dollars)

Visas and registrations
36. A total of 41 new United Nations visa requests were submitted to the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic in December. Of those, 7 were approved,
2 were denied and 32 remain pending. Of the 24 visa applications submitted in
October and November, 22 were approved in December and 2 were denied. A total of
52 United Nations visa renewal requests were sub mitted in December, of which
34 were approved, 1 was denied and 17 remain pending. An additional 53 requests
for visa renewals submitted in November were approved in December. For some
United Nations entities in the Syrian Arab Republic, a significant number of staff are
not in place or cannot be replaced owing to the non-issuance of visas for months,
despite formal requests.
37. A total of 23 international non-governmental organizations are registered with
the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to o perate in the country. Some
220 national non-governmental organizations are authorized by the Syrian Arab
Republic to operate through 315 branches countrywide.
Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and premises
38. Programmes of the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes are
implemented in areas affected by frequent clashes among belligerents, air strikes,
regular exchange of indirect artillery fire and asymmetrical attacks.
39. Since the start of the conflict, dozens of humanitarian workers have been killed,
including 22 staff members of the United Nations or agencies of the United Nations
system, of whom 18 were UNRWA staff members, 66 were staff members and
volunteers of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and 8 were staff members and volunteers

18-00842

15/20

S/2018/60

of the Palestine Red Crescent Society. Many staff members of international and
national non-governmental organizations are also reported to have been killed.
40. A total of 27 staff members of agencies and programmes of th e United Nations
system (1 staff member of the United Nations Development Programme and
26 UNRWA staff members) are being detained or are missing.

III. Observations
41. The extent to which the situation on the ground in the Syrian Arab Republic
remains volatile is of great concern, particularly as civilians continue to bear the brunt
of ongoing military activity, heavy fighting, air strikes and besiegement. While some
progress was made in Astana in December, as the ceasefire guarantors — Iran (Islamic
Republic of), the Russian Federation and Turkey — agreed to establish a working
group on detainees/abductees and issued a joint statement on humanitarian mine
action, tangible results are needed to reduce the suffering of the Syrian people.
42. Given the sustained high level of need amid the considerable constraints on
humanitarian access within the country, it is critical that the United Nations reach all
in need through the most direct routes. As I have stated previously, all modalities of
the delivery of assistance are essential to the efficient and effective provision of
humanitarian assistance and to ensuring a needs-based response. In this regard, I
welcome the adoption of Security Council resolution 2393 (2017), in which the
Council extended for another year the authorization of the use by United Nations
humanitarian agencies and their implementing partners of routes across conflict lines
and across borders to ensure that humanitarian assistance reaches people in need
throughout the Syrian Arab Republic by the most direct routes. Through the adoption
of resolution 2393 (2017), the Council has placed the people and their humanitarian
needs at the centre; the resolution will ease the suffering of hundreds of thousands of
people and will save lives.
43. Cross-border deliveries are, however, only one of the methods of delivery used
by the United Nations and its partners. While continued cro ss-border efforts are
crucial, improvements are urgently required in cross-line access. Only two United
Nations inter-agency cross-line convoys were deployed in December; no convoy
reached besieged areas. Cross-line access to hard-to-reach and besieged areas is
critical, including to besieged eastern Ghutah, where 94 per cent of the total besieged
population currently resides.
44. I note the medical evacuations of 29 patients from eastern Ghutah, reportedly as
part of an agreement that includes the release of prisoners by non-State armed
opposition groups. Under international humanitarian law, parties to the conflict shall
facilitate measures for the sick and wounded to be evacuated to a location where they
can be cared for. International humanitarian law makes it clear that medical
evacuations are an obligation based on medical need alone. An additional 600 people
remain in need of urgent medical evacuation in eastern Ghutah; 18 have already died
while waiting to be evacuated. I call on all Member States wi th influence over the
parties to the conflict to do their utmost for the medical evacuations to take place
before more people die. At the same time, medicine, food and other humanitarian
assistance must be allowed into eastern Ghutah without delay to alleviate the situation
for those who remain trapped inside the besieged enclave.
45. Accountability for serious violations is a requirement under international law
and central to achieving sustainable peace. I reiterate my call for the situation in the

16/20

18-00842

S/2018/60

Syrian Arab Republic to be referred to the International Criminal Court. I also call
upon all parties to the conflict, Member States, civil society and the United Nations
system as a whole to cooperate fully with the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011.
46. The failure to make further progress at the eighth round of intra -Syrian talks in
Geneva was a missed opportunity. Ending the immense suffering of the Syrian people
remains the impetus driving my Special Envoy to resume intra -Syrian talks in Vienna
in January. Substantive progress at this ninth round of talks will be cruc ial in this
regard. I welcome all the efforts made by Member States to end hostilities. I continue
to support my Special Envoy and the United Nations-led Geneva process as the only
process mandated by the Security Council to bring a conclusion to this war.

18-00842

17/20

S/2018/60

Annex
Incidents affecting civilians recorded by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
December 2017*
Damascus and Rif Dimashq Governorates
• On 2 December, air strikes hit a residential area in opposition -controlled Irbin
and reportedly killed six male civilians.
• On 3 December, air strikes hit a residential area in Irbin, allegedly killing three
civilians, including two children, and injuring at least five other civilians, one
of them a woman.
• On 3 December, six civilians, including a man and his son, were reportedly
killed by an air strike that hit opposition-controlled western Hamuriyah. At
around 11.50, an air strike hit a shopping area in Hamuriyah, while another
strike damaged a nearby building, allegedly killing nine civilians, including
three boys and a girl, and wounding a male civilian, who reportedly died the
following day.
• On 4 December, several ground-based strikes hit a residential area in the
Government-controlled Abbasiyin neighbourhood of Damascus and reportedly
caused the deaths of two male civilians.
• On 6 December, ground-based strikes hit a residential area in Irbin, damaging a
residential building and reportedly killing a boy and a girl and injuring their
mother.
• On 13 December, ground-based strikes hit a residential area of oppositioncontrolled Bayt Siwa and allegedly killed two civilians, including a boy, and
injured an unknown number of other civilians.
• On 16 December, ground-based strikes hit a residential area in oppositioncontrolled Duma, reportedly killing three civilians, including two women and a
child.
• On 19 December, ground-based strikes hit Al-Idshaaria Street in the residential
area of Zablatani, in eastern Damascus, allegedly resulting in the dea th of three
civilians, including a woman and a 14-year-old boy, and wounding six civilians,
including two women and a 15-year-old boy.
• On 21 December, a farmer was reportedly shot and killed in Kafr Batna as he
was working on his land in the vicinity of Mulayhah.

* In line with Security Council resolution 2258 (2015), the present description of developments
on the ground and the incidents that occurred during the month that the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights has been able to corroborate, relates to
compliance with Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) by all parties
in the Syrian Arab Republic. The information is provided without prejudice to the work of the
Task Force on the Ceasefire of the International Syria Support Group. The reporting is not a
comprehensive listing of all violations of international humanitarian law and violations and
abuses of international human rights law that took place in the Syrian Arab Republic during the
reporting period.

18/20

18-00842

S/2018/60

Dar‘a Governorate
• On 1 December, a car travelling on a road in the vicinity of opposition controlled Ibta’ hit an improvised explosive device, which reportedly killed a
civilian woman and injured two other civilians - her brother and a child.
• On 7 December, the Khalid ibn al-Walid Army allegedly publicly executed two
male civilians in Saham al-Jawlan and another male civilian in Tasil after the
three had been “sentenced” by a “court” run by the group, for allegedly
providing support to the Free Syrian Army.
• On 11 December, ground-based strikes hit a residential area in the vicinity of
the Omari mosque in Dar‘a al-Balad, reportedly killing a girl and injuring three
male civilians.
• On 17 December, ground-based strikes hit a road in the vicinity of Kafr Shams,
allegedly killing two civilians as their motorbike exploded after being hit by
shrapnel.
Aleppo Governorate
• On 11 December, Turkish-backed forces of Operation Euphrates Shield
reportedly publicly executed four alleged ISIL members at a square in the centre
of Jarabulus city, in north-eastern Aleppo Governorate. The four members were
accused of killing civilians in then-ISIL-controlled Jarabulus in 2014. Euphrates
Shield forces had recaptured the city from ISIL in Au gust 2016.
• On 12 December, air strikes hit the Levant Liberation Organization -controlled
village of Ramla, in Khanasir District, southern Aleppo Governorate, and
allegedly injured 11 civilians, 3 of whom sustained serious injuries. Those
injured were reportedly internally displaced persons who were later transferred
to a hospital in Idlib Governorate owing to the lack of medical facilities in
southern Aleppo.
• On 17 December, ground-based strikes hit a playground at a secondary school
in the government-controlled New Aleppo neighbourhood of Aleppo city,
allegedly injuring one girl and two female teachers.
Idlib and Hama Governorates
• On 8 December, air strikes hit residential areas in Zurzur village, south -eastern
Idlib Governorate, and reportedly killed seven civilians from the same family —
three women and four children — and injured at least four others.
• On 17 December, several air strikes hit residential areas in a southern
neighbourhood of Khan Shaykhun, as well as the centre of the city, where the
main market was also hit. The air strikes on residential areas in the centre of
Khan Shaykhun allegedly resulted in the killing of 10 civilians: 6 women, 3 girls
and a boy. A mother and her three children were among the victims. Many of
the victims showed signs of severe burns. The air strikes that hit the main market
of Khan Shaykhun reportedly wounded five civilians, including two women an d
a boy.
• On 19 December, air strikes hit residential areas of Tah town, in southern Idlib
Governorate, reportedly killing a girl.

18-00842

19/20

S/2018/60

• On 20 December, air strikes hit residential areas in the centre of Ma ‘arr Shurin
town, in Ma‘arrat al-Nu‘man, and allegedly killed 18 civilians, including
7 women and at least 5 children, many of them from the same family. One of
the families had been displaced from northern Hama Governorate.
Homs Governorate
• On 5 December, a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device in a mini-bus
exploded in Ahram Street in the government-controlled city of Homs, reportedly
killing 10 civilians.
• On 19 December, ground-based strikes hit residential areas in the village of
Si‘in, east of opposition-controlled Talbisah, allegedly killing a boy.
Dayr al-Zawr Governorate
• On 1 December, the Baghuz, Buq‘an and Jala’ water crossings were hit by air
strikes, which reportedly killed two male civilians at Baghuz and Buq ‘an and a
girl at Jala’. The crossings remain under ISIL control.
• On 6 December, air strikes hit the town of Jurdi, in eastern Dayr al -Zawr
Governorate, and allegedly killed 17 civilians, including 2 women and
4 children. The town, which had previously been under ISIL control, was
reportedly hit after the fighters had fled and SDF had captured the area.
• On 20 December, a car bomb detonated close to an SDF -controlled checkpoint
at the Attal roundabout near Shahil city, in the eastern part of the governorate,
and allegedly killed nine civilians, including four children.
Raqqah Governorate
• On 3 December, six male civilians checking their houses in Raqqah city were
reportedly killed when unexploded ordnance in their homes detonated.
• On 7 December, seven civilians, including two boys, were allegedly kill ed by
unexploded ordnance detonating in Raqqah city.
• On 17 December, a boy was allegedly killed when unexploded ordnance
detonated near him as he was walking in Ghanim al -Ali village, in eastern
Raqqah Governorate.

20/20

18-00842
