United Nations

S/PV.6277

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6277th meeting
Wednesday, 24 February 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Araud . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Salam
Mr. Heller
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Shcherbak
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security
Briefing by the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-25007 (E)

*1025007*

S/PV.6277

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
Briefing by the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Antonio Maria
Costa, Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
I should like to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2010/94, which contains a
letter dated 17 February 2010 from the Permanent
Representative of France addressed to the SecretaryGeneral, transmitting a concept paper on the item. The
presidency of the Council would like to draw the
Council’s attention to this excellent document.
I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and invite him to
take the floor.
The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I
thank the French presidency for having put today’s
important item on the Security Council’s agenda.
Transnational issues, including drug trafficking and
organized crime, are increasingly present on the
Council’s agenda, clearly reflecting the gravity of the
threat. Drug trafficking and organized crime have an
impact on almost all United Nations activity, be it in
the spheres of development, security, the environment
or the rule of law.
From a different perspective, however, this also
means that all of our activities in every area could
reduce the risk represented by transnational threats and
their impact. Our response must therefore be global
and integrated both within the United Nations family
and as a family of nations.

2

(spoke in English)
First, as to the global response, Member States
have united to fight pandemics, poverty, climate
change and terrorism. We can and must do the same to
counter organized crime. Member States have already
worked together on a number of important initiatives.
These include the General Assembly’s efforts against
drugs, the Kimberley Process against blood diamonds,
and the United Nations Global Initiative to Fight
Human Trafficking.
But there is so much more to be done against
emerging threats, such as cybercrime, moneylaundering, environmental crime and the dumping of
hazardous waste. The Crime Prevention Congress to be
held in April in Salvador, Brazil, offers an opportunity
to explore how we can strengthen the legal and
operational means to fight them. This year is also the
tenth anniversary of the adoption of the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. I
urge the Council to sharpen that powerful instrument at
the Conference of the Parties in October.
One of the most important improvements would
be the establishment of a monitoring mechanism. In
this work, we should not focus only on what we are
battling against; we must never lose sight of what we
are fighting for — justice and the rule of law. We
cannot fight fire with fire. The criminals use ruthless
and exploitative methods that we can never
contemplate. Human rights must always be at the
forefront of efforts to control crime.
My second key word today is “integration”.
Integration is essential at many levels. Nationally,
agencies must pull together to fight all aspects of
crime. Regionally, States must share information and
carry out joint operations. This is not always easy. A
lack of capacity and a lack of trust often cause
problems.
The lack of capacity can be overcome. We have
seen this in West Africa, where vulnerability to drugs
and crime is being reduced thanks to the work of the
Economic Community of West African States in
support of the Praia process. The West Africa Coast
Initiative, involving the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Political Affairs, is
also a good example of the One United Nations
approach. I urge the Council to support similar regional
initiatives, such as the Santo Domingo Pact launched

10-25007

S/PV.6277

here at the United Nations today, which has the same
aims for Central America and the Caribbean.
As for building trust, experience shows that
tackling common threats can build confidence and
good-neighbourly relations between countries that may
otherwise have their differences. Initiatives to share
information on the drug trade in West Asia, Central
Asia and the Gulf are among the examples of this
happening. With transnational threats, States have no
choice but to work together. We are all affected,
whether as countries of supply, trafficking or demand.
Therefore, we have a shared responsibility to act.
I welcome the Security Council’s presidential
statement S/PRST/2009/32 of 8 December 2009, in
which the Council called for the issue of drug
trafficking and organized crime to be mainstreamed
into the United Nations work throughout the conflict
cycle. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
continues to carry out important work in providing the
evidence on these transnational threats and the
technical assistance with which to respond.
Transnational networks create vectors of violence
that blaze trails of death and destruction through some
of the world’s most vulnerable regions. Crime
prevention is conflict prevention. Together, they build
safer and healthier societies. Criminal justice should
figure more prominently in United Nations
peacebuilding and peacekeeping.
(spoke in French)
In conclusion, we have to act without delay. In its
most recent presidential statement on this issue, the
Council recommended that I provide more information
on transnational threats. I will work more closely with
all the relevant components of the United Nations
system to bring impending threats to the Council’s
attention. In return, I urge the Council to ensure that
early warning is followed up by early action. Together,
let us prevent drug trafficking and organized crime
from threatening international peace and security and
all of our hard-won achievements across our agenda.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
The Security Council will now hear a briefing by
Mr. Antonio Maria Costa, Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.

10-25007

Mr. Costa: I am honoured, of course, to attend
this meeting and thank the President for the invitation.
Previous debates on violent theatres — for example,
Afghanistan, the Congo, Central America, Somalia and
West Africa — and on transnational crime issues,
including drug trafficking, piracy, natural resources
and smuggling, have shown how seriously the Council
takes these threats to peace and security.
The background is well known. International
mafias exploit the instability caused by conflicts. They
thrive in areas lost to insurgency and take advantage of
a Government’s inability to provide security. This
creates a vicious circle, illustrated in our report entitled
“Crime and instability: case studies of transnational
threats”, which is to be released in the course of the
day and is available in the Chamber. The report
underlines and demonstrates that vulnerability attracts
crime and that crime, in turn, deepens vulnerability. In
a chain reaction, humanitarian crises follow,
development is stalled and peacekeepers are deployed.
Historically, these problems have been limited to
a few trouble spots. Yet in our globalized world,
violence in faraway locations eventually affects
everybody. Today’s unimpeded movement of goods,
services, capital, people and information is creating
wealth and freedom, of course; but it has also
unleashed unprecedented opportunities for organized
crime to wreck both.
In the Council’s past reviews of these issues it
faced a tough dilemma. How can a multilateral system
created to deal with tensions between nations fight
criminal groups that are non-State, yet transnational
and powerful enough to threaten sovereign States? The
answer is two-pronged. Of course, States must
strengthen their own capacity, but also, given the
global nature of this threat, national efforts must
become part of a multilateral framework. How can this
be done?
Let me look at the issues of development and
security. First, vulnerability to organized crime can be
reduced most effectively through both development
and security — the two basic pillars of the Council’s
work. I stress that development is the best prevention.
Throughout the world, prosperity and good governance
are vaccines against violence, and reaching the
Millennium Development Goals will be the most
effective antidote to crime, while crime prevention will
help to achieve the Millennium Development Goals.

3

S/PV.6277

Security is equally crucial. By resolving conflicts
and helping Governments to enforce the rule of law,
this Council will not only build peace, but will indeed
make an affected region less prone to crime, as the
Secretary-General said in his statement. Conversely,
fighting crime helps to remove spoilers who invest in
violence and instability. To illustrate this point, we
need only take a map of illicit trafficking routes — of
which there are a few in the report — overlay that map
with a map of conflict areas, and juxtapose a histogram
of per capita income. We will see that crime, violence
and underdevelopment all overlap, and that these
regions coincide with United Nations peacekeeping
operations.
Then there is the role of justice. We cannot only
throw money or troops at a problem. Peace and
prosperity also depend on justice, namely, on the legal
frameworks and judicial institutions needed to ensure
the rule of law. A global legal framework exists. The
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, adopted 10 years ago in Palermo,
Italy, is a twenty-first century solution to a twenty-first
century problem. Yet, I am sorry to say, one third of
Member States, including some major countries, have
not ratified it. Its implementation is patchy, there is no
review mechanism and some of its protocols have been
neglected.
But this Council can help. Later in the year, a
treaty event of the General Assembly will take place,
followed by two high-level ministerial sessions in New
York and Vienna, and a Conference of the Parties will
promote ratification of the Convention. Those events
will call for technical assistance and consider a
mechanism to review implementation. I am pleased
that this morning the Secretary-General invited the
Council to send a strong signal to take these
Convention-related events seriously, which would add
a sense of purpose and urgency to the various events.
Equally important are the institutions needed to
administer justice. So many countries, especially in
Africa, lack the resources to make those institutions
work. I invite the development assistance community
to help vulnerable countries, perhaps through the
intermediation and technical assistance of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), to
upgrade their criminal justice systems. West Africa and
East Africa come to mind right now.

4

There is also an often-forgotten health dimension.
Unless the threat posed by organized crime is
confronted resolutely, we will hear renewed calls to
dump the three United Nations drug conventions that
critics say are the cause of the crime problem. The
cause of the problem is, of course, the enormous
resources generated by drug trafficking. Let me stress
that drug legalization would cause a health disaster,
especially in poor countries. Africa does not need that
new tragedy.
Greater knowledge and better intelligence are
also needed. We need further knowledge about the
ways organized crime operates. Technology has
practically abolished time and space. We should know
what goes on anywhere on the planet at any moment,
but we do not. There are so many places outside of
Government control that are too scary for investors and
tourists. Those are precisely the places where
smugglers,
insurgents
and
terrorists
operate
undisturbed and undetected. They run fleets of ships,
planes, trucks and containers that carry tons of drugs
and weapons. Their activities are mostly discovered by
chance — the crash of a phantom plane, a drug ship
that runs short of fuel, or the fortuitous seizure of an
illegal cargo.
There are so many blank spots on our radar
screens, and our ignorance about what goes on in the
world has deadly consequences. Therefore, we need a
change of attitude. It is time to regard intelligencesharing as a way of strengthening sovereignty, not of
surrendering it. When a police car stops at the border,
while criminals cross the border freely, sovereignty has
already been breached. It has, in fact, been surrendered
to those who break the law. A more comprehensive
attitude would help to establish networks to monitor
illicit flows, share intelligence and carry out joint
operations. Our Office, the UNODC, supports these
efforts in Central and West Asia, in the Gulf, in West
Africa, along the main drug routes into Europe and
across Mesoamerica. More help is needed, for example
across the Sahara-Sahel region. That was proposed to
the Council in December (see S/PV.6233), as members
may recall.
We must also be able to measure progress and
report to the Council accordingly. At the moment, I
would like this to be another area in which the United
Nations is the world’s best information provider. We
cannot report on crime trends; we cannot propose an
integrated understanding of its causes and

10-25007

S/PV.6277

consequences. The data is not there. Even the logistics
for gathering data are not there. Intellectual and
financial resources are required to develop the right
expertise to serve the needs of the Council.
My fourth point is on the factors that enable
crime to prosper. The first and foremost factor is
corruption. I am pleased that the Conference of the
States Parties in Doha agreed in November 2009 on a
mechanism to monitor implementation of the United
Nations Convention against Corruption. I commit my
Office to providing periodic evidence of the progress
made in fighting a crime that not only steals from the
needy to enrich the greedy, but lubricates other crimes.
Let me go back to the cargo plane loaded with
guns and drugs that crashed in Mali, where I was only
three days ago. I now ask how the fraudulent pilot
certificates, false registration, forged bills of landing
and lading and altered tail numbers were produced.
Looking perhaps at other countries in Africa, how are
massive shipments of counterfeit goods, illegally cut
timber or toxic waste shipped worldwide without
anyone noticing? The “C” word — “C” for corruption
— has a lot to do with that. But the theory is that the
basis of corruption is money-laundering. Current
arrangements have made it harder to recycle money
through the financial system. There are so many black
holes — informal money transfer, the hawala system,
offshore banking, recycling to real estate, recycling to
legal assets — all of which must be plugged.
In order to put in perspective the massive
proceeds from crime, let us recall that the regular
budget of UNODC is 1 per cent of the United Nations
budget. And the United Nations budget is less than 1
per cent of the yearly proceeds of the global drug trade,
which is more than $300 billion. Or, to put it another
way, consider this: a line of cocaine snorted in Europe
destroys one square metre of Andean rainforest and
buys 100 rounds of AK-47 ammunition in West Africa.
Multiply that line of cocaine by the 850 tons of cocaine
produced every year, and you get a sense that this is a
more uneven fight than even that between David and
Goliath.
My final point is about system-wide response,
something already raised by the Secretary-General.
Because of the cross-cutting nature of organized crime,
a United Nations-wide response is of course needed,
and I welcome the Secretary-General’s statement. I am
pleased that the Security Council supports the growing

10-25007

cooperation among the Department of Political Affairs,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, UNODC
and the Peacebuilding Commission. This will ensure
that United Nations conflict prevention, crisis
management and peacekeeping all include a criminal
justice component.
Concerning the future, I am pleased with the
suggestion that the Security Council hold periodic
debates on the threat to stability posed by organized
crime. Early warnings could be brought to the
Council’s attention, as we did some time ago when we
discovered the attacks on West Africa by cocaine
traffickers and, later, on East Africa by heroin
traffickers. The Council may also want to consider
including a criminal justice component in relevant
peacekeeping missions.
To conclude, we need deeds more than words.
Last week in West Africa, ministers of the Economic
Community of West African States told me — I was on
a mission there for an entire week — that cocaine
trafficking in the region had declined in the past 18
months. That is a very good omen. In a sense, our
efforts — the efforts of the Security Council — are
paying off. However, there are warning signs that
traffickers are reappearing on the scene, disguised, in
other parts of West Africa, because tough words have
not been fully matched by equally robust actions. Let
us learn from that lesson.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Costa for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Council.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): First, Mr. President, I
wish to thank you for organizing this briefing. It is
very timely and pertinent for the Security Council to
deliberate on the transnational threats to international
peace and security posed by drug trafficking, organized
crime and terrorism. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral and Mr. Antonio Maria Costa, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), for their comprehensive and
insightful briefings. We very much appreciate the
Secretary-General’s leadership in raising awareness on
this issue, as well as the valuable work done by
UNODC in building the capacity of Member States to
combat drug trafficking, organized crime and
terrorism.

5

S/PV.6277

In this era of globalization, organized crime
groups and networks have unfortunately become more
diversified and connected. As a result, they have
successfully exploited the opportunities presented by
globalization and created parallel economies of their
own, living off illicit drug and arms trafficking and
money laundering. Today, therefore, we are faced with
a unique and growing phenomenon that poses
considerable risks and threats to the entire international
community. These transnational threats, inter alia,
undermine state authority, fuel corruption, hamper
economic development and weaken the rule of law. As
such, they not only adversely affect the economic and
social fabric of the countries concerned and erode the
fundamental values of societies; given their
transnational and global character, they also create
tension and breed conflict among countries.
In the Security Council, for instance, we have
observed this grim reality on many occasions. I will
not give examples, but it is evident that such
transnational threats pose a significant and particular
challenge for countries emerging from conflict. They
are thus among the reasons exacerbating many crises
where the United Nations operates and, as such, they
also undermine the peacekeeping, peacemaking and
peacebuilding efforts of the international community.
Furthermore, the interconnected nature of
terrorism and transnational organized crime has
become more evident and troubling in recent years.
Indeed, today it is a well-documented fact that the
revenue generated by drug trafficking has become a
primary source of terrorist financing, followed by arms
smuggling, human trafficking, money laundering and
extortion. We could point to other examples and
linkages where various transnational threats work in
tandem with one another to the detriment of
international peace and security.
Of course, the magnitude of the problems they
create may differ from region to region. But it is
obvious that geography can no longer be a shield
against these threats, which recognize no frontiers; and
thus the fight against this challenge must be based on a
comprehensive, effective and global strategy. We need
strong international cooperation on the basis of
common and shared responsibility.
In this regard, there are already well-established
institutions and programmes within and outside the
United Nations system for combating these threats. Our

6

efforts must first and foremost be aimed at
strengthening cooperation between these framework
and improving their efficiency. However, as evidenced
by today’s debate, there is also a role and responsibility
for the Security Council to fulfil in monitoring the
impact that these transnational threats have on
international peace and security, particularly in areas
and issues that the Council is seized of, and taking
necessary action as appropriate to help in the fight
against these scourges.
Turkey is certainly committed to play its role on
both accounts. In fact, mindful of the vital importance
of effective international cooperation, Turkey has
already signed and ratified all the relevant United
Nations conventions, in particular the Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and its
Protocols. Turkey has also concluded bilateral
agreements with more than 70 countries on cooperation
against drug trafficking, terrorism and organized crime.
In conclusion, I would like to stress once again
that transnational organized crime cannot be prevented
by Governments acting individually or through
traditional forms of international cooperation.
Organized crime and its tremendous financial gains
necessitate
well-designed,
coordinated
and
comprehensive responses on the part of the
international community. As Mr. Costa emphasized,
our response must be based on the parallel pillars of
development and security, backed by justice. We hope
that the Security Council’s renewed commitment to
addressing transnational threats will re-energize
international cooperation. The draft presidential
statement, which we fully support, certainly sends the
right messages in that direction.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank the Secretary-General and the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) for their briefings. We
welcome the convening of this informative meeting,
which is particularly timely in view of the challenges
raised by what are called new threats to international
security, which are increasingly serious and
multidimensional in nature.
In the wake of the Security Council’s thematic
debate on drug trafficking as a threat to international
security in Africa held last December (see S/PV.6233),
today’s meeting contributes to a larger discussion of
the threats to international security, which extend

10-25007

S/PV.6277

beyond borders, harm States and affect conflicts in
various parts of the world.
Experience has shown that organized crime has
become another factor that exacerbates conflicts in
situations where institutions are still fragile. This
scourge is also at the root of other threats to internal
State stability, such as military coups, insurgencies, the
financing of armed groups, human rights violations,
social tensions, the trade in drugs for arms, the
financing of terrorist activities, the creation of
ungovernable situations, humanitarian crises, ethnic
violence, the infiltration of crime into politics and
business, regional instability and child recruitment in
criminal activities, among others.
That is why it is crucial to restore State authority
in those countries that have overcome internal conflicts
and whose peacebuilding process is affected by the
problem of drug trafficking and organized crime.
Fortunately, the places where the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime has had the greatest impact
against transnational organized crime, in particular
drug trafficking, also have peace missions, whether
they are in Africa, Asia, Europe or Latin America and
the Caribbean.
As we have repeatedly observed, these new
challenges
to
international
security
are
multidimensional, as evidenced by the global problems
of drugs and organized crime in their most obvious
manifestations. Both problems warrant priority
treatment commensurate with their implications for
security, prosperity and development.
Organized crime is among the greatest threats,
due to its ability to damage the political, social and
economic stability of countries and to take on regional
and even global dimensions. For decades, the drug
problem was analysed from fragmented points of view,
in an approach where the main market forces — supply
and demand — were de-linked. Now, however, it has
been clearly demonstrated that such de-linking is not
valid, and that, on the contrary, every Government
must tackle — not only on the basis of its own reality
and circumstances but also by adopting a
comprehensive and balanced strategy — the whole
chain of criminal activity and the various links of this
global phenomenon, which is the responsibility of all
States without exception.
Given the growing and increasingly obvious links
between drug trafficking and other forms of organized

10-25007

crime, such as illicit arms trafficking, money
laundering and terrorism, Governments and the
international community as a whole must design
strategies that address the specificities of particular
serious crimes while identifying the common and
convergent elements between them so that they can be
addressed comprehensively. In this way, the rule of law
can be strengthened, closing off more spheres to the
culture of illegality and impunity.
In recent years, transnational organized crime has
adopted
increasingly
sophisticated
operational
mechanisms, and it is therefore urgent for the
international community to define and improve their
strategies to tackle these issues while also seeking to
adopt a cross-cutting approach.
Despite the resources that every Government has
devoted to the fight against drug trafficking and related
crimes, designing strategies to counter the innovative
and organizational capacity of criminal groups is
increasingly complex. We therefore need resolute
international cooperation in order to improve our
capacity to react, given the speed with which criminal
groups respond to measures implemented by
government authorities. Strengthening international
security means that all States must commit themselves
to establishing an effective and reliable system for
exchanging information to allow us to identify new
trends and links between organized criminal groups.
These cooperation and coordination efforts must be
based on a common and shared responsibility, as a
globally recognized principle, in order to generate
mutual trust while fully respecting State sovereignty.
The United Nations institutional response is
crucial, but it has been inadequate, since organized
criminal groups are an increasingly sophisticated
phenomenon that requires, as I said, a coordinated
response and steadfast commitment from the
international community.
Mexico believes that the United Nations must
play a more active role in the debate on the fight
against this scourge, not only through its technical
forums, but also by promoting a high-level
commitment to fight it. Just as we call for commitment
in the fight against climate change, we should require
the same level of commitment in the fight against
organized crime. Mexico believes that subsequent
debates that will take place in the Security Council, the
General Assembly and in the specialized agencies must

7

S/PV.6277

be approached from a multidisciplinary and balanced
perspective, taking advantage of the synergies that
improve the results of the work of each of these
forums.
A high-level segment of the General Assembly on
transnational organized crime will be held soon as part
of the tenth anniversary of the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime —
the Palermo Convention. This event will offer us the
ideal opportunity to breathe new life into international
cooperation on this subject and to renew our political
commitment against organized crime. Mexico
recognizes the fact that the current legal regime
provided for by the relevant conventions — the
Palermo Convention, the various conventions against
illicit narcotics trafficking and the 16 counter-terrorism
instruments — provide the necessary framework to
fight organized crime. We therefore need universal
ratification and, above all, full implementation of these
instruments by the international community.
The complexity of the problem highlights the
importance of international cooperation. It is very
important to bear in mind that the fight against drug
trafficking and organized crime, besides having human
costs, also diverts major resources away from
economic and social development. We therefore
believe it fitting that the Security Council contribute to
reviewing effective measures in those areas that appear
on its agenda in order to fight drug trafficking and
organized crime. It is particularly important to think
about the ways in which the Security Council, within
the area of its competence, can contribute to the
important work carried out by the General Assembly
and other United Nations bodies, such as the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, with a view to
seeking out better defined and coordinated responses in
the global fight against drugs.
Investments in early warning and prevention
mechanisms on transnational organized crime must be
a priority for the Security Council. This organ must
therefore, in close cooperation with the General
Assembly, the Office on Drugs and Crime and the
Peacebuilding
Commission,
establish
specific
mandates for peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions
on preventing organized crime, which should include
measures aimed at strengthening the rule of law,
security sector reform and promoting development.

8

In conclusion, Mexico believes it is important to
strengthen dialogue between the Council and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and, in this
context, we believe it would be valuable to hold
informative meetings with the Office, such as this one,
on a regular basis.
We express our thanks to you, Mr. President, and
the delegation of France for having organized this
meeting. We also express our support for the draft
presidential statement.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I should like to thank
you, Mr. President, for having organized this important
debate. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
important statement and the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
Antonio Maria Costa, for his focused and helpful
briefing.
The holding of this debate soon after that of
December 2009 focused on Africa (see S/PV.6233)
attests to the commitment of the Council to addressing
this issue in a comprehensive way. Drug trafficking
and transnational organized crime, especially the
crimes of terrorism, illicit trafficking of small arms and
money laundering, pose a growing threat to
international peace and security. The challenge of
combating these crimes has become even more
formidable because the networks are increasingly using
advanced information technology methods, such as
satellite phones and cybertransactions.
There is a worrisome trend of linkages between
drug trafficking, organized crime and the financing of
terrorism. Many countries in various regions of the
world are becoming vulnerable. It is therefore critical
to strengthen collective efforts to combat these crimes
by enhancing cooperation and coordination at the
national, subregional, regional and international levels.
We commend the role played by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and the International
Narcotics Control Board in strengthening the capacity
of States to respond more effectively to drug
trafficking and transnational organized crime. In
particular, we welcome the continued UNODC support
for regional initiatives in various regions, including
West Africa and, more recently, East Africa.
Uganda continues to take the necessary measures,
both at the national level and within the framework of
the East African Community, the African Union and
international instruments, to combat drug trafficking

10-25007

S/PV.6277

and organized crime. We have stringent antinarcotics
and antiterrorism legislation and measures that
continue to be reviewed to take into account emerging
challenges.
The relevant international conventions, including
the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs and the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its protocols, provide a firm legal
framework for international action against organized
crime. What is needed is the intensification of efforts
towards implementation of the provisions of these
Conventions by Member States. The international
community’s collective response to organized crime
can be more effective through universal participation in
these instruments.
The transnational crime networks are, in many
cases, well organized. It is therefore critical that the
actions and responses of national, subregional and
regional bodies, the United Nations system and the
wider international community to counter their threats
be comprehensive and well coordinated.
In conclusion, the countries most vulnerable to
drug trafficking and transnational organized crime
networks are those with weak control measures,
especially those in conflict and post-conflict situations.
These countries deserve the support of the UNODC
and the international community in dealing with these
challenges.
The proliferation of organized crime is a deterrent
to investment and has a negative impact on the
economies of afflicted countries. The social fabric and
health of sections of the population are also negatively
affected. It is therefore important to take these threats
into account while developing conflict-prevention and
peacebuilding strategies.
Uganda supports the draft presidential statement.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank France for having convened this meeting
of the Security Council. I also wish to thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his statement and Executive
Director Costa for his briefing.
The 2005 World Summit Outcome (General
Assembly resolution 60/1) emphasizes that drugs,
transnational crime and terrorism have negative
impacts on global development, peace, security and
human rights, and calls for collective responses by the
international community. In recent years, the

10-25007

international community has made unremitting efforts
to prevent and combat drug trafficking and
transnational organized crime, and has achieved
positive results. However, at the same time,
international terrorist activities, transnational organized
crime and the production and trafficking of drugs have
become interwoven and increasingly globalized, cartelcontrolled, cyber-based and diversified.
The global fight against drugs remains a daunting
challenge. In some countries in conflict or in postconflict situations, there have been increased flows of
illegal funds and weapons for drug trafficking and
related transnational organized crimes. As channels of
financing for terrorist organizations, they jeopardize
the social stability and economic development of these
countries.
Strengthening international cooperation on the
basis of broad participation and shared responsibility is
the most effective way to combat drug trafficking and
related transnational crimes. It is precisely the
undiminished demand for drug consumption in some
developed countries and the colossal profits involved
that drive international drug cartels to unscrupulously
organize the production and trafficking of drugs.
Since economically underdeveloped regions are
most often the points of origin in drug production and
of transit in drug trafficking, the international fight
against drugs must control drugs in a more balanced
way so as to reduce the demand for them and the harm
they cause.
Helping developing countries to develop their
economies and generate jobs is the only approach that
can address the drug problem at its roots. Drug
trafficking and related transnational crimes often grow
rampant in societies that are economically backward
and impoverished. Some countries emerging from
conflict are plagued with difficulties in economic
development, youth unemployment and inadequate
legal institutions, thereby becoming major victims of
international drug trafficking.
Helping those developing countries to achieve
economic development is particularly important to
eliminating the root causes of drug trafficking and
other crimes. The international community must help
such countries to develop alternative economies,
generate job opportunities, improve people’s
livelihoods so that they have other ways of earning a

9

S/PV.6277

living, and enhance their awareness and capacity to
resist the temptation to use drugs.
The fight against drug trafficking involves social
development and many other factors, and needs
national Governments, regional organizations and
United Nations agencies to fully exploit their
respective advantages and expertise for effective
international cooperation. The primary responsibility in
the fight against drug trafficking and related
transnational crime lies with national Governments.
International cooperation in that field must adhere to
the principles of respect for sovereignty and equal
mutual benefit. Regional organizations must be
mobilized and their leading role brought fully into
play.
At the international level, the United Nations
should play a greater coordinating role. The United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the International
Narcotics Control Board and other related international
treaty bodies must continue to play a significant role in
promoting international cooperation and in helping
developing countries to enhance their capacities. We
support United Nations operational bodies in
continuing to address the problem of drug trafficking
and transnational organized crime.
The Security Council shoulders the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security. Therefore, it should focus its attention on
issues that threaten international peace and security
brought about by armed conflict. The Security Council
can continue to be engaged in the fight against drugs
and related transnational organized crime from its own
perspective, but the focus should be on the drug
trafficking and related transnational organized crime
faced by countries in conflict or in post-conflict
situations so as to help address the problem of armed
conflict.
Meanwhile, we hope that the Security Council’s
deliberations on this issue will contribute to the global
fight against drugs and transnational organized crime.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): I would first like to thank the French
delegation for convening this debate on the crosscutting threats posed by drugs, transnational crime and
terrorism.
Since those threats are real and pose genuine and
serious threats and challenges to international peace

10

and security, they call for a global response. Because
they spare no geographical area or country, those
threats must be addressed and countered collectively.
From that standpoint, exchanging information and
sharing experiences, as well as assistance at the
international level, remain essential.
Because these threats attack all strata of society
of our States, promote corruption and contribute to
destabilizing democracies, in particular emerging ones;
and because they hinder development efforts and
exacerbate crises and tensions in areas that have
already been weakened by severe challenges to
security and development, they require us to strengthen
the existing international and national legal arsenals.
Since some countries more than others have unique
weaknesses owing to various factors that promote the
vicious circle of lawlessness and underdevelopment,
we call for increased assistance in the capacitybuilding of those countries in order to enable them to
better fight such threats and to better participate in the
global effort in that regard.
We therefore welcome the establishment of a
partnership among the United Nations African Institute
for the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders, its member States and the international
crime prevention network in order to offer an effective
response to the various ills created by transnational
crime. That is why, given the challenges that the
Institute must address on the continent — including the
increasingly complex operations of transnational
criminal groups and the illicit circulation of
firearms — we underscore the need to provide the
African Institute with the necessary financial means by
increasing the subsidies granted to it by the United
Nations.
Once again, my delegation would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for having convened this debate,
while affirming its support for the draft presidential
statement that you kindly presented to us.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s meeting on
transnational threats. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his
commitment to this important issue, and Mr. Costa,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office for
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), for his efforts and
devoted leadership, which play a central role in

10-25007

S/PV.6277

combating illicit drug trafficking and transnational
crime.
Drugs and crime were among the eight priorities
that the United Nations identified in the SecretaryGeneral’s strategic framework for 2010-2011. Indeed,
transnational crime and drug trafficking groups and
networks have never had such influence and global
reach. The nexus between their illicit activities is
increasingly alarming. Those activities are unavoidably
associated with violence and corruption and, in many
cases, are used to finance terrorist groups and acts of
terrorism. Thus, transnational organized crime and
drug trafficking have a long-term negative impact on
peace, security and economic development and should
clearly be fought in a synchronized manner on multiple
fronts.
Transnational crime, drug trafficking and
terrorism profit from the weak capacity of States to
maintain law. They fuel and prolong existing conflicts
and pose threats to peacebuilding efforts in
post-conflict States. In a globalized society,
transnational crime groups and networks are better
equipped with new information and communication
technologies and are becoming more diversified;
hence, the need for a constantly evolving response.
Allow me to highlight the following elements. On
drugs, despite the statistics from the UNODC showing
decreases in the global production of cocaine and
heroin, efforts to fight the drug scourge should be
intensified. That fight requires a comprehensive
international approach based on a strong sense of
shared responsibility. Special attention should be
devoted to efficient modes of collaboration among
countries of origin, transit and destination. States need
to build capacity, share information, provide mutual
legal assistance and carry out joint operations. Crop
control strategies should also include alternative
development and, where appropriate, preventive
alternative development programmes, eradication and
law-enforcement measures. In that regard, we welcome
the Political Declaration and Plan of Action adopted at
the fifty-second session of the Commission on Narcotic
Drugs, and we commend its recognition of the need for
cooperation between developed and developing
countries.
Due to advances in today’s technologies,
transnational organized crime is increasingly operating
through flexible networks rather than rigid structures.

10-25007

That form of organization provides criminals with
diversity, low visibility and longevity. We believe that
combating organized crime requires comprehensive
efforts in building State capacity in the area of the rule
of law.
Criminals are motivated, inter alia, by financial
gain. We therefore attach importance to weakening
organized crime by eliminating its ability to launder
money. In that regard, we encourage international and
regional organizations to join their efforts to establish a
robust capacity-building mechanism for rule of law
assistance.
On terrorism, Lebanon condemns terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations. We stress the necessity to
criminalize all terrorist practices and forms of support
for them, including financing and instigation. We
consider terrorism to be a global phenomenon that is
not related to any race, religion, colour or country. The
ability to create networks with global reach and
sophisticated capacity provides terrorists with a new
dynamic. There is therefore an imperative need to
address root causes and to strengthen responsible
States, the rule of law and fundamental human rights as
part of a global strategy to fight terrorism.
On international cooperation, the transnational
nature of crime and drug trafficking means that no
country can face them alone. In that regard, my
delegation commends the role played by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the International
Narcotics Control Board, Interpol, the World Health
Organization and other relevant United Nations organs
and agencies in assisting Member States in the fight
against drug trafficking and transnational crime. We
encourage them to continue and strengthen their
cooperation with relevant regional and subregional
organizations. We particularly praise UNODC for
working on a tight budget funded mainly by voluntary
donations, and express our full support for that
important
organization.
We
support
the
recommendation that the United Nations consider
mainstreaming drug trafficking and transnational crime
into its wider conflict-prevention, assessment and
peacebuilding activities.
The collective response to organized crime also
depends on consolidating and strengthening the
international treaty framework. National, regional and
international actions and strategies to combat drug
trafficking and organized crime need to be not only

11

S/PV.6277

comprehensive but also well coordinated. No less
important is the need to work with civil society
stakeholders.

counter-narcotics activities, we must also make full use
of the capabilities of the International Security
Assistance Force in Afghanistan.

Mr. Shcherbak (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and the French delegation for your
timely initiative to organize today’s meeting of the
Security Council to consider threats to international
peace and security and to adopt the important draft
presidential statement before us. We are also grateful to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for setting out the
strategic approach of the United Nations to these
issues. We would also like to thank Mr. Antonio Maria
Costa, Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), for his thorough
briefing.

Another very important element in countering the
flow of drugs from Afghanistan is to cut off the illegal
supply to that country of precursors for the production
of heroin. We are prepared to work closely with our
partners to implement the provisions of resolution
1817 (2008). In that regard, we believe that there is an
important role for the work of the International
Narcotics Control Board and the UNODC. We believe
it important to involve them in developing initiatives
aimed at strengthening the international regime for the
control of precursors. In that regard, I refer to measures
to mark precursors in order to enable us to identify
specific producers and suppliers of such substances to
Afghanistan; to strengthen international monitoring of
the movement of precursors on the basis of a system of
notifications on pre-export, re-export and resale to
third countries; to monitor heavy-freight transport on
the Afghan border; and to license any activities related
to the supply of precursors and their substitutes.

Illicit drug trafficking associated with organized
crime and terrorism has assumed dangerous
proportions in various regions of the world. We support
the focus of the Security Council, as the principal
organ responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security, in helping to resolve this issue.
The drug threat from Afghanistan is global in
nature and as acute as ever. In that regard, we believe
that we are facing a threat to international peace and
security that requires the Security Council to take
appropriate action. Russia believes that the decisions
adopted in the context of the ongoing Paris-Moscow
process being carried out under the auspices of the
United Nations form the basis for stepping up
international cooperation to combat the global drug
threat from Afghanistan. We also believe that this
process is one of the most effective and promising
instruments available to the international community.
The time has come to give some thought to how we can
build upon those decisions on the basis of recent
narcotics trends in and around Afghanistan.
We also believe it advisable to hold the third
conference of the Paris-Moscow process at the level of
relevant agency heads the end of this year. At that
conference, the international community could adopt a
specific programme of action on the Afghan counternarcotics track on the basis of previously adopted
policy decisions. We suggest that the conference give
detailed attention to increasing the effectiveness of the
provision of technical and other assistance to the
Governments of Afghanistan and the States of Central
Asia. In assisting the Afghan Government to undertake

12

We believe that, in implementing programmes
and projects aimed at combating the illegal Afghan
trade in drugs and precursors for their production, it is
important the we do our utmost to exploit the
capacities of regional organizations and agencies —
first and foremost the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization,
the
Collective
Security
Treaty
Organization and the Central Asian Regional
Information and Coordination Centre — so as to
combat the illegal trade in narcotics, psychotropic
substances and their precursors.
We are focusing our attention on the importance
of broadening the follow-on qualitative work of the
sanctions Committee mechanism established pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999) in order to fully implement
the relevant provisions of resolutions 1735 (2006) and
1904 (2009). Additional efforts are needed for the
practical implementation of those resolutions to
provide for the listing, under the sanctions regime of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999), of Afghan drug lords who finance
terrorism through the illegal proceeds of the drug trade.
We believe that one of the priorities of counterterrorism efforts is to counter terrorist ideology and
propaganda and to overcome the radical tendencies that
fuel terrorism. We must deprive terrorist groups of that

10-25007

S/PV.6277

fuel and of logistical resources. In those efforts, it is
important to involve the capabilities of civil society
and the business community in an equal and engaged
public-private partnership, as called for in the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and key
resolutions of the Security Council.
The issue of ensuring international information
security has recently taken on great importance. We
believe it important to consider a system of measures
to counter the use of information and communication
technologies for terrorist ends and the undermining of
international peace, stability and security by terrorists
and criminals. In that regard, we believe that there is a
pressing need to develop and adopt a universal
international convention to combat cybercrime,
including a general code of conduct for States in the
area of global information.
In conclusion, I affirm that the adoption of the
draft presidential statement today will illustrate the
decisiveness and unity of the Council in countering the
increasing threats to international stability. We believe
that this important document will help to intensify
international cooperation in this area.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): First of
all, allow me to thank the French presidency for
convening this important meeting. Let me also take this
opportunity to thank Mr. Antonio Maria Costa,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, for his dedicated work and for his
briefing.
The rapid growth of criminal networks,
transcending national borders and regional boundaries,
dangerously affects today’s global peace and security.
Poorly governed countries, especially those emerging
from post-conflict situations and humanitarian crises,
are the most vulnerable, and unstable situations are
fertile ground for the development of criminal and
terrorist activities and corruption. The clear cause-andeffect relationship between poor social and economic
situations and a lack of the rule of law on the one hand
and rising crime and corruption on the other makes
development unsustainable and affects domestic,
regional and international peace and security.
To be able to provide an efficient response to the
scourge of transnational organized crime, the
international community should first undertake further
efforts to make developing countries less susceptible to
organized crime, by addressing the root causes of

10-25007

widespread poverty, investing in health and human
development and ensuring systematic law enforcement
and institution-building. Through such preventive
activities, the international community will enable
developing countries to fight organized crime by
themselves, to the benefit of all States and of the
international community as a whole.
In order to create a common assessment of rising
crime and corruption trends, which is indispensable for
identifying policies and for creating effective counteractivities, the United Nations and its relevant agencies,
through the “One United Nations” concept, should
further improve coherence in the collection and sharing
of information and in strategic data analysis. In that
context, we would like to encourage the further
development of substantive software applications such
as the United Nations National Drug Control System
(NDS), the Pre-Export Notification System (PEN On
Line), goAML and other tools specifically conceived
for national and international control and the fight
against organized crime.
My delegation joins those who acknowledge the
seriousness of this problem and points out that, given
its nature, it is clear that no single country acting alone
can address this problem successfully. While building
the proper judiciary and police systems in individual
countries is of paramount importance, cooperation at
the subregional and regional levels is equally
important. Regional strategies and the conclusion of
bilateral and multilateral agreements tailored to
national and regional specificities can provide a
comprehensive legal framework for cooperation and
successful counter-activities and could increase the
national, regional and overall global capacity to
effectively respond to international threats posed by
organized crime, drug trafficking and corruption.
I would also like to take this opportunity to state
that my country has undertaken important legislative,
judicial and structural reforms aimed at strengthening
our drug control system and fighting illicit trafficking
and related crimes. Furthermore, Bosnia and
Herzegovina attaches utmost importance to bilateral
and regional cooperation in combating these threats to
global peace and security and is fully committed to
working closely with neighbouring countries and the
relevant regional and international organizations.
We believe that it is crucial to cooperate,
exchange information and experiences and promote

13

S/PV.6277

good practices in confronting this issue. In that regard,
Bosnia and Herzegovina fully supports the efforts that
have been made jointly by the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council, the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and other relevant United
Nations organs and agencies in facing numerous
security risks caused by drug trafficking in many
countries and regions.
Lessons learned in one place can often be of great
use and help in another. In that context, the knowledge
and expertise of UNODC are exceptional value, and
Member States should benefit from them.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I thank you, Mr. President,
for initiating this important discussion on threats to
international peace and security and for providing us
with a very helpful concept paper (see S/2010/94) to
facilitate the discussion. We thank the SecretaryGeneral for his invaluable views on the subject. We
also thank Mr. Antonio Maria Costa for his succinct
briefing. We commend the role of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and its partners,
both within and outside the United Nations system, in
addressing the myriad problems of drug trafficking and
related transnational organized crime.
Drug trafficking remains an endemic and
lucrative organized transnational crime and thus a
major threat to global peace and security. No country is
totally immune to its devastating consequences. None,
indeed, can fight and win the anti-narcotics war in
isolation. In Africa, drug trafficking, cultivation,
processing and abuse are on the rise, inevitably
constituting barriers to the continent’s development
efforts. International drug cartels from other regions of
the world continue to exploit the under-resourced law
enforcement capability of most African countries and
to turn them into major transit points for prohibited
drugs and arms.
The subregion most affected by their nefarious
activities is West Africa, which is fast emerging as a
major warehouse and transit point for cocaine and
other illicit drugs. The activities of these drug cartels
constitute a major threat not only to the subregion’s
fledgling democratic structures but also to good
governance and the rule of law. Indeed, they constitute
serious impediments to subregional efforts to promote
human prosperity, genuine wealth creation, productive
work, development and peacebuilding. Drug trafficking
has led directly to increased violent crime, small arms

14

proliferation, human trafficking, systemic corruption,
money laundering and political and economic
instability. Drug trafficking nourishes the illicit trade in
firearms, which in turn provides the fuel for conflicts
to flourish in our subregion.
The fight against organized transnational crime
should not be left to one country or region. It requires
coordinated, comprehensive and effective global
cooperation. That approach obliges not only the
Council but also the international community to always
take into account the larger question of drug supply
and drug demand control channels, as they are
invariably interrelated. If we adopt a supply control
approach it will facilitate the investigation, arrest and
prosecution of drug traffickers. Seizure of assets in
countries from which the drugs emanate should be
vigorously encouraged. On the demand side, measures
must be taken to promote drug education and increased
public awareness on the consequences of illegal drug
use and trade in countries where the drugs are
consumed. Such measures should be complemented
with enhanced information exchange and intelligenceled policing.
We support the mainstreaming of crime
prevention in conflict prevention strategies, conflict
analysis and integrated mission assessment and
planning. To achieve this, it is important to build
capacities of regional and national authorities to enable
them to fulfil their international obligations on narcotic
drugs, terrorism, arms control and transnational
organized crime.
Indeed, a multifaceted approach at the national,
regional and global levels, in the wider context of
poverty eradication and human development, is
required. Criminal justice and law enforcement
responses must be supported with programmes aimed
at addressing the root causes of crime and the
eradication of poverty. In that regard, the United
Nations system as a whole should recommit itself to
the goal of assisting countries to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals by the target date of
2015.
We cannot overstate the need for cooperation,
coordination and committed and concerted action by
the international community. Our discussion today has
afforded us yet another opportunity to reflect on the
consequences of transnational threats to regional and
international peace. We already have the legal

10-25007

S/PV.6277

instruments and tools to make crime unattractive and
unprofitable. What we need most at this time is to
mobilize the requisite political will and resources to
win the war against organized transnational criminals.
We support the draft presidential statement to be
issued at the end of this debate.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
thank the presidency of the Council for initiating
today’s debate and for focusing the Security Council’s
attention on the serious threat posed to international
peace and security by transnational crime. I am also
grateful to Mr. Costa for his informative and insightful
briefing this morning.
I want to focus on three points. First, the threat
posed by drug trafficking is real and it is global. The
United Kingdom, along with all other Member States,
has a responsibility to support work which reduces
both the demand for and the supply of drugs that are
doing so much harm to our families, communities and
societies. But the scale of the challenge means that we
require a coordinated response from the international
community, and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) is playing a vital role in this
regard.
I would like to highlight in particular UNODC’s
important work in Afghanistan. The annual survey
released last year confirmed a 22 per cent reduction in
poppy cultivation in 2009. We agree with UNODC’s
recent analysis that poppy cultivation is likely to
remain stable in 2010. This shows that effective global
and regional action to counter the threat of drug
trafficking is possible. But it also shows that there is no
room for complacency.
Secondly, the threat posed by drug trafficking is
one part of a broader challenge posed by international
crime. The United Kingdom deplores the growing
number of kidnappings and hostage-takings aimed at
raising funds or gaining political advantage, whether in
South Asia, Africa or Latin America. Last year, the
Economic and Social Council called for kidnappers to
be denied the benefit of substantive concessions. We
urge all Member States to heed this call, not to pay
ransoms, and thus deprive criminals and terrorists of a
vital source of funding and political leverage. As many
colleagues have said this morning, the linkage of
conflict and terrorism to drugs and international crime
is clear.

10-25007

We also need to see stronger national and
international action against the scourge of corruption.
The United Nations Convention against Corruption has
a vital role to play. We encourage all States parties to
work together to ensure that the review mechanism
agreed in Doha last year is as effective as possible.
Thirdly, it is clear from our discussions today that
criminals and terrorists undermine stability and
security, as well as democratic institutions, in fragile
parts of the world. Countries in regions where the rule
of law is weak and where there is an underdeveloped
criminal justice system are particularly vulnerable to
these transnational threats. This underlines the
importance of coordinated international engagement,
often with a strong peacebuilding focus, to build
capacity in countries and regions most at risk. Time
and again, as we look at situations of recurring
conflict, we see that weak judicial systems and lack of
effective policing capacity are a big part of the
problem.
These are sensitive issues for all Governments.
There are no easy answers, but if transnational
criminals are agile and inventive, so must be the
response of the international community. We strongly
support the call in today’s draft presidential statement
for the Secretary-General to consider these threats
when he is analyzing conflict situations and submitting
recommendations to the Security Council. I look
forward to further discussion of these issues in the
future in the Council.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to congratulate
France on taking the initiative to organize a briefing on
transnational organized crime as a threat to peace and
security. I would also like to express my gratitude to
the Secretary-General and Mr. Antonio Maria Costa for
their helpful briefings.
The international community has intensified its
efforts to combat transnational organized crime, in
particular since the adoption of the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
10 years ago. Drug trafficking is closely connected
with transnational organized crime. International
counter-narcotics efforts, also over the past 10 years,
culminated in the adoption by the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs last year of a new Political Declaration
and Plan of Action on International Cooperation
towards an Integrated and Balanced Strategy to
Counter the World Drug Problem.

15

S/PV.6277

Despite all of these coordinated international
efforts to combat the serious threat posed by drugs and
crime, one can hardly say that the situation has
improved over the past 10 years. I would like to point
out three factors that make the challenge more
complicated to deal with.
First, advances in transportation, information
technology and financial systems have made it easier
for cross-border human trafficking and smuggling, the
trade in illicit arms and drugs, and the transfer of
proceeds of criminal activity. These advances have
enabled organized crime groups and networks to
become more diversified and connected.
Secondly, there is an increasingly strong linkage
between drug trafficking and other forms of
transnational organized crime, such as trafficking in
arms and persons, money-laundering and corruption.
Such a linkage is most noticeable, as many of my
colleagues have stated previously, in States embroiled
in conflicts or struggling through fragile post-conflict
situations.
With the profit from the illicit trafficking of drugs
and sometimes of minerals, as well as the trade in
small arms, non-State criminal groups are able to
corrupt State institutions and better equip themselves
with powerful operational capacity. They can finance
acts of terrorism while conflicts in fragile situations are
prolonged, which in turn prevents the establishment of
democratic governance and the rule of law and
impedes sustainable development. As a result,
organized crime groups gain control and establish
dependable routes for illicit trade, as governance by
fragile State institutions becomes further weakened.
Thirdly, the activities of organized crime groups
can easily cross borders and have negative impacts on
neighbouring countries first and then throughout entire
regions. It is indispensable to supplement national
efforts with regional and international cooperation.
In the light of all these challenges, I would be
grateful if Mr. Costa could perhaps provide additional
thoughts on two questions. First, with respect to the
role of the Security Council, it is useful to have these
briefings on transnational organized crime to raise
awareness of the causes and consequences of this threat
and to mobilize political will, which is a primary role
of the Security Council, but does Mr. Costa have any
additional suggestion as to how the Security Council

16

may best reflect his analysis and assessment in its
work?
The second question relates to information- or
intelligence-sharing. We should encourage the creation
of regional networks in problem areas to share
information. But what concrete additional actions
could be taken to promote timely and more effective
information-sharing and joint operations among
diverse players?
I would like to conclude by stressing how
important it is to combat this transnational threat, not
only in order to prevent conflicts and favour
peacebuilding, but also for promoting the human
security of the individual. Japan fully supports the
UNODC’s valuable work in mobilizing international
efforts.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): On behalf
of the United States, let me thank France for its
leadership in drawing attention to these important
issues. I also want to thank the Secretary-General for
his commitment and his presence here today, as well as
Executive Director Costa for his customarily candid
and thoughtful briefing and for his continued work
with this Council.
Not so long ago, the topic that we turn to today
might not have made it onto the agenda of the Security
Council, but organized crime and drug trafficking and
the terrible consequences that follow in the wake of
such large-scale crime and corruption are precisely the
type of threat to global security and stability that this
Council must confront in today’s interconnected world.
We face an extraordinary array of global challenges,
including drug trafficking, that no more stop at national
borders than a gale force wind stops from house to
house. Drug trafficking, like global terrorism,
pandemic disease and climate change, is a
transnational security threat that, by definition, cannot
be tackled by any one country alone. The work we do
together in the Security Council to shore up fragile
States and build up their capacity to provide for their
people is essential to fighting these twenty-first century
threats.
States wracked by poverty and rattled by conflict
often struggle to control their own territory, provide for
their citizens’ basic needs, and extend the rule of law.
That leaves them more vulnerable to exploitation by
terrorist and criminal networks, which strengthens
these transnational predators and in turn undermines

10-25007

S/PV.6277

global security for all of us. The nexus here is
inescapable. Where development falters, security
suffers.
This dynamic is particularly clear when it comes
to the scourge of illegal narcotics. The menace of
international organized crime and drug traffickers is
magnified by conflict, chaos, poverty and instability,
and it magnifies all those ills in return. As Executive
Director Costa rightly notes, we face a vicious cycle in
all too many States. He said that “vulnerability attracts
crime, and … crime, in turn, deepens vulnerability”.
All too often, States that lack the capacity to provide
basic services for their citizens also lack the strength to
fend off the vultures of global crime.
Drugs and drug trafficking do more than just
threaten political stability; they also undermine the rule
of law, overload prisons, strain public health systems,
waste lives and devastate communities. They also stall
and stifle the development efforts that can bring lasting
prosperity, peace and security. They pave the road back
again towards poverty, chaos and conflict, and by
bringing misery and despair to the daily lives of
citizens of other nations they threaten the security of
all nations.
The direct economic costs are bad enough.
International observers, including the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), have calculated
that transnational organized crime and corruption may
siphon off as much as 15 per cent of the world’s gross
domestic product. But today, the security costs of this
dangerous form of organized crime may be even more
grave, because even beyond the corrosion and
corruption that drug cartels inflict upon all too many
States, drug traffickers have increasingly welldocumented links to terrorist and insurgent groups that
further endanger political security and economic
development. Criminal syndicates now help terrorist
groups to slip across borders, smuggle weapons and
forge documents. Meanwhile, terrorist groups are also
often turning to organized criminal activity to extend
their reach. They now often use extortion, drug-dealing
and even credit-card fraud and insurance scams to
finance their activities.
The growing interdependence among terrorist
groups and organized crime makes it much more
difficult to staunch the flow of terrorist financing. As
terrorist groups increasingly mimic the tactics of
organized crime, our international response must

10-25007

include tools used by traditional law enforcement. And
so the United States is working with our international
partners to identify and attempt to dismantle these
terrorist criminal linkages wherever they exist; better
yet, we are working to strengthen criminal justice and
law enforcement institutions so they can thwart such
linkages before they are forged.
This brings us to a new global template for
international law enforcement cooperation, created by
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime — the Palermo Convention — and
the United Nations Convention against Corruption.
These accords, along with the three United Nations
conventions against illegal drugs, form the spine of a
common multilateral framework to better protect our
nations from the linked threats of crime, drugs and
corruption.
It will not in any way be easy to meet these
challenges. In the years since the conventions were
adopted, criminal networks have taken advantage of
the Internet, electronic financial transactions, rising
trade and other technologies associated with
globalization to expand their grasp and cover their
tracks. Such criminal activity is particularly hard to
trace and prevent in regions still struggling with deep
poverty or recovering from conflict, so we must work
together to better use the tools with which the
conventions provide us and work to short-circuit the
destabilizing syndrome of transnational crime.
Having discussed the overall nature of the
challenges, I should like to say a few words about the
role that the United States is working play to tackle
them, as underscored by our efforts to help
Governments to take responsibility as equal partners in
this shared challenge.
From 2008 through 2009, the United States
provided approximately $36 million to support
UNODC activities. We are committed to continuing
that support, and we recognize that the efforts of
UNODC and other international and regional
organizations act as an important force multiplier. For
2010,
the
State
Department
has
allocated
approximately $2 billion to high-priority programmes
to support three interrelated objectives: first, to
institutionalize the rule of law by developing partner
countries’ criminal justice systems to strengthen law
enforcement, increase judicial effectiveness, foster
cooperation in legal affairs and advance respect for

17

S/PV.6277

human rights; secondly, to disrupt the overseas
production and trafficking of illicit drugs through
targeted counter-narcotics efforts, institution-building
assistance and stronger coordination with other
Governments and international organizations; and
thirdly, to minimize the harm that transnational crime
and criminal networks inflict on the United States and
others through enhanced international cooperation and
foreign assistance.
Let me also say a word about the related and
appalling problem of human trafficking. As we all
know, one of the key components of the Palermo
Convention is its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and
Children. The trafficking of persons strikes at our
common humanity and tears the social fabric of
communities around the world. During these times of
economic turmoil, people desperate for work can be
especially vulnerable to trafficking organizations and
crime cartels, particularly in impoverished, fragile or
post-conflict States.
It is not enough simply to enact an
anti-trafficking law or announce a national plan of
action; we must act globally and firmly to implement
trafficking laws and to ensure that these statutes help
victims even while we prosecute those who prey on
them. Simply put, this is a modern form of slavery. The
suffering is vast and the victims should not have to
wait.
In conclusion, let me turn back to the realities of
our interconnected age and the nexus between
development and global security. Drug trafficking and
other transnational threats gravely undermine postconflict States, whose criminal justice sectors may
have been destroyed or even hijacked by criminal
organizations. When States suffer, so do their
neighbours. Regions wracked by conflict, want and
instability are often breeding grounds for drug
traffickers, terrorists and other nefarious actors, who in
turn undermine reconstruction activities and threaten
the security of States in the region and around the
world.
Unfortunately, we will all have to grapple with
the threat of international drug trafficking for years to
come. Given the threat that drug cartels and organized
criminals often pose to development and reconstruction
efforts, this Council should consider how best to
develop judicial and law enforcement capacities when

18

creating or reviewing mandates for peacekeeping
operations in areas where such criminals threaten
international peace and stability.
In the twenty-first century, a threat to
development anywhere can soon be a threat to security
everywhere. It is for that reason that we are pleased to
support the presidential statement to be adopted today.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Let me join previous
speakers in thanking the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
Mr. Antonio Maria Costa, for his comprehensive
briefing.
We share his concerns regarding the impact of
drug trafficking in different regions of the world. Drug
trafficking and related organized crime tend to weaken
domestic institutions and may contribute to bringing
about political instability, as pointed out by many in
this Chamber today. This is particularly serious in
situations of armed conflict or in countries emerging
from conflict. In some cases, there is also evidence that
proceeds from drug trafficking are used to finance
terrorism. The Security Council may therefore find
itself confronted with significant threats to
international peace and security brought about by drug
trafficking and transnational organized crime. When
faced with such challenges, the Council should be
ready to act in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, with due consideration for the
specificities of each case.
Avoiding such a grave risk should be a common
goal to be pursued through the active cooperation of
Member States in the specialized international entities
and bilateral and plurilateral initiatives. Drug trafficking
is, indeed, a matter that by its very nature requires
concerted and multidimensional action at all levels.
Needless to say, efforts in this area should be based on
the principle of shared and common responsibility and
should focus on all aspects of the phenomenon.
Among the several areas where such cooperation
is important, capacity-building in law enforcement is
of particular relevance, especially in the judicial and
security sectors. Strong State agencies and well-trained
personnel are indispensable in the fight against drug
trafficking. This is an area where the prospects for
South-South cooperation are promising. Brazil, for
example, has been working closely with the UNODC
in West Africa, particularly in Guinea-Bissau, where
we have been investing in training law enforcement

10-25007

S/PV.6277

agents and establishing related infrastructure. My
delegation is concerned with the situation in West
Africa in general. We praise efforts already undertaken
by the Economic Community of West African States
and look forward to the full implementation of its
regional anti-drug operational plan.
We also welcome the West Africa Coast Initiative
and extend our support to the creation of transnational
crime units that will allow for increased sharing of
information and intelligence in the region. In my
capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau Configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, I value the
cooperation with the promoters of the Initiative.
Repressive measures alone, however, are not
enough to fight drug trafficking in an effective and
sustainable manner. It is indispensable to address the
frequent underlying socio-economic factors of the
problem, which tend to thrive in a context of economic
despondency and high unemployment. Any successful
anti-drug plan must therefore encompass actions aimed
at creating alternative livelihoods, especially for young
people, to prevent the population from being lured by
the drug business.
Only through broad engagement that takes into
consideration all dimensions of drug trafficking and
transnational organized crime will we succeed in our
common endeavour against them. The United Nations
system provides us with the institutional means through
which we can actively and effectively cooperate. In so
doing, we shall be able to avoid the risk that such
problems will threaten international peace and security.
Brazil supports the draft presidential statement
that we will adopt today and thanks the French
delegation for work well done.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Let me start,
Mr. President, by thanking you for taking the initiative
to organize this important briefing on drug trafficking
and transnational organized crime as a threat to
international peace and security. Austria attaches great
importance to the ongoing fight against drug trafficking
and organized crime. We also highly appreciate the
efforts of the delegation of France and support the draft
presidential statement that will be adopted today.
I would like to express my gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his personal interest in and
commitment to this matter. Let me also thank UnderSecretary-General Antonio Maria Costa for his

10-25007

valuable input and for his committed leadership of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC).
Let me say that my country is honoured to host that
important Office in Vienna. That gives us a chance to
observe its work and the exceptional leadership of the
Under-Secretary-General on a daily basis. We also
appreciate the initiative of UNODC and France to
present, in Vienna in the run-up to today's briefing, a
report on crime and instability.
At various recent meetings of the Council,
delegations, including my own, have underlined the
need to develop a better understanding of the root
causes and aggravating factors in situations of armed
conflict and post-conflict situations. We thank UNODC
for contributing to our better understanding of the
interlinkages among data on illicit trafficking routes,
conflicts, per capita income and other matters important
in this context. All of these data illustrate convincingly
the links that exist among drug trafficking, transnational
organized crime, conflict and, as others have already
said, underdevelopment.
The globalization of transnational criminal activity
and finance has also benefited illicit business and
criminal groups, allowing them to organize themselves
and operate transnationally. To put it more bluntly, the
globalization of organized crime has so far moved
much faster than the globalization of law enforcement.
As a result, crime is being transformed from a threat at
the personal and national levels to a strategic menace
that can affect international peace and security.
It is only by acting in concert that the
international community will be able to prevail in the
fight against drug trafficking and other forms of
organized crime such as human trafficking, migrant
smuggling and money-laundering. We must help States
develop their own capacities to rebuild and strengthen
their institutions, to administer justice and ensure the
rule of law and to provide security. Here too, UNODC
can make an important contribution. The Council itself
should duly take this into account when designing
sustainable strategies for conflict areas.
Universal
adherence
to
and
accurate
implementation of pertinent international legal
instruments, such as the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime, the United
Nations Convention against Corruption, the United
Nations drug control conventions and the international
conventions related to terrorism, should be our

19

S/PV.6277

common goal. In the process of implementation,
international human rights and the standards of due
process will have to be fully respected. Furthermore,
we must constantly improve the existing instruments,
with a view to keeping pace with the changing nature
of transnational crime. Having agreed on a mechanism
to monitor the implementation of the United Nations
Convention against Corruption, the international
community should now focus on a strong and effective
review mechanism for the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime.
The Council has repeatedly recognized the close
connection between international terrorism and
transnational organized crime in its various
manifestations and has underlined the need to enhance
coordination of efforts at the regional, global and
national levels. Here again, UNODC and its Terrorism
Prevention Branch can play an important role when
delivering assistance. The Terrorism Prevention Branch
also plays a very important role in the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force.
Recent studies have confirmed the relationship
between corruption and organized crime, suggesting
that corruption facilitates all forms of organized crime,
which in turn foments renewed corruption. The seventh
Global Forum on Reinventing Government, which was
held in Vienna in June 2007, underlined in the Vienna
Declaration the need to increase transparency and
accountability to combat corruption. More cooperation
on implementation of the United Nations Convention
on Corruption will be needed, including the
development of anti-corruption policies and institutions
as well as preventive anti-corruption frameworks.
In this context, we would like to draw the
attention of the Council to the upcoming establishment
of the International Anti-Corruption Academy in
Laxenburg, Austria, near Vienna. This Academy, based
on the United Nations Convention against Corruption,
aims at promoting anti-corruption measures through
academic research and professional academic training.
The main audience of the International Anti-Corruption
Academy will be, inter alia, law enforcement officers,
judicial staff, private sector representatives and
representatives from non-governmental and international
organizations. The establishment of the International
Anti-Corruption Academy will be another important
step in the fight against corruption worldwide.

20

We fully support the invitation to the SecretaryGeneral, in the draft presidential statement before us
today, to include information on transnational threats in
his reports to the Council when analysing conflicts,
assessing or planning missions, and making
recommendations for future action. More regular
briefings by the Executive Director of UNODC will
further contribute to our understanding and help the
Council to integrate these issues into its work in a more
consistent manner.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.
I thank the Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) for his
briefing. The topics of drugs, crime and corruption are
not at the heart of the Security Council’s mandate;
those subjects are dealt with in a comprehensive way
by the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council. In that respect, we welcome the General
Assembly’s initiative in organizing for the next quarter,
within the framework of the tenth anniversary of the
Palermo Convention, a special high-level meeting
devoted to organized transnational crime.
Nonetheless, the large-scale development of these
cross-cutting problems, above all drug trafficking and
transnational organized crime, is having a growing
impact on States’ security and, beyond, on regional and
international stability and security. The Council has
observed this phenomenon as it relates to several items
on its agenda, be it in West Africa, Haiti or
Afghanistan. When the consequences of the activity of
these criminal networks threaten international peace
and stability, it is the responsibility of the Security
Council to deal with them. Such threats can weaken or
destabilize States, damaging their good governance and
slowing their economic development. They compete
with legal economic systems and promote corruption.
They hamper the post-crisis reconstruction efforts of
public institutions and development organizations led
by national authorities and the international community.
Criminal networks not only benefit from weak or
failed States; their activities also help to exacerbate
political tensions, inter alia, by financing nongovernmental armed groups and insurgency movements.
Moreover, the links between the various drug
trafficking networks and international terrorism seem
to be getting stronger. Due to their transnational

10-25007

S/PV.6277

character, these threats can destabilize entire regions;
challenging them demands close international and
regional cooperation with a view in particular to
strengthening the capacity of weaker States through
technical assistance.
Aware of the growing reach of organized crime,
in 2000 the international community adopted the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime. However, we can only observe that
criminal networks have learned since then to adapt and
to take advantage of changes that have occurred in our
societies, be it in improved information and
communications technologies or the opening up of
financial markets. As a result, we call more than ever
for the universalization of the Palermo Convention and
its additional protocols, and we hope that the upcoming
Conference of the Parties will be directed towards
more effective implementation of its texts.
We welcome the important role played by
UNODC, as well as the quality of its assistance to
States and its projects throughout the world. We also
encourage the Secretariat and its various components
to step up their activities in the area of cross-cutting
threats, especially through networking efforts with the
Department of Political Affairs, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the United Nations
Development Programme — in close cooperation, of
course, with UNODC.
In the Security Council, we are in favour of
taking further into account these cross-cutting threats
when we look at conflict analysis, prevention strategies,
integrated missions and peacekeeping missions. In that
regard, we attach the greatest importance to all the
elements that the Secretariat may be able to convey in
its various reports to the Council.
Lastly, we welcome regional initiatives on drugtrafficking, including the Praia Regional Plan of Action
adopted in October 2008 by the West African States,
and that adopted in San Domingo in March 2009 by the
Caribbean region. Since 2003, at the initiative first of
France and then of Russia, the Paris Pact, renewed in
Moscow, has made it possible to implement operational
cooperation within the framework of the fight against
heroin trafficking out of Afghanistan, and to raise
genuine awareness of the problem posed by the
diversion of chemical precursors. I support the
proposals that have been submitted by the Russian
Federation in that regard.

10-25007

The briefing by the Executive Director of
UNODC has given us a thorough picture of the threats
we face. Drug-trafficking networks and organized
crime have taken on a global dimension and are
endangering international peace and security through
their activities. We hope that the Council will remain
engaged in this matter, which has direct consequences
for our work, and that we can be given regular
briefings by the Executive Director of UNODC so that
we can keep the Council thoroughly informed on the
evolution of these cross-cutting threats.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Costa to respond to the
comments that have been made.
Mr. Costa: Let me begin by thanking you once
again, Sir, for the invitation, and the members for their
kind words and support for the work of my Office.
I heard three questions raised by the Japanese
representative, and I would like to add a couple more
comments on more general issues raised during the
debate.
The first question posed by the representative of
Japan dealt with how the Council could incorporate the
analysis and assessment of our Office into its work, its
function and the role it plays. There are at least three
ways that the Council could be helpful. First, as I said
in my statement, the Security Council’s engagement in
promoting security worldwide is what is needed to
reduce areas of conflict and instability. Indeed,
instability creates insecurity and, as a consequence, the
Council’s own work generally is the first and most
important antidote.
Secondly, regarding our own work and how it
may benefit the Council, I think the Council has
already gone a long way. It started in 2004, when we
began alerting the Council and Member States of the
threat posed to Africa by traffickers from across the
Atlantic. In a crescendo, the Council has adopted a
number of measures and has certainly listened to our
reporting, in writing and in person here in this
Chamber. Our periodic reporting has indeed facilitated
a better understanding of the role of law enforcement
in peacebuilding; in Department of Peacekeeping
Operations activities, which are always approved by
the Council; in the integrated missions; and in the use

21

S/PV.6277

of early warnings, such as we have already provided
concerning West and East Africa.
The third and most or equally important role that
the Council can play is through the work of individual
member States. Around this table are, obviously, some
of the world’s major economic and military Powers.
The work that they are doing bilaterally in the various
areas I have referred to, and the work that they are
doing by providing resources to the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime for the work it does on
behalf of Member States and the Council in this area is
another important contribution.
The second question — actually twin questions in
a single statement — asked by the representative of
Japan was about what I meant by “sharing
information”. First and foremost, mine was a general
exhortation to Member States about working together,
naturally based on the nature of this institution and of
our United Nations work. Regional efforts are ongoing,
but I think we need a change in attitude. No, I am not
asking Member States to “love thy neighbour”, but
certainly I would ask Member States to “trust thy
neighbour”, or to trust their neighbours at least to the
extent of being willing and able to share intelligence
information.
We have seen — and I saw it myself last week —
the important seizures in West Africa, whether in a
poor country like Sierra Leone or a somewhat betteroff country like Senegal. These important seizures
were the result of transatlantic intelligence-sharing,
such as information coming from Colombia or tips
coming from Venezuela. We have to build on this. It
might have been unrealistic to assume that the two
West African countries I referred to could seize tons of
cocaine, but they were able to do so because the tips
came from a neighbouring country, or at least a
neighbour across the sea. So I believe that this is a
crucial element, which is still missing.
Our own Office has been working quite actively.
The representative of Brazil mentioned what we are
doing in West Africa, through the West Africa Coast
Initiative. Reference was made to the Central Asia
Regional Information and Coordination Centre, and I
should mention the Gulf Centre for Criminal
Intelligence as well.
Today, the Secretary-General mentioned an
important session we are holding this afternoon to
promote the processes of the Santo Domingo Pact and

22

Managua Mechanism. They mimic, to some extent, in a
different regional context and for different drugs, the
Paris Pact, to which you referred yourself, Sir.
All of this is extremely helpful, but more is
needed. At the meeting held on 8 December (see
S/PV.6233), I referred to the importance of establishing
a network of monitoring stations throughout the Sahel
and Sahara. There we find countries with very limited
resources — I am referring to Mali, which I visited on
Thursday, and Niger. They are very large countries:
Mali has 7,500 kilometres of borders with five
different neighbours. They are practically uncontrolled.
And it was in Mali that a Boeing 727 with 10 tons of
cocaine crashed. All of this shows that, unless we help
these countries through various new technologies —
perhaps not through physical border control, but virtual
control through satellites and radar stations and in
various other ways — I am afraid we will have some
nasty surprises.
To finish on this second point, with regard to
intelligence sharing, I appreciate the statement by the
representative of Austria, in which he said that the
globalization of law enforcement has not been able to
keep up with the globalization of crime. This is indeed
the point that I have been trying to make, namely, that
globalization has perhaps not weakened sovereignty,
but has transferred it to market forces: to traders and to
the financial sectors, through information technologies
and so forth. However, there are, of course, sinister
forces in the market: the ones we have been talking
about. They have also taken advantage of
globalization. We therefore need — and this is the
point raised by the representative of Gabon — to
regain control of sovereignty by working together and
perhaps sharing sovereignty.
The final point, raised by the representative of
Japan, is about system-wide cooperation within the
United Nations. The legal frameworks are in place. I
was very pleased that the representative of the United
States referred to the whole set of conventions and
instruments we make use of at the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, not only the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime or the United Nations Convention against
Corruption, but also the three drug conventions and the
various protocols. We have to see all of these in a
systematic way.

10-25007

S/PV.6277

When our Office was established in 1997, we
inherited three programmes: drugs, crime and,
eventually, terrorism. They were separate programmes,
with different commissions and different expertise;
people would not talk to one another. It took a number
of years, seven or eight years, until 2005 or 2006, to
bring about an integrated view of all of this. Indeed,
drugs interact with crime, as has been said here, and
crime interacts with terrorism, and so forth. Now we
are moving one step forward, thanks to the members of
the Security Council and to the Council itself. The
United Nations system as a whole is being advised by
the Council to mainstream these three areas, which
have already been addressed in an integrated set of
instruments and policies, into the overall work of the
United Nations.
Now, the system did respond positively a few
years ago when the United Nations Chief Executives
Board called for the mainstreaming of our work within
the United Nations system. This has only worked up to
a certain point. To a large extent, the matters we have
been talking about today — drugs, crime and
terrorism — are rather sinister, both in name and in
logic, and some of our colleagues who deal with the
very noble causes of education, health, employment
and so forth resist, in a way, being associated with
these sinister causes.
But the Council has done a good job of spinning
the work differently: not only drugs but health; not
only crime but security; not only terrorism but stability.
I believe that with this kind of logic that the Council
has put forward, it may be possible for the SecretaryGeneral to propose the integration of our work within
the system at large, just as he did in 2008, a year and a
half ago, when he promoted an effort to mainstream
human rights within the global logic of the United
Nations.
This is an important development for us, because
those institutions of the United Nations that work for
development, whether Bretton Woods institutions or
the United Nations Development Programme, are
helping, in their work, to reduce the threat of crime.
Members mentioned poverty and underdevelopment
being midwives, in a way, to crime. The bodies dealing
with security — the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the Department of Political Affairs, the
Peacebuilding Commission and so forth — can indeed
help. Those working with the environment — I refer to
environmental crime, illegal logging and so forth —

10-25007

such as the United Nations Environment Programme,
can become an important related institution in our
work. Urban security is another element. Everything
that we have been talking about is a threat especially to
individuals and to society at large, especially in large
cities. UN-Habitat is an important player, and so are
those dealing with education and health and so on and
so forth.
I would like to make a couple of quick points,
just to refer to specific important considerations. The
representatives of Japan, China and Mexico underlined
the importance of shared responsibility. Those are key
words; they are not slogans. Yesterday someone — a
member of the Council — looked at the maps that are
included in our report and said, “All the arrows on all
these maps point to the North. What is the problem?”
Well, the problem in the North is that that is where the
demand is. I am glad that the representative of the
United Kingdom also explicitly called for not only a
reduction of supply and trafficking in drugs, but also a
reduction of demand.
Regarding the question of the trilogy of
development, security and justice — and I list them as
the three cornerstones of the work that we can do
together — these are indeed crucial, because it is the
absence of development — namely, poverty — or
insecurity in post-conflict situations that creates the
context that is so helpful to organized crime in terms of
establishing itself. This is not only because there are
weak judicial institutions, but because there are foot
soldiers, and plenty of them. Travel to West Africa:
half of the population is below age 30. They are largely
unemployed, perhaps even illiterate. And a little
lubricant from an organized crime group, paying them
to play the role of foot soldiers in distributing drugs, is
certainly welcome. Of course, it would be very
difficult for me to criticize those kids. I think it is our
inability to help find those kids a job or some sort of a
decent life that is to be blamed.
Finally, on the situation in Afghanistan, referred
to by the representatives of the Russian Federation and
United Kingdom, indeed, our most recent report, which
was shared with the international community two
weeks ago, shows that in 2010 we are likely going to
see a stabilization in cultivation — still at a very high
level, 130,000 or 140,000 hectares, but still about
36 per cent less than two years ago. The 20 opium-free
provinces we listed last year will, by and large, remain
opium-free, and perhaps with some energetic measures

23

S/PV.6277

by some governors, that number could even go up to
22 or 23. Much, of course, will depend on security. The
recent military operation in the Marjah district was
important from the point of view of stability, but what
is also important to note is the tremendous amount of
drug seizures. These large seizures proved that, indeed,
the link between terrorism, insurgency and drugs is
very present in that country. Progress is possible, but
there is no room for complacency, as the representative
of the United Kingdom said.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Costa for the clarifications he has provided. I note
that he made reference to the notion of trust in
international relations, and I am reminded that in an
office of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of a Council
member is written the sentence: “In God we trust;
others, we verify”.
Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations.
“The Security Council notes with concern
the serious threats posed in some cases by drug
trafficking and transnational organized crime to
international security in different regions of the
world. These transnational threats are a source of
growing concern.
“The Security Council, in this context,
further notes with concern the increasing link, in
some cases, between drug trafficking and the
financing of terrorism, including through the use
of proceeds derived from illicit cultivation,
production of and trafficking in narcotic drugs
and their precursors, as well as illegal arms
trafficking.
“The Security Council notes that these
transnational crimes may threaten the security of
countries on its agenda, including post-conflict
States, and expresses its intention to consider
such threats, as appropriate.
“The Security Council notes with concern
that drug trafficking and transnational organized
crime contribute to undermining the authority of
States.

24

“The Security Council notes that, in a
globalized society, organized crime groups and
networks, better equipped with new information
and communication technologies, are becoming
more diversified and connected in their illicit
operations, which in some cases may aggravate
threats to international security. In this context,
the Council expresses concern at the increase in
incidences of kidnapping and hostage-taking, in
some areas of the world with a specific political
context, with the aim of raising funds or gaining
political concessions. The development of
cybercrime is another particular source of concern.
“The Security Council calls upon Member
States to increase international and regional
cooperation, on the basis of a common and shared
responsibility, as well as their cooperation with
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
and the International Narcotics Control Board, in
order to counter the illicit production of, demand
for and trafficking in drugs, and to identify
emerging trends in drug trafficking. It welcomes
relevant initiatives such as the Paris Pact. The
Council also encourages Member States to
undertake further action, as well as to consider,
on the basis of concrete proposals by UNODC and
INCВ, through the United Nations Commission
on Narcotic Drugs, possible new international
initiatives aimed at strengthening the combat
against illicit trafficking in chemical precursors.
“The Security Council encourages the
coordination of United Nations actions, including
those of its agencies, funds and programmes, in
order to enhance the effectiveness of appropriate
international efforts.
“The Security Council reaffirms and
commends the important work of UNODC in
collaboration with other relevant entities of the
United Nations.
“The Security Council encourages States to
strengthen international, regional and subregional
cooperation to counter drug trafficking,
transnational organized crime, terrorism and
corruption and to investigate and prosecute, as
appropriate, persons and entities responsible for
these crimes consistent with international law.
Through compliance with their obligations under
international law, including the relevant

10-25007

S/PV.6277

resolutions of the Security Council, States can
help strengthen international peace and security.
The Council notes relevant international
conventions such as the Single Convention on
Narcotic Drugs of 1961 as amended by the 1972
Protocol, the Convention on Psychotropic
Substances of 1971, the United Nations
Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988, the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime of 2000 and the Protocols
thereto, the United Nations Convention against
Corruption of 2003 and the relevant international
conventions and protocols related to terrorism.

terrorist acts, irrespective of their motivation,
whenever and by whomsoever committed, as well
as the incitement of terrorism.

“The Security Council expresses its concern
about the number of victims caused by acts of
terrorism in various regions of the world. The
Council further reiterates that acts, methods and
practices of terrorism, as well as knowingly
financing, planning and inciting terrorist acts, are
contrary to the purposes and principles of the
United Nations. The Council calls upon States to
continue to condemn in the strongest terms all

In French, at least, that was hardly an example of
literature.

“The Security Council invites the SecretaryGeneral to consider these threats as a factor in
conflict prevention strategies, conflict analysis,
integrated missions’ assessment and planning and
to consider including in his reports, as
appropriate, analysis on the role played by these
threats in situations on its agenda.
“The Security Council welcomes further
briefings, as necessary, on a more regular basis,
by the Executive Director of UNODC.”

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2010/4.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

10-25007

25
