THIRTY-SECOND

YEAR
th
MEETING:

NEW

4 NOVEMBER

1977

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/20461

Expression of thanks to the retiring

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. .
. . . . . . . . . , . . . . .. . . . . -. . .

I

. . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . .

1

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 20 October 1977 from the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l2420)........,........,.,.........................

1

Adoption

of the agenda

President

1

SlPV.2046

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Recisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2046TH

MEETING

Held in New York on Friday, 4 November

1977, at li

a.m.

President: Mr. Mansur R. KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya).

Republic of Cameroon and Viet Nam to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bouayad-Aghu
(Algeria), Mr. Tlou (Botswana),
Mr. Boaten (Ghana),
Mr. Camara (Guinea), Mr. Jackson (Guyana), Mr. Molapo
(Lesotho).
Mr, Kane (Mauritania), Mr. Poisson (Niger),
Mr. Garba
(Nigeria),
Mr. Baroody
(Saudi Arabia),
Mr. Kamara [Senegal), Mr, Hussen (Somalia), Mr. Medani
(Sudan),
Mr. Kodjovi
(Togo), Mr. Mestiri
(Tunisia),
Mr. Oyono (United Republic of Cameroon) and Mr. Dinh
Ba Thi (Viet Nanl) took the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2046)
1. Adoption of the agenda.

3. The PRESIDENT: I wish to inform the members of the
Council that the draft resolution sponsored by Canada and
the Federal Republic of Germany (S/12433] has been
withdrawn.

2. The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 20 October 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/ 12420)

4. Members of the Council have before them a draft
resolution, in document S/12436, which has been prepared
in the course of intensive consultations. The representative
of India has asked that the draft resolution should be put to
the vote. Accordingly, I now put it to the vote.

The meeting wus culled to order at 12 noon.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President

A vote was taken by show of hands.

1. The PRESIDENT: As this is the first formal meeting of
the Security Council in the month of November, I wish to
take this opportunity to pay a tribute, on behalf of the
members of the Council, to my predecessor, Ambassador
Rikhi Jaipal of India, for his services as President of the
Council for the month of October. I am sure I am
expressing the sentiments of the entire Council when I say
that the great skill with which Amb-assador~Jainal
ducted the Council’s business during the month of October
evoked our deep appreciation.

The draft resolution was adopted ununimously. 1
5. The PRESIDENT:
The Secretary-General
make a statement and I now call on him.

wishes

to

& The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
We have today clearly
witnessed a historic occasion, The adoption of this resolution marks the first time in the 32.year history of the
Organization that action has been taken under Chapter VII
of the Charter against a Member State. It is not my purpose
to seek to determine whether the Council’s decision by
itself is adequate to secure its objective. However, it is
abundantly clear that the policy of apartheid as well as the
measures taken by the South African Government to
implement this policy are such a gross violation of human
rights and so fraught with danger to international peace and
security that a response commensurate with the gravity of
the situation was required. It is also significant that this
momentous step is based on the unanimous agreement of
the Council members. Thus .we enter a new and significantly different phase of the long-standing efforts of the
international community to obtain redress of these grievous
wrongs.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 20 October 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Tunisia to the United Natio.ds addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12420)
2. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with decisions taken
by the Council at earlier meetings, I invite the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Ghana, Guinea, Guyana,
Lesotho, Mauritania, the Niger, Nigeria, Saudi Arabia,
Sepegal, Somalia, the Sudan, Togo, Tunisia, the United

1 Seeresolution 41.8 (1977).
1

-

r
1

7. I note that the Council requests me to report within the
next six months on the progress of the implementation of
the mandatory arms embargo which it has decided to
impose. To fulfil this task, I shall obviously need, and I am
confident I shall receive, the whole-hearted co-operation of
all States, Members and non-members of the United
Nations. I would ask all Governments to provide me with
the most complete information as quickly as possible on
the measures which they take to comply with this binding
decision of the Council.

tions, that working paper, which could be called the “Jaipal
formula”, earned the general and unanimous support of this
organ, to the satisfaction of all the members of the Council
and of the United Nations family.
15. In this instrument, the Council, which for the first
time in its history is acting under Chapter VII of the
Charter:
“Decides that all States shall cease forthwith any
provision to South Africa of arms and related matClie1of
all types, including the sale or transfer of weapons and
animunjtion, military vehicles and equipment, paramilitary police equipment, and spare parts for the
aforementioned, and shall cease as well the provision of
all types of equipment and supplies and grants of
licensing arrangements for the manufacture OF maintenance of the aforementioned.”

8. It is, of course, unfortunate that the situation in South
Africa should have deteriorated to such a point that the
Council felt compelled to take this extraordinary measure.
However, this should come as no surprise to the Government of South Africa when it considers how long the world
has appealed in vain for the abandonment of its aparlh’d
policies.
9. We can only hope that the gravity of the Council’s
decision wiil be fully recognized by the Government of
South Africa and that it will therefore begin without delay
the process of restoring fundamental human rights to all the
people in South Africa, without which there can bc no
peace.

The resolution also
“Calls upon all States to review, having regard to the
objectives of the present resolution, all existing contractual arrangements with and licences granted to South
Africa relating to the manufacture and maintenance of
arms, ammunition of all types and military equipment
and vehicles, with a view to terminating them.”

10. Mr.
ILLUECA
(Panama) (intetpretation
j?om
Spanish): Mr. President, the Panamanian delegation wishes
to express jts sincere pleasure at seeing such an outstanding
statesman from the third world presiding over the work of
the Security Council for the month of November. We trust
that with your experience, wisdom and eminent human
qualities the Council will, under your skilful leadership, be
able to do fruitful work in the best interests of international peace and security.

Further, it is the wilt ,of the Council that “all States shall
refrain from any co-operation with South Africa in the
manufacture and development of nuclear weapons” and
that “all States, including States non-members of the
United Nations.
act strictly in accordance with the
provisions of the present resolution”.
16. The fact that in this same resolution the SecretaryGeneral is requested to take certain steps and to present his
first report to fhe Council not later than 1 May 1978 is
evidence that this time the Council is ready to act and to
adopt new measures, in the light of developments, in order
to find a peaceful, just and lasting solution to the question
of South Africa in keeping with the interests, aspirations
and ideals of the large indigenous African majorities of that
important part of the world.

11. My delegation also wishes to take this opportunity to
express the deep gratitude of Panama for the dedication
and the wisdom with which the President of the Council for
October, Ambassador Rikhi Jaipal of India, carried out his
functions. Men of such calibre who have the rare ability
harmoniously to combine humility and great talent for the
common good cannot belong to a single country, to one
region OF to one ideology, for they are the heritage of
mankind at whose service they have placed the extraordinary talents with whjch nature has so generously
endowed them.

17. MF. LEPRETTE
(France)
(interpretation
from
&XC/Z): Mr. President, I should like first of all to congratulate you on your accession to the high office which
you now occupy. I take particular pleasure in so doing as
my country maintains excellent relations with fours. The
masterly way in which you have in the first days of your
presidency conducted our delicate discussions has strengthened-if there were any need of strengthening it-the
confidence which we have in you.

12. The delegation of Panama has given whole-hearted
support to the draft resolution in document S/12436,
which was just unanimously
adopted as resolution
418 (1977).
13. I think that it is appropriate to mention, as part of the
legislative background of this resolution, that the draft
resoIution .submitted as a working paper by the President of
the Council for the month of November was based
substantially on the working paper presented in October,
during informal consultations, by the Ambassador of India
as representative of his country and undoubtedly constitutes a signal contribution to the solution of the grave
problem of South Africa,

18. I should also like, on behalf of my delegation, to
thank your predecessor, the representative of India, Ambassador Jaipal, who as President of the Council displayed his
outstanding qualities as a man and a negotiator. He carried
out his mission with the utmost high-mindedness and with
the constant concern to carry the work of the Council to B
successful conclusion. He may rest assured of our real
gratitude.

14. After lengthy debates, controversy and much discussion back and forth, as well as revisions and reconsidera-

19. France, as it had already announced, has decided in
favour of a mandatory embargo on arms shipments to
2

South Africa, and it will take all necessary measures for its
application.

27. As Secretary of State Vance pointed out two days ago,
the United Stateshasoffered no blueprint for socialreform
in South Africa, and it has offered no time-table t”or
progress. Those matters are up to the people of South
Africa, and it is our fervent hope that the Government of
South Africa will finally begin to talk and listen to its own
people, black and white, Asian and Coloured, Englishand
Afrikaans-speaking,and work with them in moving away
-from the disasterwhich threatensthat country.

20. The consensus which has emerged today is important
because it marks the unanimous will of the 15 members of
the Council. The message is clear. South Africa must now
understand that it will have to come to its senses and
rapidly put an end to its policy of apartheid.
21. Mr. YOUNG (United States of America): Mr. President, I should like to begin by expressingmy admiration
for the skilful manner in which you have led us in the
successfulconclusionof our work on this matter sinceyou
assumedyour responsibilitiesof the presidency of the
Council. I shouldalsolike to take this opportunity to thank
the representativeof India for his leadershipand insight in
bringing the discussionon the draft resolution to such a
successful
conclusion.
22. We can all take satisfactionin the resolution which we
have just adopted. It representsa genuine compromisein
which the membersof the Council demonstrateda willingnessto adjust their views to the necessity of reaching an
agreement.Given the importance of the issue and the
strong feelings which it has generated, our successin
reachinga compromise,through the excellent work of the
Council Presidentsfor October and November-the reprcsentatives of India and the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya-,
demonstratesonce againthe viability of the Council asa
meansfor responditig to situations which threaten international peaceand security.

28. As far as the United States is concerned, it looks
forward to the day when progressin South Africa will make
it possiblefor the Council to remove the stigmawhich this
resolution placeson South Africa. We look forward to early
South African adherenceto the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and a decision to put all its
facilities under international safeguards.We look forward to
the day when South Africa will no longer be an issuebefore
the Council and hope that our resolution will not mark the
beginningof a processof increasinginternational sanctions
against South Africa but, rather, the end of a period of
growing confrontation between South Africa and the rest
of the world.
29. Miss LOPEZ (Venezuela) (interpretation
from
Although we did not intend to speakat this time,
since my delegation has already stated and reiterated its
position on the itetn before us, I have chosento speakto
expressour appreciation and thanks to AmbassadorJaipal,
whosecareful diligencehasfortunately produced the basic
ideas embodied in the draft resolution that we have just
adopted. We shouldalsolike to welcomeasPresidentof the
Council, AmbassadorKikhia, who has already proved his
many diplomatic skills.
Spanish):

23. As I pointed out in my remarkslast Monday/2045th
it is important that the membersof the international community, including the Government of South
Africa, should have a clear understanding of why this
resolutionhasbeenadoptedand what it means.

meeting/,

30. WC supported the three draft resolutions that were
rejected last Monday by the Council becausewe were
convinced of the need for extreme measuresto meet these
extreme problems. The text that we have just adopted
obviously does not incorporate all the elementsthat we
should like to have seenincluded. However, we understand
that a compromisehad to be made to achieve a specific
result, even iT this only deals with one aspect of the
problem, and we gaveour support for that reason.

24. This is the first time that sanctionsunder Chapter VII
of the Charter have been adopted againsta Member of the
Organization. We havejust sent a very clear message
to the
Government of South Africa that the measures
which were
announcedon 19 October have created a new situation in
South Africa’s relationship with the rest of the world.
There should be no further doubt in Pretoria today that
continuation along the courseon which the Government of
South Africa is now embarked can only lead to further
strains on the ties between South Africa and the other
membersof the international community.

31. In this new phaseof the struggle againstthe inhuman
policy of apartlzcid, we hope that the commitment on the
armsembargowill be fully and scrupulously compliedwith
by thosewho arecalled upon to apply it.

25. I am very pleasedto say that this unanimousvote on
the part of the Council wasaccompaniedby the vote of an
overwhelming majority of 347 to 54 in the H, use of
Representativesof the United StatesCongress,alsoexpressing its concern and condemnationof the acts in South
Africa.
26. At the sametime, however, we must stressthe other
side of the picture and make clear to the Government of
South Africa our desirefor reconciliation, provided South
Africa is willing to begin progresstowards the end of
apartheid and the full participation of all South Africans in
the political and economiclife of their country.

32. Mr. DATCU (Romania) (interpretation
fronz French):
The Security Council has just adopted unanimously an
important resolution in accordancewith which the Organization will institute a mandatory embargoon all shipment
of arms,ammunition and war tnateriel to South Africa. The
Council, therefore, has just eased-at least in part-the
bitternesscreated last Monday by the rejection of three of
the four draft resolutions put forward by the African
membersof the Council, a rejection which my delegation
very tnuch regretted.
33. Romania supported the African proposalsbecauseit is
convincedthat it is the duty of the Security Council to take
firtn and practical measures,the only ones capabfe of

3

constraining the Vorster rigime to give up its racist,
inhuman and nparthcid policy and put an end to its acts of
aggression against neighbouring States.
i
34. Indeed, the latest developments in South Africa no
longer leave any doubt that the Pretoria regime does not
intend to heed the voice of reason and that it will persist in
its characteristic
policy ‘of a brutal negation of the
fundamental rights of the. South African people, in flagrant
violation of the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations.

41, Although the task has boen a difficult one, we shoufd
be clear about what has been achieved. For the first time, as
others have said, and unanimously, the Council has adopted
a mandatory measure directed against a State Member of
the United Nations. For my Government the importance of
this is twofold. We agree that the international COlllinUllitY
must do what it can to curb the build-up of oppressive
force in South Africa. At the same time, and perhaps more
importantly, we view the action which the Council has
taken as both a warning and an appeal to South Africa-a
warning that the international community is in earnest
about the need for change, and the desire to see, as I said in
my statement Iast week, a peaceful and democratic transformation, rather than a disintegration into violence. The
resolution is also an appeal to the South African Government to heed the views of the international community
before matters deteriorate further.

35. Today’s vote is significant. It is the first time that the
Security Council has decided to impose mandatory sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter against a Member
State which persists in wholesale violation of the very
principles of the Organization. The resolution adopted
today is the expression of the will of the Member States not
to ease the political pressure on the racist r6gime of Pretoria
until that regime abandons its policies of cpzrtheid and
aggression.

42. I shouId like now to say a few words about the
resolution itself. As with all compromise texts, it probably
does not reflect entirely the views of any one delegation.
But it does patently reflect the general will of the Security
Council. We have made clear our view, which is reflected in
paragraph I, as to the nature of the threat to international
peace and security. We do not interpret the reference in the
preamble to “acts of aggression” as being used in the
technical sense of Article 39 of the Charter. Paragraph 2
sets out the principal action required of Member States. It
is now for all Governments to consider what additional
measures they need to take to bring their national policies
and practices into line with the terms of this resolution.
Inevitably, there are imprecisions in a document of this
sort. For example, it is not at all clear to me precisely what
is meant by “related matc%P. Howcvcr, the general aims
and purposes of the resolution are clear; we for our part are
prepared to implement them and will now urgently
consider how best that can be done,

36. I should like to avail myself of this opportunity to
congratulate you most warmly, Mr. President, on your
accession to the presidency of the Council and on the
results already achieved. The very fact that the Council has
been able to adapt this important resolution today is the
best proof that the Council is now in very good hands. In
carrying out your important duties, you can always count
on the friendly support of the Romanian delegation.
37. Today’s success was much facilitated by the work and
the consultations which took place last month under the
presidency of Ambassador Jaipal of India. On behalf of my
own delegation, I should like to say that we feel great
admiration for Ambassador Jaipal, and we thank him for all
his sincere and devoted efforts which have helped us to find
a generally acceptable solution, one which has found
practical expression in today’s decision.

43. The implementation of some points, such
iIs the
regulation of licensing arrangements, may well misc, depending upon the legal and the administrative systems of
individual Member States, intricate problems which may
take a Little time to resolve. I should like to tell the Council
that, for our part, when difficulties of that nature arise, we
shall seek to resolve them in step with other countries.

38. Mr. RlCIlARD
(united Kingdom): First, I should like
to congratulate you, Mr, President, on your assumption of
the office of President of the Council and to congratulate
your predecessor, the representative of India, on his
conduct of the Council’s work last month. I make only a
brief opening tribute because I want to say a little more on
this subject in a moment.

44. III conclusion, I should like to repeat the gratification
of my Government at the fact that the Council has been
able to agree on the action taken today, and our hope that
the Government of South Africa will pay heed to the voice
of the international community as embodied in the
resolution.

39. My delegation isvery pleased to have been able to join
with all the other men~bers of the Council in adopting this
morning’s resolution. We have thus been able to fulfil the
assurances which I gave to the Council on behalf of my
Government on 28 October [2042nd meeting/, that the
United Kingdom would support a mandatory arms embargo
under Chapter VII of the Charter in relation to the supply
of arms to South Africa,

45. The United Nations is often accused of being unable
to act as speedily as the situation may require. This is
perhaps inevitable when we are seeking to produce an
agreement out of SO many different national or regional
interests. We have seen in this debate perhaps the worst and
the best of the United Nations at work: principles,
sometimes even individual words, even commas, have been
analysed; they have been discussed, debated, weighed,
almost dissected, with thoroughness and with determjnation. But South Africa is a topic which, quite rightly, gives
rise to strong feelings on all sides. Sometimes we feel that

40. As we all known, it has not been easy to achieve that
result. Prolonged negotiation and consultation between
members of the Council have been necessary. Success is due
in no small measure to the constructive and active role
played by your predecessor, Ambassador Jaipal, and not
least, Sir, by you yourself in conducting our consultations,
I wish to place on record my delegation’s appreciation for
those efforts.
4

much is demanded too quickly. Sometimes others feel
that we respond too slowly and too quietly. But now that
the argUmentS
on the text are over, I think we can and
should all take some pride in the fact that on this issue at
this time we have produced a careful, measured and
unanimous response. Today’s decision is therefore of
profound significance, in the view of my Government, both
as a reflection of the way in which we can, if we wish, ma,ke
the United Nations a reality and also in the signal that it
sends to the South African Government. That signal is
clear, unmistakable and precise, namely, that the world
expects changes to be made and, what is more, will do what
it can to ensure that they arc.
too

measures to be taken by the Council in the fight against
racism and apartheid in South Africa. Given goodwill on
the part of membersof the Council, this decisioncanserve
as a point of departure for the application of effective
economic and othr mandatory sanctions against the
Pretoria rkgime, and will becomean importantmilestoneon
the roadto the liberation of the peoplesof southernAfrica.
For this, purpose,it is essentialthat the resolutionordering
the embargoon armsshipmentsto SouthAfrica, like other
resolutionsof the Council, should be strictly implemented.
52. By adopting this decision,the Councilhastaken upon
itself a great responsibility.Now it will haveto discharge
its
obligationsin full tq the peoplesof southernAfrica andto
the peoplesof the wholeAfrican continent.

46. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): Sir, since this is
the first time I have spoken in the Security Council this
month, I should like warmly and heartily to congratulate
you,
the representative of the Libyan Arab Jarnahiriya, a
country friendly to us, on your accession to the high and
responsible office of President of the Council, We are glad
to note that firm ties of solidarity, trust and friendship have
been established between the Soviet Union and your
country and are being successfully strengthened. We are
convinced that, under your guidance, the Council will
successfully carry out the tasks entrusted to it.

53. Mr. MOUNGAVOU (Benin) (interpretation from
French): Mr. President, my delegationwisheswarmly to
congratulateyou on your accessionto the presidencyof the
Council for the month of November. Your integrity and
your well-known skill asa diplomat are true guarantees
of
the successof our work in the courseof this month, I can
assureyou that you will receive our militant support in
your endeavours,asis only to be expectedin view of the
very close ties of friendship, brotherhood and militant
co-operation that have developedand aregrowingbetween
Benin and the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.I think we standas
a living example of militant revolutionary co-operationto
ensurethe freedom and independenceof peoplesand the
prevalanceof peace and freedom in Africa, our great and
glorious continent. The role played by your country, Sir,
hasbeen significantly constructive. I shouldlike to address
my delegation’s thanks, through you, to the outgoing
President,our friend AmbassadorJaipalof India.

47. We should also like to convey our sincere appreciation
to the representative of India, Ambassador Jaipal, who so
ably and effectivcty presided over our work last month. The
confidence that he would perform his exacting duties with
the utmost success, expressed by ourselves and by other
delegations, was fully vindicated.
4X. As regards the draft resolution just adopted by the
Council, my delegation would like to make the following
statement.

54. The historic event we have just witnessedis without
doubt a milestonein the processof the determinedstruggle
againstapartheid, that hideousform of economicexploitation and political domination imposedon the indigenous
inhabitants of South Africa. I feel compelledto saythat the
text we have just adopted is a compromisetext and does
not entirely satisfy my country, which was one of the
sponsorsof four earlier draft resolutions,oneof whichwas
a more explicit formula for an armsembargoagainstSouth
Africa. The measuresthe Council hasjust adoptedagainst
the racist rigime in South Africa could have beentaken
more than 15 years ago. Africa called for them at the
appropriate time. It is to be regretted that the embargohas
been decided upon only now, when the South African
racistshave succeeded,thanks to the co-operationof some
countries, in becomingmilitarily self-sufficient.

49. The Soviet Union has always taken the view that the
introduction of a mandatory and effective embargo on arms
shipments to the South African racist rigimc, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, would help in
bringing pressure to bear 011 the Pretoria rbgime, with a
view to cutting off the endless chain of crimes committed
by racism and apartheid. We are firmly convinced that this
purpose would have been best served by the draft resolucountries (S/12311/
tion
of the three African
REID.I] -Benin, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Mauritius-and we did, in fact, vote for il.
50. The draft resolution adopted by the Council today
bears the traces of compromise; thus it does not go as far as
one might have wished. Nevertheless, my delegation found
it possible to support it, since, by its adoption, the Council
is in essence taking the first definite step forward in the
matter of the application to South Africa of mandatory
sanctions in accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter. ln
‘essence, this is the first instance in the history of the United
Nations where the Council has taken a decision on
mandatory sanctions against a ML.nber of the Organization
on the basis of Chapter VII.

55, The technical capacity of the racistsof South Africa in
the field of armsand weaponsmanufactureis well known.
Those who have helpedthem and continue to do so know
that full well, and the Africans are not hoodwinked.But it
is in respect of licencesand contracts that Africa expects
most as far as the implemenfation of this reSOhtiOn
iS
concerned. As to the nuclear question,we know the role
the West has played in allowing the racists to develop
nucleartechniques.
56, With regardto control over the implementationof this
resolution, my country and Africa as a whole attach

51. We regard this step by the Council not only as an
important advance but as a basis for further effective
5

continue to work with all the energy at their command, but
without bloodshed, towards a soeedy transition of Namibia
and Rhodesia into independence and towards the necessary
changes in South Africa.

enormous importance to the establishment of an appropriate committee, such as that set up to deal with the
sanctions against Rhodesia. The Council shouId consider
the establishment of such a committee in the near future,
possibly by 1 May 1978, that is to say as soon as the
Council is seized of the report of the Secretary-General
pursuant to paragraph 6 of the resolution.

--

--

I

64. The decision to impose upon South Africa a mandatqry arms embargo is in keeping with the policy of the
Federal Republic of Germany, which has observed a
voluntary arms embargo towards South Africa since 1963.

57. I wish to add that Africa impatiently awaits a Council
decision to impose an economic embargo, because, when all
is said and done, that is the weapon that can most
effectively and peacefully be wielded against the racists of
South Africa.

65. We regret that South Africa continues to ignore the
demands of the United Nations and that the dialogue which
the Federal Government has carried on with the South
African Government has gone unheeded. Today’s decision
of the Council flashes a warning which does not, however,
preclude a constructive development. We renew our appeal
to South Africa not to oppose any longer an inevitable
development. The Federal Government will persevere in its
policy; in co-operatian with all States that are ready to do
so, to bring about a peaceful settlement of existing conflicts
in southern Africa.

58. Mr. BARTON (Canada): Mr. President, I should like
first to join all the others who have extended congratulations to you on assuming your important office and also
express thanks for the car.tribution you have already made
to the achievement of the result we voted through today.
By the same token, I should like to express our appreciation of the distinguished work of your predecessor,
Ambassador Jaipal. It is true that at one point he accused
us of hijacking one of his draft resolutions, but I think it
was in a good cause, and we are most grateful for his
efforts.

66. Mr, AKHUND (Pakistan): Mr. President, allow me first
of all to say how very pleased my delegation is to see in the
Council Chair this month the representative of the Libyan
Arab Jamahirya, a country with which Pakistan enjoys the
most fraternal relations and which plays such an active and
energetic role in the affairs of Africa and here at the United
Nations. You presided last year with great distinction over
the Council’s proceedings; members received a renewed
demonstration of your qualities of leadership in the
consultations you conducted over the last few days and
which have resulted in the unanimous adoption of draft
resolution S/12436. The contribution made by your predecessor to this resolution is known to us all, and it is right
that his contribution should not pass unacknowledged. 1
should like to commend Ambassador Jaipal for the great
patience and deftness with which he guided the Council’s
deliberations during the month of October.

59. I spoke twice in the debate, and I think the views of
the Canadian delegation are well known. The results we
have obtained today are precisely what I expressed the
hope of achieving. I say this primarily because I believe that
what we have done and the document that will record it are
historic, and I want it to be on record that the Canadian
Government will do everything it can to fulfil and support
the terms of this resolution.
60. Mr. VON WECHMAR (Federal Republic of Germany)
Before I address myself to the resolution just adopted,
Mr. President, please permit me to wish you well during
your remaining 26 days as President of the Council. In the
first four days of your presidency you have once again
proved that we are guided by a diplomat of high skill and
great experience, by a distinguished representative of a
country with which we enjoy good and friendly relations,
and by a man who has given us another example of his
abilities as a negotiator and mediator.

67. When the Council adjourned its previous meeting it
was under the cloud of the vetoes cast by three permanent
members and the negative votes of two Western members
on the draft resolutions submitted by the African members
of the Council. Today’s action, which was described by the
Secretary-General as historic, has served to dissipate the
atmosphere of frustration
and confrontation
which was
developing around a question on the fundamentals of which
there exists, as we have just demonstrated,
complete
unanimity. I should like to place on record the appreciation
of my delegation for the statesmanship and the spirit of
compromise and realism demonstrated by all concerned in
arriving at today’s satisfactory outcome.

61. Let me also express our sincere thanks to our previous
President, the representative of India, for his outstanding
contributions to this resolution, in which, for the first time,
an arms embargo under Chapter VII of the Charter is
applied against a State Member of the United Nations.
62. My delegation endorses the draft resolution which has
just been adopted by the Council. We consider the decision
of the Council, which has been reached after intensive
consultations, conducted by all parties with a strong sense
of responsibility, to be a necessary and adequate response
to the challenging action taken by the Government of
South Africa on 19 October.

68. As to the resolution WC have just adopted, we
weIcome the Council’s action in unreservedly condemning
upnrtheid and the repressive policies and aggressive acts of
the Vorster regime. We welcome its recognition that such
policies and acts pose a threat to international peace and
security. Above all, we welcome the fact that the Council
has for the first time acted on this matter under Chapter
VII of the Charter-a
long-standing demand of the vast
majority of the United Nations membership.

63. We hope that South Africa understands the serious
warning voiced by the Council today. We expect the ban on
arms supplies to diminish the potential for conflict in
southern Africa and to encourage those forces which
6

69. The arms embargo decreed under the Council’s deci.
sion today has similarly been demanded by the world
CommUnitY for InanY Years. Its imposition at this stage is
likely, unfortunately, to have a largely symbolic effect h
view of the military production capability which South
Africa has managed to acquire or build up over these years,
Nevertheless, we consider it a step of great significance that
countries which have been traditional suppliers of military
equipment and technology to South Africa have joined in
imposing a total arms embargo on that country. We hope
that the significance of this action will not be lost on the
apartheid rhgime. It goes without saying that the embargo
must be rigorously applied and enforced and no loopholes
of any kind permitted which might nullify or reduce its
effectiveness.

recognkes that “the military build-up by South Africa and
its Persistent acts of aggression against the neighbouring
States seriously disturb the security of those States”, it
would have been difficult for African members, especially
for mY delegation, to accept operative paragraph 1. And I
note with satisfaction that that paragraph uses the wording
“having regard to the policies and acts of the South African
Government”. My delegation is happy that reference is
made in paragraph 2 to “licensing arrangements”. We are
Particularly happy that reference is made in paragraph 4 to
refraining from “any co-operation with South Africa in the
manufacture and development of nuclear weapons”, since
this is in line with and in the context of our determination
to see that Africa is declared a nuclear-free zone. We must
also bear in mind that in paragraph 7 the Council decides to
keep this item on its agenda “for further action, as
appropriate, in the light of developments”.

70. We consider of particular importance the injunction
against co-operation with South Africa in the military uses
of nuclear energy, in view of the suspicions about South
Africa’s nuclear intentions, suspicions which Mr. Vorster’s
interview OII television here the other day has only further
strengthened and which cannot in any case be allayed by
the sort of unilateral assurance given by him in a letter to
President Carter, suspicions which cannot be removed as
long as South Africa’s nuclear establishment and capability
remain free of safeguards and screened from the world’s
scrutiny. We hope therefore that vigorous efforts will be
made to support the proposal for a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in Africa and to obtain South Africa’s adherence to it.

76. My delegation welcomes this mandatory resolution
even though we feel that it contains too little and comes
too late.
77. I wish to place on record the appreciation of my
delegation regarding the understanding and co-operation we
have received from all members of the Council.
78. Mr. JAIPAL (India): Mr. President, I should first of all
like to thank you and the other members of the Council
who havs made friendly and appreciative references to me.
I also wish to extend to you, on behalf of my delegation.
our warm congratulations on your accession to the presidency of the Council and assure you of our full co-operation. We feel sure that your proven ability, your wide
diplomatic experience and your deep understanding of the
various forces at work in international relations will be of
the greatest value to the Council. It is fit and proper that
the resolution we all worked together on should have been
adopted under the presidency of an African member.

71. In conclusion, we should like to express the hope that
attention will now be turned to the question of imposing
economic sanctions against South Africa and that, in
particular, the Powers concerned and the Powers affected
will begin to give earnest and serious thought to the subject.
72. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): Mr. President, I congratulate you on your assumption of your duties as President of
the Security Council for the month of November. Your
qualities and talents are well known to all of us and I do
not need to elaborate on them here today. I pledge to you
the full co-operation of my delegation.

79. My delegation voted for the resolution not because it
will bring about the end of apartheid in South Africa today
or tomorrow, but because we think that it is the first
international “nail in the coffin” being prepared for
apartheid. We are happy that the resolution for imposing a
mandatory arms embargo against South Africa has been
adopted unanimously, The resolution implicitly promises
further sanctions and further actions against South Africa
under Chapter VII of the Charter. It is in that Sense a
warning to South Africa. It is also an enCOu%ement
to
those struggling against apartheid. In the last analysis, it is
an expression of the determination of the Security Council
to make South Africa conform to the general will of
mankind for the abolition of apartheid.

73. I have already expressed my feelings regarding your
predecessor, Ambassador Jaipal, who has earned the admiration of all of us.
74, The resolution we have just adopted is a historic
one-a historic and unprecedented one. It is more so
because it was adopted after very careful consideration and
prolonged consultation. My delegation hopes that the
Secretary-General will receive the full co-operation of all
Governments regarding the information he will require to
discharge his duties, I have no doubt that all States will do
everything in their power to implement fully the provisions
of this mandatory resolution and to see that no loopholes
are exploited,

80. I should not like to end my statement without Placing
on record our tribute to the dedicated and energetic efforts
of Ambassador Andrew Young, representative of the
United States, to l-& determined initiative and to his
vigorous pursuit of all available peaceful means to bring the
system of apartheid to a quick end.

75. The resolution is a compromise worked out on the
basis of a working paper produced originally by the Indian
delegation. IL must naturally be read as a whole, that is, the
preambular paragraphs should be read in conjunction with
the operative paragraphs. For example, were it not for the
inclusion of the second preambular paragraph, which

81, Of course, Ambassador Young could not have sueceeded in his efforts but for the sympathetic response alld
co-operation received from the representatives of Canada,
7

France, the Federal Republic of Germany and the United
Kingdom, to whom WC &XI ilre in debt.

continued denial of our people’s participlltion in the
political life of our country but a declaration of war on us?

82. The PRESIDENT:
Since no other members wish to
speak, I should now like to address the Council in my
capacity
as representative
of the LIBYAN
ARAB
JAMAI-IIRIYA.

90. While some expectations were raised amongst our
people by the pronouncements of Western countries that
they would support a total mandatory nrnls enlbargo
against that racist settler coIonia1 r8ginle of VOrster* we
must submit that these pronouncements, whic~l have Come.
so late in the hour of our strt*ggle, fall far to0 short Ot
meaningful sincerity. ~Iow are we expected to treut this
gesture by Western permanent members of the (‘(luncilt
coming asit does when racist South Africa itself statesthat
an armsembargowill not hurt it becauseit is self-sufficient
wl
that score? Western permanent members of the Council
have alreadysupplied it with enougharms, arn~~nmiti~~r~
and
spareparts. They have supplied the racist r6gilne with so
many arms, so much nuclear technol<>gy and nuclearweaponscapability that it would be able to Wagea War for
between five and eight years without any shortages. hence
their enthusiastic support of a symbolic rimIs embargo. In
spite of all this, the massesof our people corltilll~e to rise in
tidal wavesin cities and villages, in urban toWnShiPS
d
ill
the hated bantustans, as the liberation progrutnme unfolds.

83. We support what has been said by our two brothers,
the two other representatives of Africa in the Council,
namely, Benin and Mauritius.
84. We how,
HS it has been said, that the resolution we
have just adopted emerged as a compromise,after long and
intensive negotiations with all the interested parties. We
know that it does not meet all OLIN demandsand needs,in
Africa, but WC lhink it is a positive, smallbut significant
step in the right direction. We hope that we shallcontinue
our co-operation in the Council to redize even Inore
positive steps and, cspccially, to extend the sanctionsto
other fields, and also to establish appropriate machinery
within the united Nations t,o secure the orderly and
effective implementation of this resolution.
85. III my capacity as PRESIDENT, I would remind the
Council that at its 2045th meeting it cxtcnded an invitation
to Mr. Elias L. Ntlocdibe, Administrative Secretary of the
Pan Africa& Congressof Azania. I invite him to take a
seatat the Council table md to make his StiltClll~llt.
86. Mr. N’I’LOI~DIBE: Mr. President, the Pan Africa&
Congressof Azania wishesto associateitself with the warm
sentimentsexpressedhere about your qllalities asa diplomat of outstanding proficiency. Your assumptionof the
important task of presiding over the deliberations of the
Security Council at this crucial time inspiresgreat confidence not only a~nong
the oppressedand exploited people
of AZanin but alsoin the third world and amongprogressive
peace-lovingsections of mankind. Your country, of course,
is one of the unflinching supporters of the liberation
struggle.

91. While we accept the application of Chapter VII 01 the
Charter assupportive of our struggle, we shall continue tc’r
be contemptuous of the manoeuvresto apply sclectivcly
certain provisions of the Chapter, in order trj hijack thOSC
which arc most effective and important. WC, of course,
camlot forget to express our strong disappointment over
the negativevotes cast the other day, which killed the draft
resolutionsand measureswhich could have complctcd the
isolation of the racist Fascist regimeof Pretoria.
92. Even at this late hour, making use of past cxpcriuncc
means a lot to us. Although one may have gained the
impressionthat a certain leading Western country h:ts in
some respectsadopted a tough line against racist South
Africa, one cannot lose sight of the fact that ambiguity has
been noticeable in the whole rhetoric. Thnt siunccountry
has, for instance, in the past saidthat conlmunicati<>n with
racist South Africa did not mean either acccptanuc of
aprlrtheid or departure from its stand of abhurrcncc of
apartheid. But it holds that apartheid is profitable.

87. t should bc failing in my duty if I did not take this
golden opportunity to expressour sincerestgratitude to the
African Group for having acted promptly by bringing up
oiicc again the perennial problem of South African racism
in its horrendous features of brutal rdc and daily massacre 93. We recall also that a leading Western country, a
permanent member of the Council, in B foreign policy
of our people in the Iand of their birth.
statement on 3 May 1973 said that it rect>gnixcd Snuth
88. Addressingourselves to the r~or~-perrni~~~ent
members Africa as a dynamic country with an advnrlced cc(,)nomy,
with which it sought to maintain contact, and did not
of the Security Council, in particular the sistercountries of
believe that the policy of isolating its wlljte leaders and
Benin, Mauritius aml the Libyan
Arab J:una.hiriya,
we
black puppets from the influence of the rest of the world
commend their uncompromising stand against apartheid
would be an effective way of moderatio which ;,ccon+
and their magnificent performance in the Council on behalf
modatedseedsof change.
of Africa,
89. The non-aligned countries, the Nordic countries and
the socialist countries continue to play ;III important role in
this joint concerted struggle for the destruction of the
nparfheid rCgimc. The people of Aznnia will always apprcciate their solidarity and support. We particularly commend
those countries for rccognizing the problem of racist South
Africa for what it is -a threat to international peace and
security. For what else could bc the outcome of this

94. We are convinced that Westerncountries which are the
traditional allies of racist South Africa Hugo for too long
given that Fascist Boer clique a long lease 011p(llitic;sl life
for reasonsthat have nothing to do with the frccdonl of our
people but serve their own economic and other interests in
our country. We reject it2 tot0 the reasons that they
advanceto justify their continued support for sucha racist
and oppressiverCgime.
8

9.5. Racist South Africa, 0x1 the other hand, takes advantage of such imperial concern to move or threaten to move
in the opposite direction, to confuse the uninitiated.
Indeed, the racist rigimc has in the past few weeks moved
in the opposite direction, contrary to what the apologists of
npartlzeid would want the world to believe. The racists have
gone On a rampage of murder of black people and this has
been intensified since 19 October this year,

among the world’s five biggestsuppliersof fuel minerals
and had consistentlydemonstratedits potential, goodwill
and reliability as the West’smost important source of
mineralsand strategicmaterialsand raw materials,a fact
which was of the greatestimportance to the Western
economy.
99. It is because
of thisvastbackgroundthat the peopleof
Azania have alwaysknown who their friends are, who the
enemy is and who the principalsupportersof that enemy
are. It will take sometime for the import of the South
African racist rBgime’sdefianceto sink in fully amongthe
beneficiariesof the apartheid regimebecausethe consequencescould be so momentous.Thosewho not so long
ago voted to protect uparfheid, contrary to the provisions
of the Charter of the UnitedNations,havemerelyaddedto
the Azanian people’sdeterminationto intensify the armed
struggle and liberatethe country from racist colonial rule.
The writing ison the wall clearfor all to see,

96. These mass killings are carried out because Western
COUIltrieS, Christian civilized nations, permanent members
of the Council, have for the last 17 years assisted the racist
rCgime to stockpile arms of destruction which are being
used for no purpose other than oppression. If this arms
embargo resolution adopted today-which in our opinion is
a mere symbolic gesture from the Western countries
permanent IneInbers of the Council-had been adopted in
1960, several thousands of lives would have been saved and
the bitterness now felt in the country could have been
avoided. Racist South Africa has incurred a heavy debt of
blood with the connivance of the Western countries, and
the people of Azania have vowed to settle this debt with
blood, whatever the cost. Our messaie to the Western
countries permanent members of the Council, in connexion
with the adoption of this resolution by a unanimous vote, is
that it is a symbolic gesture arriving 17 years late. Your
technicians are still in racist South Africa to assist in the
completion of nuclear-weapons capability and the licences
you have granted for local weaponry production turn the
adoption of this resolution into a mockery. But the people
of Azania know that to appeal to the sensibility of
imperialism is a dangerous game.

100. Finally, we Inustadvisethe Councilonce again,aswe
have done on many occasions,
that the white ruling clique
in our country knows no human decency, let alone
diplomatic moralnorms.They haverecently ridiculedsome
of the outstandingdiplomatsaroundthis table by referring
to them as diplomatic infants who deservedto go to a
school of diplomacy, and, by innuendocharacterizedby
cynicism, invoked the memoryof that deplorableinstitution in history which brought our African peopleto the
Americas.

97. As early as 1973, the racist Defence Minister,
Mr. 1’. W. Botha, who has become of late the most
notoriously articulate spokesman of the apartheid gang,
boastedthat the international cliInate favoured the whites;
he said they were obliged to face all kinds of hostile
onslaughtson the southernimperialbastion. Bothawent on
to say that, althoughSouth Africa geographicallybelonged
to the so-calledthird world, it wasculturally andmilitarily
in the ilnperialist zone and therefore a direct ideological
obstacle in the path of communism.This gangsterBotha
further boasted that essentiallyracist South Africa found
itselr in the prevailinginternational strugglefor power and
was particularly in a position of increasing strategic
importance. In a more revealingexercisethis year-repeated
againonly last week-Botha spelledout in great detail the
colonial stakein our country, Azania; he madeit clearthat
racist South Africa was holding the imperialistnationsto
ransomin return for political and military support.This has
been proved by the prevarications and tiptoeing tactics
adoptedwhen a completearmsembargowasto be imposed.
98. The political correspondentof the Rand Daily Mai1 of
Johannesburg,reporting from the gallery of the racist
Parliament,hadthis to say:

101. How unpalatablethis soundsto us. And we Inust
wonder why there is this continued protection of that
gangsterrCgimeat Pretoria.
102. The SecurityCouncilpossesses
a powerful diplomatic
potential but the blackmailby racistSouth Africa seems
to
be making those who have the meansand the strength
appear“totally irrelevant”.
103. The PRESIDENT:The next speakeris Mr. Makatini,
the representativeof the African National Congress,to
whom the Council, at its 2036th meeting, extended an
invitation. I invite him to take a placeat the Counciltable
andto makehisstatement.
104. Mr. MAKATINI: Mr. President,I shouldlike most
sincerely to thank you for giving me the opportunity to
expressthe viewpoint of the African National Congress
on
the outcome of this seriesof Councilmeetings,the first of
which was convenedby your eminentpredecessor,
Ambassador Jaipal, in responseto the request of 49 African
countries.
105. On behalf of our organization,I alsowishto convey
warmestcongratulationsto you on your assumption
of the
post of Presidentof the Council for the current month.
Libya’s active and unswervingcommitmentto our struggle
and your personalexperience,dedicationand indefatigable
contribution in all forums which have been seizedand
continue to be seizedof the problemof mappingout the
correct strategy as well as ways and meansof complementing the efforts of the liberation movementto attain
the overtl~row of the apartheid rCgimeand the seizureof

“The West’s strategic and economic position would
suffer immeasurabledamageif South Africa’s gold and
other mineral resources fell into the hands of the
communistbloc.”
Quoting further from the White Paper submitted to the
racist Parliament, he observed that South Africa ranked
9

-

-

power by the people is to us a firm guarantee that the
Council will under your guidance live up to our expectations.

LJIljted Kil~gdo~~~,Canada and the Fccicra’
ltePublic Of
Ger,tlany.
That is of vital importance t0 (‘llr !‘eoPlet whose
struggle has entered a decisive phase. ‘i’tzey nced to kr’ow
whether
those
who
have
always
bee11
f-lI=iuf)(ls
;IIlCl
:illics
of
their ellelny
have changed
their traCfiti’-J~li~l P~~Sitil~I~.
(hr

106. Allow me also to pay a tribute to your predecessor,
statesmanshipand selflessness
in presiding over so
controversial a series of meetings helped to preserve the
essentialspirit of reconciliation.
whose

people
the

must

know

whether

llegotiated

so-called

the

highly

settlement

tTK1lCStl.iltCd

hid

iI1

t&k%

st’utherJl

liN

points to a change still in the pipclirle
;Ind ~‘t Set
co1lsuIl~matecl
()r is ;1change of tactics tl~~~~~rdsthe (Jh~clivC

107. For the benefit of a body such as the Security
Council, whose raison d’&tre is the preservation of peace
and international security, it is, I believe, necessaryand
imperative that at all times truth shouldoverride diplomatic
nicetiesor considerationsof personalfriendships.
108. The Council was convened on an emergency basis,
following the escalation of the reign of terror in South
Africa. For the African National Congressand the overwhelming ma.jority of the representativeswho spokehere,
the issue before us was not how to react to the current
crackdown on 18 organizations and two newspapersand
the detention and banning of some individuals. The issue
before us was the long-overdue concrete and effective
punitive measuresto be adopted by the Council againstthe
r@gimewhose u[Jurtheid rule has created a situation which
constitutes a threat to international peace and security. I
believe that it was for that reason that the three African
members of ~11~Council limited themselvesto the draft
resolutions which they had introduced on 29 March this
year. In so doing, they er?joyed the full support of the
African countries and the liberation movements.After all,
the Council had been seizedof this matter for sevenmonths
following the resolution on the matter adopted by the
General Assembly at its thirty-first sessionand the subsequent request for a two-month delay presentedby the five
Westerncountries membersof the Council.
109. The negative vote cast by the three Western permanent members,joined by Canadaand the Federal Republic
of Germany, came asno surpriseto us. Their position is in
keeping with their persistent violation of countlessresolu-.
tions calling for the total isolation of the apartkid
r6gime.
However;1 must be honest and say that we thought that
they would have demonstrated their avowed indignation
and that of the peoples which they represent by at last
joining justice-loving and peace-loving mankind and supporting the other three draft resolutions.
110. We listened attentively to the argumentswhich they
advancedfor not doing so. Wehalf agreedwith Ambassador
Andrew Young and other representativesof the Western
Powers who stressedthe need for a clear and unconfused
signal which was expected to come from the Council.
However, we parted ways when it appearedthat they were
talking of this signalbeing conveyed to Vorster.
111. We maintain that the international community has,
through countless United Nations decisions,sent a barrage
of clear signalsto the upurtheid rigime-signals which have
been systeinatically confused by the Western Powers for
reasonswell known to all of us. Our position was that the
time had come to sendclear and unconfused signalsto the
oppressedstruggling people of South Africa and its potential allies, the peoples of the United States, France, the

tllat
remains
the same,
that
is, the
status quo in a camouflagedform.
112,

The

three

triple

vetoes

I~~rPct~‘~ti~~~~

c~~~~fir~l’ll?d

iI1

of

the

th

Clc:lIWt

terms that whatever the Western I’c)W~~s l)rctcrld to be
doing ill support of our struggle is cnlC4tliltcd ill tcI’Ni td
pounds, dollars, francs and DeutschnXlr%rS dnd riot hM!d WI
principles. Our people has once gain
bWI1
ttdtf
tllilt
ecoIloInic

SanctioIls

and

the

witl~dril\VaI

of

iIlvc.StIllCllls

would harfn the *economies of the W~7~f~rn cuuntrics. 11)
other words, they have been told to CCIII titlW! f~ Sfktd their
sweat and blood to ensure the continuctf PI’(Vel’itY
dthC
white minority in South Africa and tk
“lI@hty few” ill
the Westrepresentedby the transnatiorlnl ~(~IPf;lli~~I~s.
113. We arc in a war situation. We rni2>~ be CSCllSCd
if WC
use as our criteria for judging friends 111‘foes what pe~lplc
do either to strengthen our striking I>owcr against 111~
enemy or to strengthen the enemy’sstrikirll: prlwer.

114. It is for that reason, that we WisIl
ttr
st:ltt!
+lik
categorically that the resolution that Iius jilst hccil aihplcd
is too little and has come too late. l’hc ~~‘nuncil.representingthe international community, 11~1srnisscd an cq>pnrtunity to erasefrom the surface of tllc cart11 the iniquities
portrayed in the picture behind yuu, Mr. I’residcnt,
Ilowever, we feel that, while it is too late tirl- peaceful chaogc,
there is still time for the Western COCI
retries 10join us in iI
common struggle, a common battle ag:rinst the C~IIIIIIIUII
enemy.
115. it is important to stressthat our i~ctrpfe llavc clm~t’to
the conclusion reached by their courltorparts
in various
countries that have been placed in a sirrlil:lr situation, that
genuinefreedom cannot be granted, it tx II only ho grahbcd.
116. The resolution adopted today, its I Ir:lvl: said, f;ltls far
short of our expectations, but we rnni~~t;~i~~that. if it is true
that somechangesarc in the pipeline, it sc~ycs as;I basisfor
effective action, which we hope will 1~ rlrldertakerl l~el’orc
it is too late.
117. At this juncture I should like
to ;lss<)ci;lte Ll\tr
delegationwith the position expressed by ;, I-ew lnem[)crsof
the Council, particularly the African rllclnIJers, that is, we
hope that in the near future there will ITe II~~~ve~
t~,,w;~rds
setting up a watch-dog committee tl, cIIsure the strict
implementation of the limited measures tIlat have just bee])
adopted,
1lg. We thank all those who have strboLI firarn with u~iI)
calling for the appropriate and overdue mcasures, and ,ve
wish to express the hope that the ~oll~,,-il, wl~jcll rc,nains
seizedof this issue,will, next time it streets, surprise lls iuld
our people by sendingthe appropriate signal to the Vorsler

10

regime. To achieve that, it is important that we speak the
same language. For us, the situation that is characterized by
expropriation, hunger, super-exploitation and social deprivation, and maintained by the ever-escalating reign of
terror and aggression against neighbouring States constitutes a threat to peace and international security
and
calls for economic sanctions and a mandatory arms embargo under Chapter VII of the Charter.

through him, also to his Government, his party and his
people. I should also like to say on this occasion that if we
are here now it is largely thanks to the fight of the Soviet
peoples against nazism. It was thanks to that fight, and to
the alliance between the Western liberal democracies and
the Soviet Union that we defeated nazism 30 years ago, and
we hope that with the alliance of all peoples, and especially
with an active role played by the peoples of the third
world, we shall defeat the new nazism in South Africa.

119. There has been much talk of Canada having “hijacked” India’s draft resolution; we do hope that the next
draft to be hijacked by Canada will be that on economic
sanctions.

122. Mr. KNARLAMOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation from Russian): Mr. President, I
should like to thank you for the congratulations that you
have just extended to our country, our party and our
Government. I assure you, on behalf of the delegation of
the Soviet Union, that our country has continued to pursue
the Leninist policy of peace and friendship among peoples
and support for national liberation movements. As one of
the founders of the United Nations, we shall do everything
necessary to ensure that the Organization acts effectively
and successfully for the benefit of all the peoples of the
world.

120. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to thank
Mr. Makatini, the representative of the African National
Congress, for his statement and the kind words he
expressed about my country and myself. On this occasion, I
should like to assure him and his colleague, Mr. Ntloedibe,
of the indefatigable support of my country and my people
and our total and unlimited commitment to the cause of
the people of Azania.

123. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council has thus
completed the present phase of its consideration of the
question of South Africa.

121. There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
Since no meeting is expected on Monday, which is the
official anniversary of the October Revolution, I should like
before adjourning the meeting to extend to the representative of the Union of the Soviet Socialist Republics, on
behalf of those present, our sincere congratulations and,

The meeting rose at 1.40 p.m.

1

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
or write
to: United

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vent-z dans les librairies
ddpositaires
du mondc entier. Informez-vous
aupr&s de votre libraire
& : Nations
Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou Gen&ve.

I

KAK
’

HOJIY’IHTL

H3AaHHX

Litho

in United

Nations,

HBAAHZISI

Op,-aHH3aUHH

OPI’AHH

06Ze~HH‘?HHblX

3AlJJiH
,%qUfi

MOBSIO

KY,WTb

COMO

CONSEGUIR

NACIONES

HAI&MH
B KHW)KHbIX

N &reHTcTB*X
a0 acex pakoxax
hiupa. HaaOAKTe
cnpamcw
miH)Kz-xohf hfara3nHe
wnu nau.mTe no anpecy:
OpraHu3aqwa
CeKquR no npoAa%e
HSAaHNR,
Hblo-HopK
zlnw XCeaeaa.
DE LAS

et les agences
ou adressex-vous

Ol.5%EAHHEHHhIX

3HH&X
BarneM
Hauwii,

PUBLICACIONES

and distributors
Nations,
Sales

M&l-&-

06 r(3AaHWIIX
06zejqruiemibrx

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas estin
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas,
Secci6n de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

en venta en librerias
y casas distria su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

New York

in otheicurrencies)

Price:

SU.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

a

77-70001-October

1978-2,200
