S/PV.7748

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7748th meeting

Wednesday, 27 July 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bessho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Lamek
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Taula
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Seck
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-23736 (E)
*1623736*

S/PV.7748

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

Vigilante groups going after suspected suicide bombers
have injured innocent civilians.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, and Mr. Stephen O’Brien, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

27/07/2016

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Feltman.
Mr. Feltman: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to brief the Council on the situation in the
Lake Chad Basin region.
Attacks by Boko Haram continue, mainly in northeastern Nigeria and southern Niger, and to a lesser
extent in northern Cameroon and the Lac region of
Chad. Terrorists persist in targeting innocent civilians,
often using young children. Despite commendable
regional efforts, the group continues to threaten
regional stability, as illustrated by the 3 June attack on
a military base in Bosso town, south-eastern Niger.

To protect human rights, the States concerned must
ensure accountability for serious violations by national
forces and that the use of force is in full compliance with
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee
law. States must adopt measures to protect civilians
and respect due process when dealing with persons
arrested for Boko Haram-related charges. Children
used by Boko Haram should be treated as victims and
dealt with in accordance with international standards
for juvenile justice. We welcome the establishment of a
human rights desk by the Nigerian army to investigate
allegations of human rights violations committed by its
forces, and we encourage other affected countries to
institute similar mechanisms.
The Boko Haram crisis has devastated the region’s
economy. Economic growth has dropped sharply with
the decline in the price of oil and other commodities.
Decreasing resources affect States’ ability to deliver
basic social services and to pay the salaries of security
forces and civil servants.
Insecurity has disrupted trade routes between Chad
and Nigeria, interrupting the supply of basic goods
and resulting in price hikes. Youth unemployment is
at a worrisome high, providing a recruitment ground
for Boko Haram. We urge that military operations
be complemented with development interventions,
including to address the effects of climate change.

Lake Chad Basin countries face a serious
humanitarian crisis. Significant numbers of refugees
and internally displaced people add pressure on host
communities that are already food-insecure. The
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
Stephen O’Brien, will brief the Council on the
humanitarian challenges.

We commend the Lake Chad Basin countries’
efforts to combat Boko Haram. The regional offensive
involving Chadian, Cameroonian, Nigerien and
Nigerian troops operating under the Multinational Joint
Task Force (MNJTF) has recaptured 80 per cent of the
areas once under Boko Haram control, freed thousands
of captives and prevented terrorist attacks.

The United Nations has received reports of an
increase in the number of incidents of sexual and
gender-based violence among the displaced. In Nigeria,
the Protection Working Group, comprising the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and the Nigerian National Human Rights
Commission, reports rape and sexual abuse in almost
half of the 26 sites covered.

I returned yesterday after visiting a number of
Central and West African countries. As part of my tour,
I met with President Idriss Deby Itno in N’Djamena and
visited MNJTF headquarters. MNJTF’s main challenge
remains a severe lack of funding. The 1 February
African Union donor conference aimed to mobilize
$750 million, of which only $250 million was pledged;
even less was disbursed. The success of MNJTF
operations also depends on timely and actionable
intelligence as well as specialized counter-terrorism
skills and equipment, given the evolving tactics of
Boko Haram.

In Cameroon, allegations of human rights abuses
committed by security forces persist, especially against
youth belonging to Muslim communities in the north.
2/21

16-23736

27/07/2016

Peace and security in Africa

So far, the Lake Chad Basin countries have borne
the financial responsibility of combating Boko Haram
despite their own economic crises. As President Deby
Itno explained to me with frustration, they have been
forced to divert national spending away from basic
services to security. Lake Chad Basin leaders have
expressed their growing impatience over delays by
international partners to support the MNJTF financially.
I commend the United Kingdom for its financial
support to the MNJTF and welcome the European Union’s
intention to commit funds for the operationalization of
the force. I urge the international community to support
the MNJTF through the mobilization of the required
political, logistical and financial support.
The United Nations supports national and regional
efforts to prevent and combat terrorism and to ensure
that the perpetrators of terrorism are brought to justice.
However, counter-terrorist operations must abide by
the rule of law and international human rights norms.
MNJTF commanders reassured me that every effort
was being made to protect human rights, including
by the deployment of dedicated personnel to monitor
human rights issues.
Further to the Council’s request to extend the
Integrated Assistance on Countering Terrorism (I-ACT)
initiative to the Group of Five (G-5) Sahel region, the
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force (CTITF) is working closely with the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel to develop
the G-5 Sahel I-ACT In this regard, CTITF, accompanied
by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, will meet G-5 representatives from
30 August to 1 September in Nouakchott to produce the
outline of a capacity-building framework for counterterrorism and the prevention of violent extremism,
including concrete regional projects.
The Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
will also visit the Lake Chad Basin countries in
October, accompanied by the Special Representatives
of the Secretary-General for Central Africa and for
West Africa and the Sahel, CTED, CTITF and the
Special Representative of the African Union for
Counter-Terrorism Cooperation. In Central Africa, the
United Nations Centre for Counter-Terrorism supports
the efforts of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa to implement the Central Africa counter-

S/PV.7748

terrorism strategy. It will meet with partners in the fall
to discuss specific projects.
A military approach, while essential, will not bring
an end to the Boko Haram threat. Affected countries
must tackle not only the humanitarian consequences,
but also the root causes that contributed to the
emergence of the group, including the social, economic
and political grievances of marginalized communities.
The Special Representatives for Central Africa and
for West Africa and the Sahel continue to encourage
regional interlocutors to address the Boko Haram crisis
holistically and beyond an exclusively security-oriented
lens. Lake Chad Basin countries need our support so
that military operations are followed by stabilization
measures and the restoration of State authority.
The Second Regional Security Summit for the
Lake Chad Basin, held on 14 May in Abuja, reaffirmed
the need to address the root causes. Among a number
of noteworthy recommendations, the Summit
encouraged affected countries to utilize the services
of community and religious leaders to discourage
impressionable youth from being radicalized and to
lead deradicalization programmes. The Summit took
note of the negative consequences of climate change,
affecteing the livelihoods of those who depend on Lake
Chad, in particular young people. The Summit urged
the concerned countries and partners to support the
restoration of Lake Chad as part of a strategy to combat
Boko Haram.
The United Nations stands ready to support the
Lake Chad Basin countries in addressing both the
consequences and the root causes of Boko Haram. We
encourage the leaders of the Economic Community of
Central African States and the Economic Community
of West African States to hold their long-planned
joint Ministerial Summit to adopt a common regional
strategy to address the crisis. The Security Council’s
support would help underscore the urgency of the
matter.
The President: I thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. O’Brien.
Mr. O’Brien: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the humanitarian
situation in the Lake Chad Basin. I also thank my
colleague, Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman,
and endorse his clear and powerful statement.

16-237363/21

S/PV.7748

Peace and security in Africa

The Lake Chad Basin region, which hosts Africa’s
fastest growing displacement crisis, needs our urgent,
united and collective attention. Violence and brutality
to the most heinous, barbaric and unconscionable
extent — almost unimaginable — as perpetrated by Boko
Haram are resulting in massive forced displacement,
human rights violations, severe disruptions to
livelihoods, and unprecedented humanitarian needs
in a region that was already endemically and deeply
vulnerable.
As I witnessed during my travels to north-east
Nigeria and south-east Niger and their capitals just a few
weeks ago in May, boundless insecurity has deepened
the vulnerability of communities in that fragile region,
which was already impacted by severe climate, climate
change, progressive desertification, environmental
degradation — including the massive drying-up of
Lake Chad itself, straddling the unpoliceable borders
of four countries — the highest population growth in
the world, and our planet’s most widespread, chronic
and deepest extreme poverty. The region remains
precarious for every one of the millions of our fellow
human beings there, and the current exacerbated crisis
vastly surpasses the capacity of national and local
authorities to respond. People across the Lake Chad
Basin desperately need our help.
Across the Lake Chad Basin, spanning parts of
Nigeria, the Niger, Chad and Cameroon, the United
Nations estimates that over 9 million people need
humanitarian assistance. About 2.8 million of these
people have been displaced, fleeing violent attacks
in their towns and villages. They include people like
52-year-old grandfather Mustafa, newly relocated into
a 7x7-foot wood and sheeting shelter, after having fled
from his torched lifetime house in Bama 11 months
earlier, when Boko Haram brutes ransacked his village.
He bravely held his shard of mirror to tell me he was
still trying to be the barber he had always been, but his
stoicism could not hold back the tears provoked by his
fears or his plea for our help.
Many are in camps, where living conditions
are grim, but the vast majority are living with host
communities that are themselves among the world’s
poorest and most vulnerable people, living in the Sahel
zone which faces chronic drought and food insecurity
that place over 1 million children’s lives at risk year in,
year out. Using next season’s seeds to feed those they
have taken in, hundreds of thousands of farmers have
4/21

27/07/2016

missed three successive years of planting, leaving them
without any stocks or income whatsoever to live on.
Vital trade routes have been severely disrupted,
leaving an estimated 5.2 million people severely food
insecure. People in the Lake Chad Basin are some of
the toughest in the world. They are used to coping with
extreme hardship, exploiting every and any option they
can to keep their families going. But as many of the
affected people themselves told me during my visit,
this suffering has pushed them to the absolute limit; it
is unlike anything they have felt before. Personally, I
have been traveling throughout that region on and off
for the past 37 years, and I have never heard such fear
and desperation. This is a new terrible.
Children are particularly vulnerable, especially
the 1.7 million who have been displaced across the
Lake Chad Basin. Children risk being abducted and
forcibly recruited by Boko Haram to take part in the
violence, including by acting as suicide bombers. From
January to June this year, more than 50 children have
been coerced into carrying out suicide bombings across
the four countries. Gender-based violence and sexual
exploitation are widespread, and women and girls are at
great risk of forced abduction into sexual slavery.
Nigeria is bearing the brunt of the crisis, despite the
significant efforts undertaken by the federal and local
authorities to address this burgeoning catastrophe.
Seven million of the nine million people in need across
the Lake Chad Basin are in Nigeria. As the Nigerian
army has progressively regained control of a number of
towns and villages in Borno state, up in its north-east
centred round Maiduguri, aid agencies have gradually
been able to access new areas. What we have uncovered
and assessed is deeply, distressingly alarming even
for those of us who have witnessed such depths of
humanitarian need before..
Last month, the Nigerian authorities rightly
declared a nutrition emergency for Borno state.
Direct reports from the field indicate that affected
communities are rapidly running out of food. We have
no time to lose. The lean season, which puts millions
at real risk of hunger and malnutrition each year across
the Lake Chad Basin region, has already started. If we
do not act now, the human suffering will only become
more extreme. Children are no exception. UNICEF
reports that in Borno state alone, 244,000 children are
suffering from severe acute malnutrition. Among them,
almost one in five risks death this year if they are not
16-23736

27/07/2016

Peace and security in Africa

treated. That is 134 children dying each day from a
preventable condition. We have to stop this — and we
can with will, money, urgency and coordination.
While the sheer number of people suffering is
mainly in Nigeria, all of the affected countries are
deeply vulnerable. In the Niger, one single attack by
Boko Haram left over 70,000 people displaced in Bosso
town in June, bringing the total number of displaced
people in the Diffa region to over 160,000. The Niger
is the poorest country in the world; yet despite living
on virtually nothing, families there have welcomed
the displaced into their homes and shared their meagre
supplies of food and water with the newcomers, as I
saw for myself with utter humility and total admiration,
in equal parts, when I visited Fatimah in Diffa, who
had voluntarily taken in two families, 11 people in all,
sharing her diminishing staple food supplies and her
very modest home.
Needs are also dire in Chad’s Lac region, where
there are over 60,000 registered displaced persons, and
tens of thousands who have not yet been registered.
In the Far North region of Cameroon, which has been
under a state of emergency and lock-down for security
reasons, the number of people in need of immediate
food assistance has quadrupled since June 2015, to
over 200,000 today, and the total number of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) increased in the same period
to around 190,000. Severe acute malnutrition rates
for children under 5 have surpassed the emergency
threshold in the three neighbouring countries, as is the
case in Nigeria. And the three departments along the
east of Cameroon were already food-insecure because
of taking in over a quarter of a million refugees from
Central African Republic’s violent conflict over the past
two years, with as yet few of those people returning to
that country.
Humanitarian actors have been scaling up their
assistance, despite a dangerous operating environment.
Since January, the humanitarian country team has been
able to reach 2 million people with primary health-care
outpatient services in north-east Nigeria, including
close to 91,500 people in the areas of Borno state,
where the State has re-established a presence. As of
the end of June, the World Food Programme (WFP)
had provided 54,000 children at risk of malnutrition
with supplementary food, and the agency is targeting
1 million people for food assistance this year. In the first
half of 2016, 148,000 girls and boys were reached with
psychosocial support through child-friendly spaces

S/PV.7748

across the four affected countries. However, as is clear,
considerably more needs to be done — and now.
Humanitarian agencies are taking a regional
approach. Last week, the humanitarian country teams
in Cameroon and Nigeria partnered to provide vital
cross-border assistance to people in Banki, Nigeria,
where up to 20,000 IDPs had been cut off from aid since
last year. The food and relief items were transported
by road from Cameroon and then distributed by WFP
staff from Nigeria, in close cooperation with national
authorities in both countries.
It is urgent that we continue those efforts and
complement them with increased development
assistance. We must be ready to capitalize on the
advances made by the Nigerian State to regain control
of territory, as evidenced by the recent reopening of
the road leading east from Maiduguri to Dikwa, along
which I could not travel even on 19 May. That is essential
to promote trade and income generation along that vital
road axis. But we must be clear — to ourselves and to
the Nigerian Government also: this is not just a security
issue. The Lake Chad Basin, and the protracted violence
of the terrorists of Boko Haram, is for the millions of
people there, caught up in this for years, as much, or
now even more, a humanitarian catastrophe as it is a
security priority. We, the international community and
the Nigerian Government, must act accordingly.
Protection must be at the core of the humanitarian
response, particularly for women and children, who are
at severe risk of exploitation and abuse. Without more
help, villagers are left to defend themselves. In the town
of Baga Sola in Chad, villagers have erected their own
checkpoint to try to fend off further attacks. It is nothing
more than a flimsy rope. Said a youth manning it,
“We are unarmed, so if anybody comes with
explosives or attacks us, we will hold him down
until the police arrives”.
The affected countries have themselves recognized
and drawn attention to those protection concerns. Last
month, the Governments of Nigeria, Cameroon, Chad
and the Niger held a regional protection dialogue and
agreed on a set of comprehensive actions to enhance
protection and respond to the most urgent needs
of refugees, internally displaced persons and other
affected populations. I commend the four countries for
that strong initiative, and urge them to fully implement
the commitments made.

16-237365/21

S/PV.7748

Peace and security in Africa

Despite the best efforts by the regional authorities
and humanitarian actors to expand their reach and
scale up life-saving assistance, the means to support
the humanitarian response in north-east Nigeria,
and throughout the Lake Chad Basin, do not match
the staggering scale of need. The 2016 humanitarian
response plan for Nigeria is only 28 per cent funded,
while those for the Niger, Cameroon and Chad are
similarly underfunded. In noting that the United
Kingdom has provided $18.5 million in humanitarian
support for people in the Lake Chad Basin States, I
earnestly appeal again to Member States to make their
first, or to increase their contribution, to the ongoing
humanitarian operation rapidly — and now.
Earlier this month, at the initiative of the
humanitarian community, including the Regional
Humanitarian Coordinator and the country teams in
Nigeria, the Niger, Cameroon and Chad, developed a 90day plan highlighting the priority humanitarian needs.
A united call for $221 million in funding between July
and the end of September to address life-saving needs
was made. I welcome the generous new pledges and
contributions that have been made following the release
of the 90-day plan. That adds to the Central Emergency
Response Fund (CERF) allocation of $13 million for
Nigeria that I approved at the end of June — and the
nearly $90 million already provided by the CERF to the
Lake Chad Basin since last year. The scale of CERF’s
allocation is something of a record in terms of the
quantum for one, albeit regional, crisis. CERF funds are
being made available nimbly and rapidly, which I judge
to be wholly necessary and proportionate. But — please
note — it is intended to jump-start, not be a substitute
for, Member State contributions.
I am working with my counterparts in humanitarian
agencies to take measures to continue to quickly scale
up capacity at the field level, where it is most required.
That includes deploying additional United Nations
staff, establishing operational hubs, mobilizing relief
supplies and deploying international non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), which is central to the
response. Agencies such as UNICEF, the WFP and the
International Organization for Migration, as well as
their NGO partners, have ambitious scale-up plans that
require urgent resources to implement.
We urgently need to strengthen international
attention to this neglected crisis. For months, I have
been shouting into what feels like an empty room to
highlight the dire situation in the Lake Chad Basin.
6/21

27/07/2016

My trip to the region in May was part of that effort.
Ambassador Power’s visit to the region in April was
also vital in shedding light on this dreadful situation.
I also want to take this opportunity to thank the
Government of the United States and the European
Commission for partnering with the United Nations
and the affected countries on an event focused on the
humanitarian situation in the Lake Chad Basin during
the Economic and Social Council session one month
ago. It was also highlighted in a packed side-event at
the World Humanitarian Summit on 23 May.
We all know that the humanitarian response in
itself is insufficient to re-establish people’s lives and
livelihoods. We must move from delivering aid to
ending need — a crucial outcome endorsed at the World
Humanitarian Summit. That means that, in parallel to
providing life-saving assistance and protection, which
we as humanitarians do, we need a concerted effort
with political actors to address the root causes of the
violence, as Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman
highlighted moments ago. To move from delivering
aid to ending need, we must work with development
partners to address the drivers of vulnerability across
the region. It is also important to recognize that national
authorities in the four countries have been investing in
ensuring greater security for their people, but that they
cannot do it alone. We need to give them our support
and partnership in this effort.
Finally, during my mission, I visited a camp in
Konduga, Nigeria, that hosts some 1,600 displaced
people. During my visit, I met a group of displaced
women and men who had fled from Bama, some 35
kilometres away. As we sat on the ground, Aissa,
Amina, Falmata and Bukar — all of whom had had to
flee Bama — described vividly how venturing outside
the camp to fetch firewood carried the risk of attack
or abduction by Boko Haram, and how they continued
to live in abject fear. They also shared with me their
concerns for their children, who were not getting
enough food and no longer went to school.
These displaced persons who I met, and so
many others affected by this crisis, desperately need
assistance and protection. In the camp, I witnessed not
only human suffering, but also the aspirations of so
many individuals and families to a better future — or
perhaps I should say to be more accurate, a future.
They are looking to the United Nations, to the Security
Council and to all of us for urgently needed help. It is
within our power to be relevant, and to do the right
16-23736

27/07/2016

Peace and security in Africa

thing for our fellow human beings who need us most
requires our determination, our decision and the will to
provide— in very real resources — the means. I urge
the Security Council today not to fail the people in and
around the Lake Chad Basin.
The President: I thank Mr. O’Brien for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for agreeing to hold this meeting at our
request. I also thank Mr. Feltman and Mr. O’Brien for
their highly effective briefings today.
I would like to begin with the harrowing words
of Stefan Heunis, a photographer working for Agence
France-Presse who visited a camp for internally
displaced people near Maiduguri in Nigeria. Stefan
wrote this in his blog earlier today:
“The camp is now home to nearly 16,000 people
and is growing by the day. You can practically taste
the despair — there is no food, few opportunities
and no shade. Flies looking for moisture in the
dry heat pester the eyes and mouths of women
and children too weak to swat them away. What
strikes me most about severe acute malnutrition is
the deformation it causes. The head becomes much
bigger in proportion to the body, and the angular
changes of the skeleton. Bones start protruding
from under the skin, almost piercing it.”
This humanitarian nightmare is the direct
consequence of Boko Haram. They are a group that we
are all familiar with. We all called out in unison for
the return of those young women from Chibok. We all
demanded: “Bring back our girls!”. But now, over two
years on, can we say that we have really maintained our
focus? Today is our chance to bring overdue attention
back to this crisis.
The plight of the people of the Lake Chad Basin
is almost beyond comprehension. Because of Boko
Haram’s anarchy, millions across the region now require
urgent humanitarian assistance. Around 800,000
people are living on the verge of famine, and for many,
I fear that we are simply too late. So many of those in
need are children. As Stephen said, UNICEF estimates
that as many as a quarter of a million children are now
suffering from severe acute malnutrition in Borno state.
Around one in five will die if they do not receive urgent
treatment. So, we must act fast, and I thank you again,

S/PV.7748

Mr. President, for convening this meeting so speedily. I
see three priorities ahead.
First, strong clear leadership from the United
Nations is needed to coordinate the international
effort, particularly given the challenging conditions on
the ground and the continued instability. We strongly
support the work already done by the United Nations,
including to raise the international profile of the plight
of these communities, but it is also imperative that
the international community and the Governments of
the region redouble their efforts to support the United
Nations, so that together we can significantly scale up
the delivery of urgently needed support. That means
putting our hands in our pockets.
The United Kingdom was one of the first donors
to respond to this crisis, and I thank Stephen for
acknowledging that fact. In 2015, we provided
$32 million in humanitarian assistance in the Niger,
Chad and northern Cameroon, and this year we have
already provided an additional $34 million. In Nigeria,
we have provided nearly $11 million to support conflictaffected people in the north-east and will provide an
additional $42 million over the next three years. We
are currently considering where we could do more, and
I hope that others around this table will do the same.
We look to the United Nations for further details on
the priority needs in the region and how we can best
support their plans for their response. But we know that
this is not just about money, so we strongly support the
deployment of additional United Nations staff to the
region, particularly those with relevant experience in
dealing with such complex ongoing humanitarian crises.
My second point is about protection, which must
be at the centre of our response to this crisis. So many
people in the Lake Chad Basin have suffered at the
hands of Boko Haram and fled their towns and villages
in response, so it is vital that the displaced be returned to
their homes only when it is safe to do so. We encourage
all actors to work together to report, mitigate and
address protection violations against displaced people,
refugees and other vulnerable groups. We support the
work being done by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and Governments of
the region on this issue.
My third and final point is that while it is vital that
we treat the symptoms of this crisis and quickly, we also
need to address the root causes. That means stopping the
conflict. Defeating Boko Haram across the region will

16-237367/21

S/PV.7748

Peace and security in Africa

require a comprehensive approach that builds stability,
tackles extremist narratives and addresses the root
causes of instability, including economic and political
development. It is a comprehensive approach that needs
to put the protection and empowerment of women at its
centre, combatting the misogyny and oppression that
are so ingrained in violent extremism. It is an approach
that needs to offer something that the extremists can
never provide — the rule of law. For that reason, it
is vital that any action against Boko Haram be fully
compliant with human rights standards. Ultimately, it is
a comprehensive approach that we all need to support.
As Jeff kindly highlighted, the United Kingdom has
provided $6.5 million to the Multinational Joint Task
Force, and we are also providing military intelligence
and humanitarian and development support to Nigeria.
I hope that all members of the Council will play their
part to tackle both the humanitarian crisis and the
scourge that has created it. I look forward to hearing
from all gathered here about how, between us, we can
step up.
Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Today’s
briefings, in addition to that held in May under the
Egyptian presidency (see S/PV.7699), based on the
Spanish initiative regarding the challenges facing
the Sahel region and Africa, have demonstrated the
multifaceted and multidimensional nature of the crisis
in the Lake Chad Basin and the Sahel. Indeed, the Sahel
and the Lake Chad Basin face various interconnected
and complex challenges related to insecurity in
northern Mali and Libya; the growth of organized
crime, particularly trafficking of drugs, weapons and
human beings; and the increase of terrorism in the
region, notably as perpetrated by Boko Haram.
In addition, new, non-traditional challenges have
arisen. Climate change has had an impact on the way
of life and the socioeconomic situation of the region,
as have humanitarian challenges in the form of
displacement of some 4.2 million people from the Sahel
and the Lake Chad basin and the need of 2.9 million
people for emergency humanitarian assistance, as
Mr. O’Brien mentioned.
Egypt supports all efforts undertaken by the
countries of the Lake Chad basin and Benin, members
of the Multinational Joint Task Force (MNJTF), to
combat Boko Haram. Egypt commends the leadership
shown by the countries of the region to counter this
threat. On this point, the latest military operations of
8/21

27/07/2016

the MNJTF have weakened Boko Haram and made it
possible to arrest many of its members. We welcome the
fact that the Force has fulfilled its role and carried out its
mission in accordance with international humanitarian
law and international law and in full compliance with
human rights. However, in spite of the achievements of
the Force in fighting Boko Haram, it still requires the
support of the international community, as noted by the
representative of the United Kingdom, so that the Force
can restore security in the Lake Chad basin.
Egypt encourages all regional and international
partners to provide increased support to the
Multinational Joint Task Force, especially in the areas
of training and capacity-building and in terms of
equipment and logistics. Egypt also urges all partners to
fulfil the pledges they made at the donor conference for
the Multinational Joint Task Force, held in Addis Ababa
in February, towards the establishment of a trust fund
for the support of African Union forces. With regard to
support for the MNJTF, Egypt will work to ensure that
the Centre for Conflict Resolution and Peacekeeping in
Africa, created in Cairo, will work at the regional level
to provide African solutions for African problems.
We are profoundly worried about the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in the Lake Chad basin and in
the Sahel. We stress the importance of undertaking
greater efforts to find a response to this humanitarian
crisis and focus on both the humanitarian and political
aspects of the crisis. We also reiterate our appeal
for a holistic approach, including focus on political,
military, humanitarian and development dimensions,
in addressing the problems facing the countries of the
Lake Chad Basin. Egypt has consistently supported a
comprehensive approach to dealing with and overcoming
the phenomenon of terrorism and restoring peace by
investing in the institutional and human resources of
the region. This is the topic that the Security Council
will consider tomorrow during the ministerial debate
on peacebuilding in Africa.
Dealing with the humanitarian crisis in the region
requires putting the crisis at the top of the list of
priorities of the international community and shedding
light on its scope and impact and on the suffering it
has caused to people in the region. It is also important
to call upon all international and regional partners to
supply the resources needed to lessen the suffering of
millions of women, children and displaced persons. We
call on tomorrow’s meeting to focus on development
16-23736

27/07/2016

Peace and security in Africa

and humanitarian aspects with a view to ensuring
security for areas liberated from Boko Haram.
Finally, the crisis in the Lake Chad basin requires
the solidarity of the international community and
coordination of efforts by the United Nations agencies,
regional and subregional organizations as well as
Governments of the region, based on the various
cooperation and coordination mechanisms. Egypt
stands ready to step up its cooperation with the
Governments of the Lake Chad basin countries through
the Egyptian Agency of Partnership for Development in
order to put an end to the interconnected crises that the
region is experiencing.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We start by commending the
delegation of the United Kingdom for calling for the
convening of today’s meeting. We thank the UnderSecretaries-General for Political and Humanitarian
Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman and Mr. Stephen O’Brien,
respectively, for their insightful briefings on a critical
situation prevailing in the Lake Chad Basin, a region in
the heart of Africa facing huge challenges that threaten
the very existence of Lake Chad and the survival of
millions of people living on it shores. It is our hope and
expectation that today’s meeting will further contribute
to sensitizing world public opinion and the international
community to this very serious issue.
The challenges facing the region are of three
distinct but often interrelated natures: environmental
degradation due to climate change and human actions;
security threats linked to poverty, unemployment,
youth radicalization and terrorism; and the huge
humanitarian crisis unfolding against the backdrop of
high rates of population growth, extreme poverty, and
the food and nutrition crisis.
Lake Chad’s resources benefit around 20 million
people living on its shores in four countries. The lake
supports the peasant economy of local people who
see their sources of livelihood in peril and the lake
at the brink of ecological disaster, as it has become a
tiny fraction of its former size. A set of factors such
as shifting climate patterns and human activities,
namely, the diversion of large quantities of water from
inflowing rivers, the irrigation for crop production
and an increasing population’s demand for water, have
had a strong impact on and triggered the diminution of
the lake’s size. Several initiatives at the national and
regional levels aimed at managing the lake’s shrinking
water resources and at reversing the trend towards its

S/PV.7748

extinction have been undertaken. These initiatives
are a demonstration of the concern by the people,
Governments and the international community with
respect to the current state of affairs.
The Lake Chad Basin Commission, a regional
initiative established with the objectives of, inter alia,
regulating and controlling the use of water and other
natural resources in the basin, while relatively active
and having made some achievements, has not delivered
visible improvements in the lake’s water replenishment.
The Lake Chad Basin Commission has developed the
Lake Chad replenishment project with the objective of
regenerating the lake through the transfer of 900 cubic
metres per second of water from the Ubangi River by
way of a navigable channel to Lake Chad aimed at
reversing land and water degradation and reviving the
lake’s ecosystem. Being an ambitious project, it has the
potential to radically change the current situation in the
Basin and the lives of its populations.
The countries of the region should assume their
irrevocable responsibilities and strengthen their
political will in order to mobilize the international
community, which should seriously consider extending
tangible support to the project. If the current situation is
not rapidly reversed, it has the potential to become yet
another hotbed of crisis and conflict and a real threat to
regional and international peace and security. In short,
the Lake Chad Basin is no longer able to secure the
livelihoods of the people living on its shores, a state of
affairs that is triggering a threatening security situation
and the current humanitarian crisis.
The security situation in the Lake Chad Basin
has continuously deteriorated over the past few years,
against the backdrop of shrinking resources. Poverty and
joblessness create a reservoir of radicalization, violent
extremism and willing recruits for the terrorists. The
seven-year-old Boko Haram insurgency that spread from
Nigeria into Chad, the Niger and Cameroon prompted
countries bordering Lake Chad to join forces in the
Multinational Joint Task Force, on the understanding
that a collaborative and cooperative regional approach
would be the most effective way of denying safe havens
to the terrorists, whilst strengthening those countries’
military capabilities to face and defeat Boko Haram.
The Multinational Joint Task Force was endorsed by the
African Union in January 2015, and the Security Council
commended Lake Chad Basin countries and Benin for
their efforts to operationalize the Multinational Joint
Task Force.

16-237369/21

S/PV.7748

Peace and security in Africa

Despite progress in the fight against Boko Haram,
the terrorists are still active in the region, intensifying
asymmetric attacks and continuing their rampage of
terror, death and destruction. It is imperative that the
international community support the Multinational Task
Force and the countries of the region in consolidating
the gains achieved to date in the fight against terrorism
in the region.
The recurring nature of food insecurity and poverty
in the region requires a concerted effort to assist the most
vulnerable, prevent severe hunger and malnutrition and
ensure that communities in distress are able to recover.
Although the Governments of the region are making
efforts to address humanitarian challenges with the
international community’s support, the sheer scale of
the crisis, its complexity and its potential for further
deterioration call for a renewed sense of urgency.
According to the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the number of
displaced people in the most affected areas has risen
from 1.6 million to 2.4 million, while food insecurity
and malnutrition have rapidly grown worse. Women
and children represent a majority of the displaced as
Boko Haram attacks continue and military operations
intensify. Now more than ever, the humanitarian
community is called to protect and assist people
displaced by conflict and the communities hosting them.
In conclusion, it is crucial that Member States in
the Lake Chad Basin region continue their joint efforts
to address the multiple challenges affecting the region.
Angola fully supports regional and international
efforts to rehabilitate Lake Chad and give new hope to
extremely distressed populations, as well as to combat
terrorism until Boko Haram is defeated and to provide
assistance to the millions of people in desperate need in
the Lake Chad Basin region.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I too
thank Stephen O’Brien and Jeff Feltman for their
presentations on this issue, which is so important to us
all. Mr. O’Brien’s accounts of the situation in the Lake
Chad region in the areas affected by Boko Haram are
appalling. Vulnerable populations, including children,
young girls and women in particular, are the target
of heinous acts. In addition, we remain extremely
concerned about the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in those countries. We need to address the
plight of the people by making every effort to ensure
that humanitarian assistance reaches them. The needs
10/21

27/07/2016

are enormous, as working conditions for humanitarian
actors remain particularly difficult and Boko Haram is
a long way from being defeated, despite the progress
achieved. I take this opportunity to salute the courage
and commitment of humanitarian actors working under
these conditions.
The humanitarian consequences of the actions of
Boko Haram, recalled earlier by Stephen O’Brien, are
considerable. However, the figures are alarming, since
the threat affects nearly 20 million people. There are
three times more displaced people today than there were
two years ago. It is the fastest growing displacement
crisis in Africa. People affected by the crisis require
urgent assistance in the form of food, water, shelter,
health care, protection and education. Stephen O’Brien
told us earlier that 5 million people are in a situation
of food insecurity. In Borno state alone, nearly half
a million people are deemed to be at the emergency
stage — that is to say, very close to starvation.
According to UNICEF, 50,000 children are likely to die
of malnutrition if they do not receive treatment.
We have, of course, the duty to assist them, but
this also means that Boko Haram must be fought with
the utmost firmness. The countries of the Lake Chad
Basin have taken the initiative to unite their efforts in
the framework of a joint multinational force, and we
welcome this approach. We support this effort both
militarily and financially. France actively supports the
operations against Boko Haram carried out by countries
in the region. We bring intelligence to the benefit of the
countries involved, in addition to logistical support to
Chad and Niger by providing equipment and training to
the Cameroonian forces. We are all allies in the fight
against terrorists and such criminals, whatever form
terrorism takes and wherever it occurs.
The ongoing military operations against Boko
Haram have already proved their effectiveness.
Today, Boko Haram no longer controls territory and
has retreated into its safe havens. These important
achievements owe a great deal to the work of military
forces from Chad and Nigeria. Many soldiers of these
armies have already paid the price in blood in the
regional offensive, and France respectfully pays tribute
to them. The fight against Boko Haram is far from over.
The offensive campaign waged by the countries of the
region will continue, and it is our duty to support it.
It is equally essential that the fight against Boko
Haram be complemented forthwith by development
16-23736

27/07/2016

Peace and security in Africa

policies in the affected regions. Without them, this
criminal movement will continue to thrive on poverty
and the feeling of exclusion that feeds it. France too is
involved in that effort; the President of the Republic
launched a Lake Chad initiative, which has been
implemented by the French Development Agency at the
regional level.
In closing, I recall that international humanitarian
law applies to all parties. The United Nations and its
partners should have access to all persons in need,
including displaced persons. We call for immediate,
safe and unconditional access to populations in need.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation should like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having accepted the request of the
British delegation to convene this important open
meeting on one of the most sensitive regions of Africa
and the world. I also thank both of this morning’s
briefers, Mr. Feltman and Mr. O’Brien, for their
presentations and for the updated information they
kindly brought to our attention.
The Lake Chad Basin is one of the parts of Africa
where the changes in the characteristics of the physical
environment have an impact not only on the daily lives
of people but also on the security and stability of the
countries that surround it. My country, Senegal, well
aware of the many benefits of the joint management of
shared natural areas, including rivers and basins, has
made inter-State cooperation on water a fundamental
pillar of its foreign policy. In that spirit, Senegal
launched its Water, Peace and Security initiative,
which it intends to promote at the international level,
including in the Security Council. Our meeting today
confirms the relevance of such an initiative.
Materially, the people of the Lake Chad Basin are
imperilled by the drastic shrinkage of the lake due
to drought, desertification, climate change and the
overexploitation of natural resources. Those phenomena
have increased the vulnerability of the inhabitants and
aggravated social conflicts over the access, use and
sharing of resources from the Lake Chad Basin. This
tragic situation has transformed the area into fertile
ground for the infiltration and extremist activity of
violent terrorist groups, the notorious Boko Haram first
among them. In that regard, my delegation recognizes
and supports the cooperative efforts of the countries of
the Lake Chad Basin Commission to address together
both the structural and cyclical challenges facing them,

S/PV.7748

in addition to the rampant insecurity, new threats and
duress caused by the ongoing attacks and kidnappings
perpetrated by Boko Haram.
The concerted response of the countries of
the region, with the support of the African Union,
subregional organizations and the international
community is beginning to show results, in particular
the meaningful military successes carried out by the
by the Multinational Joint Task Force (MNJTF). But
the countries in the region require additional logistical,
financial and even human support, including in the
area of intelligence, if they are to more effectively
address the numerous challenges facing them with
respect to security, humanitarian needs and sustainable
development.
According to the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral on the activities of the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel (S/2016/566), the number
of displaced persons in the Lake Chad Basin is now
2.4 million people. These displaced persons, most of
whom are women and children, are exposed to every
danger, including exploitation and abuse. Therefore,
along with military action, an appropriate humanitarian
response must be provided in confronting numerous
challenges, including, among others, migration owing
to the security crisis; the specific protection needs of
refugees and displaced persons, who number in the
millions; and the food insecurity and near-famine
conditions that are rampant in the Sahel and areas at
the centre of the security threat caused by Boko Haram.
In that regard, my delegation commends the
various activities carried out in response to the acute
humanitarian needs of the people, recalling the need
to harmonize initiatives and for ongoing cooperation
among the relevant actors. From that perspective, my
delegation welcomes the regional dialogue on protection
held in Abuja from 6 to 8 June, at the conclusion of
which the participants representing the Governments
of Cameroon, Chad, the Niger and Nigeria, with
international partners and numerous non-governmental
organizations, adopted measures aimed at providing
additional protection and assistance to the population of
the Lake Chad Basin region. The tripartite agreement
on the voluntary repatriation of Nigerian refugees in
Cameroon, signed on 9 June by the Governments of
Cameroon and Nigeria and the regional representative
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, which deserves to be commended.

16-2373611/21

S/PV.7748

Peace and security in Africa

My delegation underscores the challenges associated
with funding and calls for greater mobilization to bridge
the gap, which remains considerable, with only 22 per
cent of the necessary funds having been received. That
is why my delegation has echoed the appeal made by our
two briefers this morning, as well as by our colleague
from the United Kingdom, for the $250 million pledged
to the Multinational Joint Task Force to be quickly
disbursed, and above all for more be done to balance
the $723-million budget proposed by the countries of
the subregion.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank you,
Sir, for convening today’s meeting on the continuing,
ever-more urgent crisis in the Lake Chad Basin, which,
as others have noted, deserves greater attention from
the Security Council and from the broader international
community. I thank Under-Secretaries-General Feltman
and O’Brien for their briefings and efforts, and those
of their teams, to help tackle the significant security
and humanitarian challenges in the region. Mr. O’Brien
knows the region better than most after a lifetime of
dedication to its people, and I think that his personal
commitment is deeply appreciated and very moving.
In April, at the request of President Obama, I led
a United States Government delegation to Cameroon,
Chad and Nigeria to meet directly with those leading
the efforts to counter Boko Haram and respond to the
humanitarian disaster that it had created, as well as of
course to hear from the communities directly affected
by the group’s horrific violence. Our delegation included
representatives from a range of United States military,
humanitarian, political and economic agencies,
reflecting our understanding of the comprehensive
approach that is needed to defeat Boko Haram in an
enduring way and prevent another group like it from
emerging in its place.
As part of the trip, we visited camps of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees displaced by
Boko Haram. Virtually everyone whom we met had a
horror story of having seen homes looted and burned,
men and boys murdered, and women and girls raped
and abducted. A 14-year-old girl whom I met in a camp
in Cameroon told me that when Boko Haram came to
her village, one of the fighters told her, “Either you
marry me and become my slave, or I will kill you and
the rest of your family”. This girl became a slave so that
her family could live. Imagine a child being forced to
make a decision like that. The girl eventually managed
to escape her captors, but she will carry the trauma
12/21

27/07/2016

and, perversely, the guilt that she suffered for the rest
of her life.
As we all know, atrocities like these persist. On
3 June, for example, Boko Haram attacked a security
outpost in the Niger’s Diffa region, reportedly killing
24 security personnel and wounding 111 more. More
than 50,000 people were displaced as a result, many
of whom were already IDPs or refugees. On 29 June,
a young boy reportedly blew himself up in the town
of Djakana, Cameroon, killing 11 people who had
gathered after breaking the fast during Ramadan.
I would like to discuss briefly the security and
humanitarian efforts that we need to vanquish this
monstrous group. It goes without saying that a robust
military effort is critical. Because Boko Haram has
demonstrated its ability to move back and forth across
international borders, Governments of the region must
be able to seemlessly coordinate their efforts to pursue
the terrorists across those same borders. That does not
always come easily, and it has been very challenging
in that region, but the Multinational Joint Task Force
(MNJTF) is playing a growing role in improving such
coordination, as well as in planning and intelligence
sharing. Those efforts have produced important gains
in recent months, including the freeing of thousands of
hostages, destroying dozens of terrorist camps and — this
is worth stressing — recovering approximately 75 per
cent of the territory that Boko Haram once controlled.
Those gains must be preserved, and that requires the
international community’s supporting and shoring up
any weak link in the security posture of the region.
While members of the Council and United Nations
Member States unanimously agree that Boko Haram
constitutes a threat to international peace and security,
unfortunately few are supporting the countries on the
front lines of this fight. We applaud the European
Union and the United Kingdom for their contributions
to the MNJTF. For its part, the United States is
supporting the MNJTF and its members with advisers,
intelligence-sharing, logistic support, training and
non-lethal equipment totalling more than $71 million
of assistance, as well as providing $40 million through
the Global Security Contingency Fund for training and
equipment to help our partners enhance border security.
We urge more Member States to step up and support
that effort.
To be effective, those military efforts must respect
human rights, as the Council importantly underscored
16-23736

27/07/2016

Peace and security in Africa

in its presidential statement S/PRST/2016/7, adopted
in may on efforts to counter Boko Haram. When
Government security forces round up civilians on
nothing more than suspicion, use torture to try to
extract information, apply scorched-earth tactics or
stand by as vigilante groups carry out mob justice or
commit any other abuses with impunity, they alienate
the very civilians whose support and cooperation is
crucial to combating Boko Haram effectively.
As we continue to strengthen the military effort
against Boko Haram, we also have to do much more
to address the region’s dire humanitarian situation—
and I stress the word, “dire”. As we heard from UnderSecretary-General O’Brien, an estimated 2.5 million
people have been displaced within their countries by
Boko Haram, while some 150,000 have been pushed
beyond their borders. More than 90 per cent of IDPs
in the region have been taken in by family members or
communities — a testament not only to the tremendous
generosity of the people of the region, but also to the
huge strain that has been placed on them. A security
guard at a university I visited in Yola, Nigeria, had at
one point taken in more than 50 members of his extended
family who had been displaced by the violence. He is
a national hero, and there are tens of thousands of such
heros across the region. We therefore have Boko Haram
unleashing this true evil, an evil that has seen them
pioneering the theft of children and the use of young
girls as suicide bombers. But, alongside that evil, we
have seen such unbelievable altruism and goodness.
I think we of greater means should all be inspired by
those heros to do much more.
The situation in the camps is as dire, as we have
heard. Médecins sans Frontières (MSF) recently was
able to reach the city of Bama in Borno state, Nigeria,
which aid workers have been unable to reach for two
years due to insecurity. It is home to approximately
10,000 people. MSF found that 15 per cent of the children
there were suffering from severe acute malnutrition,
and nearly 1,500 people had to be evacuated. Most
chillingly, when the group arrived, they found 1,233
graves near the camp, which had been dug in the last
year; 480 of those graves appeared to belong to children.
And camp residents told MSF of 40 deaths in Bama in
the first three weeks of this month due to starvation and
treatable illness. Those are the camps we can reach. In
the parts of Bormo, Nigeria. Lake Chad and Diffa, the
Niger, that are unreachable, one can only imagine how
infernal the conditions likely are.

S/PV.7748

Yet despite that overwhelming need, the
$535 million in humanitarian appeals for the affected
countries, as we have heard, are grossly underfunded.
In Nigeria, only 28 per cent of the appeal has been met,
in Cameroon the figure is 22 per cent and in Chad only
17 per cent. We have provided more than $253 million
in humanitarian assistance to countries in the Lake
Chad Basin in the past two years. We, like the United
Kingdom, are considering now what more we can
do — because the situation demands it. More countries
need to step up immediately.
In addition to strengthening those military and
humanitarian efforts, we also need to address the
chronic problems that helped to fuel Boko Haram’s
rise in the first place, and which, if left unaddressed,
will lead to further instability and insecurity. That
is my final point. We have to play the long-term
game in countering violent extremism. That means
investing more in the education of young people
from marginalized communities, which can open up
opportunities that provide a brighter path than the one
offered by terrorist groups who exploit marginalization.
It means building law-enforcement bodies that are
actually accountable to the communities they serve and
work to earn their trust. It means amplifying the voices
of religious leaders who condemn terrorism and seek to
exercise their faith in moderate and peaceful ways. It
means rooting out the rampant corruption that has long
siphoned away resources from the people who need it
most, and fostering inclusive institutions that serve all
people, rather than one group at the expense of another.
That is a daunting agenda. And one of the challenges
we face now is that we have to simultaneously tackle
those root causes and address this agenda at the same
time that we keep people alive in the here-and-now who
desperately need our humanitarian support.
Let me conclude. It just so happened that the
delegation that I led to the region coincided with the
two-year anniversary of the abduction of 276 Nigerian
schoolgirls from the town of Chibok. As everyone
present here knows, all but one of those girls are still
missing, presumably held by Boko Haram. I had an
opportunity to meet with eight girls who were taken
captive on the awful night in April 2014 when their
school was overrun. Herded into open-roof trucks, a
few of the girls managed to escape by actually clinging
to the branches overhead as the trucks were being
driven away from the school. A few of the other girls I
met escaped because one of the trucks mercifully broke

16-2373613/21

S/PV.7748

Peace and security in Africa

down and a number of girls jumped out of the backs of
the truck. The girls I met were studying at the American
University of Nigeria in Yola, where they had been
given scholarships. Those were girls who, prior to their
abduction, had not completed secondary school. Now
they are taking accelerated courses to prepare them
for the lives ahead. Eight young women, along with
16 other Chibok girls, were studying for a university
degree, and they were pursuing a range of professions.
All spoke ambitiously and idealistically about studying
medicine, engineering or accounting. All of them
shared something very important in common: they were
determined to go back to Chibok and help rebuild their
community. One of the young women told me, “We
want to make the world proud”. Think of the profound
character of a group of young women who, after being
taken from their classrooms in a dangerous area where
they just wanted to complete their exams, taken in the
dead of night by Boko Haram, now are determined as
ever to go back to that community and who just want
to make the rest of us proud. I have no doubt that these
girls will, as will so many other young men and women
in Nigeria, Cameroon, Chad and the Niger. If only, we
help empower them to do so.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke
in Spanish): I thank Japan and the United Kingdom
for having convened this informative briefing. I also
thank Mr. Stephen O’Brien for having shared with
us his assessment of the situation in the region in the
wake of his May visit, and in particular for sharing his
recommendations as to how we avoid a humanitarian
catastrophe in that region. I also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Jeffrey Feltman for his briefing in the area of
security, and specifically on the progress made and
the challenges that still lie ahead in the fight against
Boko Haram.
I am not going to repeat the chilling information
that we have already heard. I think that we are all
very aware of the extreme gravity of the situation.
For my part, however, I would initially like to make
two comments.
The first is that the humanitarian crises in the Lake
Chad Basin happen so often not that they are becoming
a chronic phenomenon. If those humanitarian crises
are no longer timely, the response of international
cooperation must also not be timely. That is why
emergency humanitarian aid should be combined with
development activities that promote the resilience of
the region.
14/21

27/07/2016

The second comment is that the humanitarian
crisis in the Lake Chad Basin requires a comprehensive
response, as it is the result of a combination of factors:
fragile State authority with limited control of the
territory, poverty, migration, climate change, terrorism
and violent extremism, among other factors. I would
like to focus on those issues.
First, with regard to violent extremism, many
delegations have already referred to the fight against
Boko Haram through the Multinational Joint Task
Force. Spain also joins in recognizing the efforts being
made by Chad, Cameroon, theNiger and Nigeria in
that regard. We also echo the call for closer regional
cooperation to combat this terrorist group. I would also
like to point out the importance of ensuring that those
operations take into account the specific protection
needs of women and girls. It is crucial to provide
medical and psychosocial services for survivors. It is
also important to dismantle the trafficking networks, as
women and girls often end up as victims. Guaranteeing
security in and around the camps for internally
displaced persons is also important. As has already
been stated, military actions are not enough. There
also needs to be a relevant component in the fight
against violent extremism, which fuels the terrorism
threat. Boko Haram substantiates its acts with rhetoric
that squarely opposes education and fundamental
rights and freedoms, particularly of women and girls.
Winning the communication and awareness-raising
battle — especially with regard to youths — in order to
counter terrorist groups is a pending task.
The second issue to which I would like to refer is
climate change. During our meeting on the challenges
in the Sahel region (see S/PV.7699), convened barely
two months ago under the Egyptian presidency,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Ibn
Chambas identified climate change as being one of the
main challenges confronting the region. Lake Chad is
disappearing, thereby exacerbating the already very
difficult conditions being experienced by the people of
the region. That is causing forced internal displacement
and migration and compounding threats such as
terrorism, organized crime and violent extremism.
In that regard, I would like to draw attention to the
interesting proposal made by the Executive Director of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee to analyse whether
the effects of climate change worsen the fragility
of certain populations and whether they are making
them even more vulnerable to violent extremism and
16-23736

27/07/2016

Peace and security in Africa

recruitment by terrorist groups. That seems quite
timely to us when it comes to the area we are discussing,
namely, the Lake Chad Basin.
Migration is the third issue I want to discuss.
One of the consequences of the terrorism perpetuated
by Boko Haram is the tragedy resulting from the
massive displacement of populations, with the parallel
emergence of camps with enormous needs for basic
services. Many of the displaced opt to migrate, often
becoming victims of human trafficking networks.
As proof of that challenge we need only look to the
thousands of deaths in the Mediterranean Sea and the
desert, including as well the exisitng links between
terrorism and trafficking in migrants.
I would like to conclude by saying that today’s
meeting is a good example of how early-warning
mechanisms are functioning correctly. The Security
Council is being informed in a timely manner about
the situation the region, and on recent occassions it has
expressed itself on the matter — the most recent being
on the eve of the security summit held in Abuja in May.
Nevertheless, if we want to change the course of events,
there will have to be greater political will the part of
everyone. Early warning will serve little purpose if it is
no accompanied by an early response.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey
Feltman and Under-Secretary-General Stephen O’Brien
for their briefings.
The countries of Central and West Africa have
recently further strengthened their cooperation on
security, and the overall situation in the region is stable.
The countries of the Lake Chad Basin have established
the Multinational Joint Task Force and intensified their
fight against terrorism, making significant progress in
that regard, for which China expresses its appreciation.
The security problem and the humanitarian situation
in the region remain very serious, however. Repeated
terrorist attacks and rampant criminal activities, such
as piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, pose a threat to the
security and stability of the region.
The international community should support
the countries of Central and West Africa, including
the countries of the Lake Chad Basin region, in the
following areas.
First, they should support African countries in
their counter-terrorism efforts, which constitute. a

S/PV.7748

very important component of international counterterrorism efforts. The international community must
actively support and assist the countries of the region in
their capacity-building to fight terrorism, enabling the
Multinational Joint Task Force to effectively conduct
its operations to eliminate the threats to the countries,
particularly in the Lake Chad Basin, posed by terrorist
organizations and activities.
Secondly, there must be greater cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations, including the
African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States and the Lake Chad Basin Commission.
The international community must fully respect
the leading role played by regional organizations in
addressing the region’s problems, and draw on the
unique expertise and advantages of those organizations
with a view to building synergies and promoting
solutions to regional hotspot issues through such
methods as dialogue, mediation and good-offices.
Thirdly, humanitarian aid should be provided to the
region as soon as possible. The international community
should adhere to the purposes set forth in the Charter
of the United Nations and the fundamental principles
of humanity, neutrality and impartiality, as established
by relevant General Assembly resolutions, and actively
provide humanitarian assistance to the countries
concerned based on respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of nations, in order to mitigate the
food shortage and insecurity facing regional countries.
Fourthly, countries of the region must also
be provided assistance so that they can achieve
development by addressing the root causes of conflict.
The international community should also increase its
financial assistance to those countries on the basis of
respect for their national sovereignty so that they can
truly build their capacities to promote economic and
social development.
China has always actively supported Africa in
capacity-building, abiding by its policy of sincerity,
good faith and friendship towards Africa, characterized
by prioritizing justice over interests. During the
Chinese presidency in April, we took the initiative to
hold an open debate of the Security Council on piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea (see S/PV.7675), which resulted
in presidential statement S/PRST/2016/4, in which the
Council offered a positive response to the aspirations
of the regional countries for international cooperation
in combatting piracy, thereby building an international

16-2373615/21

S/PV.7748

Peace and security in Africa

consensus on fighting piracy in the Gulf of Guinea,
offering a new approach to a collective response to the
piracy issue.
China will continue to implement the outcome
of the Johannesburg Summit and the China-Africa
Cooperation Forum, and is ready to work with the
international community and countries concerned
to support the countries of Central and West Africa
in their efforts to achieve lasting peace and common
prosperity.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General
Feltman
and
UnderSecretary-General O’Brien for their comprehensive
briefings, as well as the United Kingdom delegation for
requesting this meeting.
The humanitarian situation in the Lake Chad Basin
continues to destabilize the entire West Africa region.
The food security and nutritional situation in the area
is next to disastrous. Extreme poverty, interethnic and
intercommunal tensions, climate change — all these
factors contribute to the sad state of affairs. People living
in insecure areas continue to face the deterioration of
their livelihoods, including farming and fishing. In
addition, during the past decade, the rise of violent
extremism complicated an already dire situation in
the region.
In that regard, Ukraine fully supports all
international initiatives aimed at the stabilization
of the region. The regional efforts to address all key
conflict drivers must also be strongly encouraged.
Humanitarian aid has to be delivered wherever it is
needed most, especially for those most vulnerable,
including displaced persons and refugees, in host areas
and areas inaccessible to humanitarian programmes.
Borno state in Nigeria, which hosts more than 1 million
internally displaced persons, is one of the vivid cases in
point here. This endeavour requires substantial funding
from the international donor community. Unfortunately,
as we have just heard, only 28 per cent of the United
Nations humanitarian response plan for the Lake Chad
Basin has been financed so far. We therefore encourage
donors to support United Nations efforts in this respect.
International assistance will not be effective if we do
not provide a proper response to the major threat to the
region, that is, Boko Haram. As was rightly mentioned
by today’s briefers, Boko Haram’s activities undermine
the international community’s and regional efforts to
take forward the recovery of the countries affected.
16/21

27/07/2016

Confronting the Boko Haram threat in the
countries of the Lake Chad Basin requires the adoption
and subsequent implementation of coherent national
programmes aimed at combating violent extremism.
In that light, we commend the results of the second
Regional Security Summit, held on 14 May in Abuja,
which helped to better evaluate and prepare the regional
response to the threat posed by this terrorist group.
We call on the United Nations Secretariat to
support these regional efforts as much as possible, in
particular through the relevant United Nations Offices
in Africa, including the enhancement of cooperation
with the Multinational Joint Task Force in developing
and strengthening strategic communications among the
intelligence and counter-terrorism authorities of the
States affected.
We are also looking forward to the planned visit to
the Lake Chad Basin States by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee in October this year. In our view, it should
be aimed first and foremost at elaborating the further
steps required for strengthening and promoting
cooperation between the international community and
the region so as to assist it in countering terrorism,
including through the development of a relevant
regional comprehensive strategy.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I join earlier speakers in
welcoming our discussion today on the situation in the
Lake Chad Basin, which we, too, feel is timely, and we
thank the United Kingdom for having requested it. This
discussion, in my view, could also set the stage for the
wider conversation on peacebuilding in Africa that the
presidency will convene tomorrow.
I wish to add my voice to those expressing
appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Feltman and
Under-Secretary-General O’Brien for their respective
briefings, which shed much light on the situation
there. Earlier speakers touched on the security and
humanitarian challenges faced by the region and on
possible responses by the international community.
With a view to contributing to the discussion, I intend to
focus my statement on similar themes, but I also intend
to focus on the theme of the protection of children in
the Basin area.
Malaysia shares the concerns expressed by Council
members on the deteriorating security and humanitarian
situation of the roughly 50 million inhabitants of the
wider Basin area, which straddles Chad, Cameroon, the
Niger and Nigeria. On the security front, my delegation
16-23736

27/07/2016

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV.7748

notes that the civilian population of the Basin is
doubly impacted, first by the worsening humanitarian
situation, which results partly from both climate and
human factors, and, secondly, by the security threat
posed by violent extremists, particularly Boko Haram.

consider meeting such needs. The protracted situation
of insecurity, instability and lack of socioeconomic
development in the Basin area continues to expose
the exceeding vulnerability of the civilian population,
particularly of women and children, boys and girls.

Clearly, Boko Haram has played a role in
exacerbating the already dire humanitarian situation
in the Lake Chad Basin, and we recognize the needs
of the population. We support the call made and
encourage donors not to overlook but instead support
the humanitarian response to the region. The fact that
Boko Haram retains the capability to launch large-scale
attacks and undertake complex ambushes and is fairly
proficient with improvised explosive devices, as well as
its pledge of allegiance to the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and Da’esh, give rise to much concern, not
least because the humanitarian situation of the civilian
population in the Basin area is already vulnerable
and precarious.

In this regard, I wish to highlight the deplorable
and unacceptable situation faced by children at the
hands of Boko Haram. Since 2013, at least 1.3 million
children have been uprooted or displaced as they seek
to flee the violence. Among the key losses suffered is
access to education and to health care. Loss of access to
education is particularly worrying. Left unchecked, the
large number of uneducated and idle youth provide a
pool of potential recruits not just for terrorists but also
for other armed criminal groups, thereby perpetuating
the cycle of violence in an already insecure and unstable
region. As such, we stress the importance of ensuring
that all children, including and especially displaced
children in the affected areas, continue to receive an
education.

In this connection, Malaysia is pleased to note that
the Multinational Joint Task Force (MNJTF), established
last year by the Lake Chad Basin Commission member
States and the African Union, has been operationalized
and is undertaking active operations against Boko
Haram. Apart from the MNJTF operations, we also
welcome the various other measures undertaken
by the countries in the region to prevent attacks and
reduce civilian targets. The improved coordination and
intelligence-gathering among the MNJTF authorities
that allow for successful pre-emptive operations are
also commendable.
It is striking to note that nearly one of every five
Boko Haram suicide bombers is a child; almost three
quarters are girls, as highlighted by UNICEF in its
most recent report. This is utterly abhorrent. Despite
the criticism levelled at it, the MNJTF is a concrete
example of what concerted political will and military
action, coupled with regional solidarity, cooperation
and resolve, can achieve.
In combating the scourge of terrorism and violent
extremism, all parties must continue to adhere to
international law, including international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. We fully
understand, however, that in order to ensure its continued
functioning, the MNJTF requires the predictable and
sustained provision of necessary resources. We support
the call for States and other partners in a position to
do so, including those from the region, to positively

Malaysia condemns in the strongest terms the
practice of abducting children for recruitment and using
them as combatants or human shields by terrorists and
other parties to conflict in the region. Such practices
constitute grave violations against children for which
the perpetrators must be held to account. These children
and the many others who are hidden within the ranks
of the group are victims of Boko Haram’s inhuman and
ruthless tactics. We encourage the MNJTF authorities
to provide special protection for children associated
with Boko Haram. We condemn on equal terms the
abduction of women and girls, who are then subjected
to sexual violence and forced marriage by the group, as
appalling and unacceptable.
Moving forward, we wish to flag the concern
that even upon their release or separation from Boko
Haram, children face serious challenges in getting their
lives back. They are often stigmatized by their own
communities. We wish to stress that in such situations,
children must primarily be seen as victims who deserve
treatment and support for their eventual reintegration
into the community. They should not have to suffer
being ostracized and shamed.
By way of conclusion, I wish to reaffirm Malaysia’s
commitment to working effectively with all partners
and stakeholders in a coordinated and concerted
manner, with a view to collectively addressing the dire
situation in the Lake Chad Basin.

16-2373617/21

S/PV.7748

Peace and security in Africa

Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I should like to thank
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman and Mr. Stephen O’Brien for their
briefings this morning regarding the humanitarian and
security situation in the Lake Chad Basin.
We remain concerned about the security situation
there as well as the humanitarian crisis that has engulfed
that region for several years now and which, despite the
progress made by the countries of the region in recent
months, continues to affect millions of people, owing
both to the impact of extremists, who use appalling
tactics to sow fear among the population, and to all
of the socioeconomic factors that have historically
affected the countries of the region. Food insecurity,
poverty, exclusion, drought, transnational organized
crime and the clashes between local communities, in
addition to the threat posed by the terrorist group Boko
Haram, responsible for forced displacement and great
instability, have undermined the normal development
of a region with great human and economic potential.
In that connection, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela once again emphatically condemns the acts
carried out by the terrorist group Boko Haram in the
Lake Chad region, which represent grave attacks against
the peace and security of the people of Cameroon,
Chad, Nigeria and the Niger in recent years, and which
exacerbate the already fragile situation, particularly the
humanitarian aspect.
It is absolutely reprehensible that the actions of
that terrorist group include the abduction of children,
young people and women, and the destruction of
educational facilities and other civilian infrastructure.
In that regard, we have been and will continue to be
unwavering in our support of all Council initiatives to
promote a sustainable solution to this terrorist threat.
The most recent initiative was presidential statement
S/PRST/2016/7, of 13 May, which reaffirmed the
commitment to decisively fight terrorism in all of its
forms and manifestations.
We wish to express our solidarity with the victims
of Boko Haram’s criminal actions, and we demand the
immediate and unconditional freeing of all abducted
people that are still captive, including those who are
victims of forced recruitment.
The humanitarian calamity affecting the region
should be the cause of great concern and immediate
attention, especially considering the massive numbers
of internally displaced persons and refugees who
18/21

27/07/2016

have fled their homes to save their lives. According
to the latest reports from United Nations specialized
agencies, the number of persons internally displaced
over the past year exceeds 70,000, with almost 7,000
refugees. As can be expected, the situation does not
allow the victims to lead a full and peaceful life, and
they are deprived of their most fundamental rights to
basic services, education and culture. Moreover, this
undermines at all levels the ability of the subregion and
the countries concerned to respond.
At a time when humankind faces significant
humanitarian challenges, crises such as the one in the
Lake Chad subregion, which in some cases have less
media coverage, fall squarely on this Organization and
the international community, and they must receive
increased attention. It is crucial for the various sectors
of the international community that have pledged
financial resources to this issue to fully keep their
commitments with a view to addressing and solving the
humanitarian and development challenges.
The efforts spearheaded by countries in the region
in order to effectively address the situation and facilitate
humanitarian access in this risky environment are
laudable, as are the efforts of various United Nations
entities and international organizations to provide
assistance and relief to the victims of these crises.
Similarly, we welcome the efforts of Nigeria, Chad, the
Niger and Cameroon, through the Multinational Joint
Task Force, to fight Boko Haram. We commend their
achievements in recent months, which has resulted in
greater stability in the region. We wish them continued
success in their coordinated efforts in all areas to
combat the security threat.
The regional security summit held in Abuja on
14 May was an appropriate forum to reaffirm the political
commitment of regional and international players to
strengthening their joint security strategy aimed at
curbing the spread of terrorism. We hope that its results
are duplicated and lead to concrete improvements.
In that connection, all solutions to the scourge of
terrorism must be consistent with the purposes and
principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
including the sovereignty and self-determination of
peoples. As part of the effort in addressing the terrorist
threat to international peace and security, we consider
the role of public policy to be essential as an engine
of social stability. Consequently, we encourage the
countries in the Lake Chad region to continue making
16-23736

27/07/2016

Peace and security in Africa

efforts to promote inclusive educational, economic
and political Government strategies for sustainable
development. That is why it is urgent to strengthen
State capacities at all levels, including regional and
local levels, in order to prevent and combat the causes
of the security threats. The efforts of the countries in
the subregion must be accompanied by the decisive
support of the United Nations and its agencies.
The work of the Lake Chad Basin Commission in
various areas to counter the actions of Boko Haram
have been of great value, and we believe that, with the
leadership of affected countries and the support of the
international community, there should be coordinated
strategies to prevent, combat and eliminate this threat
to international peace and security.
Finally, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
reaffirms that the ultimate defeat of terrorism cannot be
based solely on military action. We must make progress
in addressing the structural elements of poverty that
drive the emergence and spread of violence. Otherwise,
military victories on the battlefield will not guarantee
sustained peace.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I wish to thank the delegation of the United
Kingdom for convening this meeting on an issue of great
importance, namely, the situation in the Lake Chad
Basin. I also wish to thank Under-Secretary-General
Jeffrey Feltman and Under-Secretary-General Stephen
O’Brien for their detailed and illuminating briefings.
Just over two weeks ago, the Security Council heard
Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel, deliver a briefing
here in the Chamber on the latest report (S/2016/566) of
Secretary-General on his Office (see S/PV.7735), during
which he highlighted the precarious humanitarian
and security environment in the Lake Chad Basin.
Uruguay’s brief statement on this issue does not reflect
any intention to understate the impact of this crisis, for
given the multidimensional nature of these problems,
we could clearly explore these issues at much greater
length.
Uruguay takes a comprehensive approach to the
crises in this region, considering that the situation
has devolved to its present state due to the sum of a
great number of converging elements that are further
aggravating existing structural deficiencies. The
deplorable security environment, made worse primarily

S/PV.7748

due to the terrorist threat posed by Boko Haram, the lack
of food and the unmet basic needs of the populations,
have led to 2.6 million people to leave their homes
forcibly — with 71,718 registered displaced persons in
a little over a year and an estimated 43,193 others who
have not been registered — which further destabilizes
an already fragile region.
We are talking about 2.6 million people who had
to abandon everything due to the crisis in the region,
2.4 million people affected by Boko Haram violence
and 3.8 million people suffering from extreme food
insecurity. For the international community as a whole,
those numbers may not seem so significant on a global
scale. However, given that the population of Uruguay
hovers around 3.5 million, just making that comparison
has a meaningful and disconcerting impact on us.
The question we must ask ourselves is, What can the
international community do to at least ease the crises
facing the 21 million people who live in these crisisaffected regions?
First, we must recognize the work of the specialized
agencies of the United Nations — the World Food
Programme, UNICEF, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the World Health
Organization, among others — as well as of the Central
Emergency Response Fund, which, insofar as their
capacities allow them, have tried to meet the most
urgent needs of those people. The 90-day emergency
response plan is yet another tool that will undoubtedly
make a significant difference in the situation in the
Lake Chad Basin.
Secondly, we must address the root causes of the
crisis: hunger, lack of education, lack of access to safe
drinking water, insecurity and lack of medical facilities,
among many others. We need sustainable solutions for
these populations so that they can build their resilience
and adapt to adversity.
With regard to Boko Haram, in addition to its
warped or deviant interpretations of religion, it clearly
seeks to intstil and exploit fear in its victims. It has also
been shown to have strategic interests in the border
areas of Nigeria, the Niger and Cameroon, including
control over the flow of weapons, human trafficking
and trafficking in ivory. We stress the fact that when
its members are not engaged in terrorism they operate
as common criminals. We need to pursue our strategy
against them with all means at our disposal.

16-2373619/21

S/PV.7748

Peace and security in Africa

Uruguay commends all of the emergency plans and
initiatives that have proven to be important instruments
of assistance to the populations at risk, but we must also
continue to work with the Governments of Cameroon,
Chad, the Niger and Nigeria to build capacities that
will enable them to address the root causes that fuel
these crises.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs Jeffrey Feltman and Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator Stephen O’Brien for their detailed
briefings on the military-political and humanitarian
situations in the Lake Chad Basin region.
Of particular concern are the ongoing activities of
Boko Haram, which continues to undermine stability in
Cameroon, the Niger, Nigeria and Chad and threatens
many other countries of the continent. We recall
that Boko Haram has declared its allegiance to the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, which has become
entrenched in Libya, where chaos and a de facto power
vacuum have prevailed for the past five years. That
linkage makes it even more urgent than ever to find
an urgent, cohesive and robust response to the terrorist
threat in Africa. We are also concerned about the new
and innovative tactics used by Boko Haram, which
avoids direct confrontations with Government armed
forces and prefers attackingpeaceful civilians and
civilian infrastructure through suicide bombers and
improvised explosive devices.
It will be impossible to improve the humanitarian
situation, resolve the issue of refugees and many
problems linked to the terrorist threat in the region
without eliminating the threat posed by Boko Haram.
That is evident to us all today and is our highest
priority. We note the efforts of the Lake Chad Basin
Commission, their Multinational Joint Task Force and
Benin, and welcome the results they have achieved. We
are convinced that collective action alone can defeat the
terrorist hydra in Africa and elsewhere in the world.
We also welcome the positive decision taken at the
recent African Union Summit in Kigali to establish an
anti-terrorist fund to meet the needs of the continent,
which will play an important role in the elimination
of terrorism throughout Africa. We also highly
commend the measures taken by the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel and the United
Nations specialized agencies that provide multifaceted
20/21

27/07/2016

assistance to the Lake Chad Basin countries. The
most important decisions have been taken and must
now be implemented. Russia will maintain its active
multilateral and bilateral cooperation with the States
of Africa.
Mr. Taula (New Zealand): I thank Under-Secretaries­
General Feltman and O’Brien for their first-hand
engagement and insights on the Lake Chad Basin.
As we have heard, the region faces a range of very
serious challenges, including the environmental and
economic effects of climate change, lack of development,
youth populations that aspire to greater economic and
political participation, low commodity prices, and the
presence of groups promoting an extremist ideology. We
are deeply concerned by the displacement of millions
of people across the region, many of whom are women
and children, due to the actions of Boko Haram. This
has been further exacerbated by the growing number
of attacks in the southern Diffa region of the Niger.
The large-scale displacement risks fuelling further
regional instability, and we agree that a concerted
effort is required on resettlement and recovery for
those affected.
Mr. O’Brien outlined that there are over 9 million
people in need across the Lake Chad Basin region.
Boko Haram’s continued actions are exacerbating an
already difficult humanitarian situation. The disruption
of farming and herding activities is contributing to a
looming food crisis in north-east Nigeria. Today’s
meeting is therefore important in highlighting to the
Security Council and the international community the
sheer scale of the problems.
We welcome the gains made by the Multinational
Joint Task Force (MNJTF) and the Nigerian army
against Boko Haram, including the rescue of over 2,000
abductees and the arrest of key Boko Haram members.
We are also encouraged by the enhanced coordination
by Governments in the Lake Chad Basin area, including
on intelligence-sharing with the establishment of an
intelligence fusion cell in N’Djamena in April.
New Zealand supports and encourages regional
solutions to regional issues. The MNTJF represents a
practical example of a collective, coordinated regional
response to a threat that is inherently regional and
cross-border in nature.
Ensuring that the MNJTF is adequately financed
is critical. It also speaks to a deeper ongoing problem
16-23736

27/07/2016

Peace and security in Africa

in the international community’s approach to funding
regionally led counter-terrorism and peace operations.
New Zealand is strongly supportive of African calls for
a long-term solution to these financing questions that
would provide regional organizations with more stable
and predictable funding, recognizing that there also
needs to be flexibility in specific cases.
As our briefers have said, this is not just a security
issue, and a military response is only part of the
solution to defeating Boko Haram. It is necessary to
address the conditions that have allowed extremism
to take hold in the region, including political and
economic marginalization, limited access to education,
scarce employment and economic opportunities, and
food insecurity.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Japan.
I thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman and Mr. Stephen
O’Brien for their important briefings.
The Lake Chad Basin faces growing vulnerability
at an alarming scale. Approximately 9.2 million
people — a population greater than that of New York
City — are in need of urgent humanitarian assistance
and face violence perpetrated by Boko Haram. That
will be compounded by the rainy season and a lean
crop intake. Japan is deeply concerned by the situation
on the ground, which requires a careful and dedicated
response. In addressing this situation, I would like to
take up two points.
First, regional military cooperation through the
Multinational Joint Task Force (MNJTF) is absolutely
vital to the Lake Chad Basin. That regional initiative,
through the Lake Chad Basin Commission (LCBC),
together with national ownership and leadership, plays
an irreplaceable role in regional stabilization. Only
through effective MNJTF operations can vulnerable

S/PV.7748

communities receive access to humanitarian assistance.
Once areas are liberated from Boko Haram insurgents,
many other activities can be effectively undertaken in
addition to the efforts of the MNJTF.
The second point I would like to underline is that
improved livelihoods are equally vital for stabilizing the
region. The United Nations, regional and subregional
organizations, national Governments and donors must
all work together to restore community livelihoods in
the long-term while also supporting the immediate
humanitarian response. The impact of the violence
caused by Boko Haram is wide-ranging. Jobs and
local economies are threatened, education and health
services have disappeared, community institutions are
undermined, and women and children have been major
victims. This impact leads to major challenges at the
local level. In Diffa, Niger, trade in the local specialties
of hot peppers and dried fish remains banned out of
concern that profits could fund Boko Haram. Corn
growing is also banned over fears that the corn fields
could provide safe haven to Boko Haram. Entire
community livelihoods are at stake without economic
and social development.
Tomorrow, the Council will hold an open debate on
peacebuilding in Africa, focusing on institution-building.
Communities in the Lake Chad Basin need immediate
humanitarian assistance, but extending humanitarian
response is no substitute for rebuilding livelihoods and
institutions. People require extended State authority,
credible governance, improved public administration,
and expanded security. The international community
must stand ready to support both the region’s immediate
needs and long-term efforts to sustain peace. Japan is
ready to do its part.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The meeting rose at noon.

16-2373621/21
