S/2021/689

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 July 2021
Original: English

Implementation of paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013)
Thirty-first report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013), covers developments pertaining to missing Kuwaiti and thirdcountry nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, including the national archives, since
my previous report, dated 22 April 2021 (S/2021/395).

II. Recent activities with regard to the repatriation and return
of all Kuwaiti and third-country nationals or their remains
2.
Further progress was made in the identification of missing Kuwaiti and third country nationals during the reporting period. On 11 July, the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of Kuwait announced the conclusion of DNA testing on the remains of a
further 10 individuals that had been transferred from Iraq to Kuwait in August 2019.
The remains were conclusively identified as belonging to 10 individuals from the
Kuwaiti list of persons missing since 1991. The Ministry released the names o f the
10 missing persons, confirming that it had informed the victims’ families. The
Permanent Representative of Kuwait to the United Nations conveyed those
developments in identical letters dated 14 July (S/2021/654). In those letters, Kuwait
thanked the Government of Iraq, the members of the Tripartite Commission and its
Technical Subcommittee, the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) for contributing to the
efforts to determine the fate of the 10 individuals.
3.
UNAMI, in its observer capacity, attended the 116th meeting of the Technical
Subcommittee and the fifty-first session of the Tripartite Commission, held in Kuwait
and Baghdad on 20 and 22 June, respectively. Owing to the continued coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) restrictions, the sessions were held in a hybrid format, with both
in-person and online participation.
4.
During the meeting of the Technical Subcommittee, its members congr atulated
the representative of Kuwait, Rabea al-Adsani, on his appointment as Ambassador
Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary for Kuwaiti Prisoners and Missing Persons and
welcomed the new head of the delegation of Saudi Arabia, Haifa Hassan al -Gaith.

21-10027 (E)

060821

*2110027*

S/2021/689

5.
The representative of Iraq updated the Technical Subcommittee on the efforts
by the Ministry of Defence, in coordination with the Iraqi National Intelligence
Service, to locate two potential witnesses with information on the Shaykhiyah site in
Samawah, Muthanna Governorate. He also provided information on the Ministry’s
efforts to obtain more information regarding another potential site in Samawah.
Information in that regard had previously been provided by the Governor of
Muthanna, as indicated during the 113th meeting of the Technical Subcommittee, held
in September 2020. The Ministry had submitted a request to the General Secretariat
of the Council of Ministers seeking information from the Governor of Samawah. The
Kuwaiti representative reiterated the importance of Samawah as a promising site, as
initially indicated during the forty-second meeting of the Technical Subcommittee,
held in 2003.
6.
Regarding points of interest at the Karbala’ sites, ICRC reported that discussions
were under way with a Technical Subcommittee member regarding the possible
establishment of a formal data-sharing mechanism to streamline and expedite requests
for satellite imagery analysis. The Iraqi representative underscored that such analysis
would assist in identifying further potential locations for excavation. The Kuwaiti
representative emphasized, as well as that analysis, the importance and efficacy of
following up with potential new witnesses, recalling that three of the four Karbala’
sites had been located thanks to witness testimony.
7.
Regarding the Salman Pak site (the cemetery), the Iraqi representative said that,
on 13 June, the Ministry of Defence had conducted a field mission in cooperation
with the local authorities to follow up on the rehabilitation project for several
destroyed graves, in an effort to identify unnamed tombs and better focus the search
for missing persons in the area. The local administration and families had
rehabilitated and marked many of the graves, while religious authorities, in their
sermons, were continuing to urge families who had not already done so to finalize the
process. The Kuwaiti representative expressed appreciation for those efforts and
recalled that Salman Pak contained the individual graves of 11 Kuwaitis who had
been executed after a military court decision. The rehabilitation and marking of the
graves would help to narrow down the area of interest, which could further help the
search for the missing persons.
8.
Following his previous update to the Technical Subcommittee, in which he had
defined the Khamisiyah site as significant in terms of further exploration, the Iraqi
representative said that an exploratory mission had been dispatched to the area on 16 and
17 June based on information collected from a witness during the previous joint field
visit, in 2019. The mission had been carried out to assess any soil changes at the site
and determine machinery needs for excavation works. Its findings would be shared
with the Technical Subcommittee after the finalization of the report.
9.
Following up on information shared during the 114th meeting of the Technical
Subcommittee, held in January, concerning the naval base in Kuwait, the Kuwaiti
representative said that an exploratory mission had been conducted in the area based
on a witness sketch of the site. The sketch did not contain additional information. The
size of the area meant that it would be difficult to identify or locate specific excavation
points in the search for one set of human remains. It was therefore important to
arrange a visit to Kuwait for the witness, facilitated by Iraq and ICRC. The Iraqi
representative noted that the visit had been authorized and could be conducted during
the next Subcommittee meeting or at any other agreed time.
10. The Iraqi representative informed the Technical Subcommittee that the Ministry
of Defence was continuing to follow up on information regarding the Mahawil site in
Babil Governorate. He reiterated the Ministry’s commitment to broadcasting calls for
witnesses through the media on a quarterly basis and explained that, in coordination
2/4

21-10027

S/2021/689

with the Ministry’s media department, a new format for a call for witnesses would be
finalized soon and shared with the Kuwaiti representative for comments.
11. On 22 June, during its fifty-first session, the Tripartite Commission renewed the
mandate of the Technical Subcommittee and the official observer role of UNAMI.
The Commission confirmed the formal closure of nine case files of persons missing
since 1991, corresponding to human remains identified based on conclusi ve DNA
tests conducted by Kuwait. The closed files pertained to eight individuals from the
official Kuwaiti list of prisoners of war and missing persons and one national of Saudi
Arabia from that country’s official missing persons list. In addition, the Co mmission
announced the formal closure of the case file of one Iraqi soldier. Since November
2020, the Commission has closed 30 cases of persons missing since 1991. Of those,
28 were matched to the official Kuwaiti list of missing persons, 1 was matched to the
list maintained by Saudi Arabia and 1 to the list maintained by Iraq.
12. During the session, the Iraqi representative reaffirmed his Government’s efforts
to solve all cases of Kuwaiti and Iraqi missing persons using new technologies such
as satellite imagery, in cooperation with all Tripartite Commission members. He
called upon Kuwait to accelerate the process of identifying the remains found in
Samawah in 2019 and 2020. The Kuwaiti representative gave assurances that the
forensic laboratories in Kuwait were doing their utmost to conclude the sorting and
identification of the remains. He reaffirmed the eagerness and commitment of Kuwait
with regard to finalizing the analyses as soon as possible.
13. On 10 May, my Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs and
Electoral Assistance met the Head of the Human Rights Directorate in the Ministry
of Defence of Iraq, Thaer Saad Abdullah. He confirmed his Directorate’s commitment
to the missing persons file, noted that it was following up on a daily basi s with
security and intelligence agencies to assess the credibility of witnesses and affirmed
its commitment to carrying out field visits to potential burial sites once restrictions
were lifted. My Deputy Special Representative reiterated that the Iraq -Kuwait file
was a priority for UNAMI and stressed the Mission’s steadfast commitment to making
tangible progress in that regard.

III. Recent activities with regard to the return of
Kuwaiti property
14. During the reporting period, there were no significa nt developments regarding
the return of Kuwaiti property, including the national archives.

IV. Observations
15. In view of the continuing challenging circumstances caused by the COVID -19
pandemic, I commend the Governments of Iraq and Kuwait for makin g notable
advances throughout the past year in the search for missing Kuwaiti and third -country
nationals. The identification of the remains of a further 10 individuals from the
Kuwaiti list of persons missing since 1991 is another important step towards b ringing
closure to the families of the missing persons. After 30 years, they can now carry out
appropriate burial rituals for their loved ones. I extend my deepest condolences to the
families of the missing persons. I commend the General Department of Crim inal
Evidence in Kuwait for meticulously carrying out this complex identification operation
after so many years and encourage continued commitment and perseverance.
16. Thanks to the persistence and cooperation of all members of the tripartite
mechanism, under the able leadership of ICRC, it is a significant achievement that,
21-10027

3/4

S/2021/689

since November 2020, 30 case files of persons missing since 1991 have been formally
closed and attests to the fact that determined and tireless work has given rise to
significant results.
17. The renewed efforts of the Ministry of Defence of Iraq to contact new witnesses
for information and leads on potential burial sites are of the utmost importance and
clearly signal the determination of all parties to continue their search unabated u ntil
all missing persons have been accounted for. I very much hope for an improvement
in the epidemiological situation and the easing of COVID-19-related restrictions to
allow for the resumption of field missions and the exploration of potential burial sit es.
18. Building on previous successful efforts, I strongly encourage the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of Iraq to renew the search for the remaining missing Kuwaiti
property, in particular the national archives.
19. My Special Representative for Iraq, my Deputy Special Representative for
Political Affairs and Electoral Assistance and the UNAMI staff remain steadfast and fully
committed to promoting and facilitating efforts in support of this important mandate.

4/4

21-10027
