UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY _COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

2480t”

MEETING:

NEW

18 OCTOBER 1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2480)

1

. . . . . . . ..*..........................

Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

. ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (S/16036) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda

WPV.2480

t

NOTE

i.

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2480th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 18 October 1983, at 12.30 p.m.
.President: Mr. Abdullah

SALAH

(Jordan).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation porn Arabic); MemberS of the Council have before them the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL)
for the period from 13 July to 12
October 1983. They also have before them document
S/16046, which contains the text of a draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council’s consultations.
4.

I call on the representative of Lebanon.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2480)
1. Adoption

of the agenda

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (S/16036)

5. Mr. TURK (Lebanon) (interpretation from Arabic):
Mr. President, allow me to extend congratulations to you
on your assumption of the presidency for the month of
October. I am confident that your personality, your ability
and your experience in the political and diplomatic fields
will &able you to guide the Council in the carrying out of
the duties entrusted to it.

The meeting was called to order at 12.40 p.m.
Expression of thanks to tbe ret&g

Resident

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfiom Arabic): As this
is the first meeting of the Council for the month of October, I should like to pay a tribute, on behalf of the Council,
to the President for the month of September, Mr. Noel
Sinclair, representative of Guyana, for the great diplomatic skill and courtesy with which he conducted the
Council’s business last month.
Adoption ,of the agenda
72e agenda was adopted
‘I%e situation 4n the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-GeneraI on tbe Unhd
Interim Force in ,Lebanon (S/16036)

Nations

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretatfon j.Fom Arabic): .I
should like to inform members of the Council that I .have
received a letter from the representative of Lebanon, in
which he requests to be invited to participate insthe discus.sion of the item on the agenda. In .conformity wilh the
usual practiti, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite that representative to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules. of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Turk (Lebanon)
took a place at the Council table

6. I should like to take this opportunity to express appreciation for the efforts made by your predecessor, the,,President for last month, Mr. Sinclair, to ensure that the Council
assume its natural role for bringing peace to Lebanon.
7. I also have pleasure in expressing to the SecretaryGeneral appreciation and thanks for his constant interest
in everything relating to Lebandn and also for the report
he has submitted to the Council on 12 October in which,
in response to the request by the Government of Lebanon,
he has recommended an extension of the mandate of
UNIFIL
for six months without any changes in its duties
as set forth in Council resolutions 425 (1978) and 426
(1978).
8. The presence of UNIFIL
in southern Lebanon, as
pointed out in the repcirt of fhe Secretary-General, is a
consecration of the United Nations commitment to the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon and to the assurance of the withdrawal of Israeli forces from the south, in accordance with Council resolutions
425.( 1978) and 509 (1982). Furthermore, that international
presence constitutes a fundamental factor for stability in
the region.
9. Approval of the renewal of UNIFIL’s mandate for a
,further six months would enable the Lebanese authorities
to resTore legitimacy in the south up to the internationally
recognized boundaries and to find solutions to bring about
the withdrawal of all unauthorized forces from all Lebanese territory.
10. In presenting on behalf of my Government the
request to renew the mandate of UNIFIL in southern Leb-

anon as defined in resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978).
for a six-month period, I should like to put on record our
thanks to all the members of the Council for their understanding of our cause and for their position on it. I should
like also to extend special thanks, on behalf of the Govemment’and people of Lebanon, to the countries participating in UNIFIL
for the effective role played by their
contingents in southern Lebanon. Similarly, I wish to
record Lebanon’s thanks, satisfaction and appreciation to
the international forces in the south, and to their Commander, Lieutenant-General William Callaghan, as well as
to the troops and civil ser&n.s stationed there for their
contribution, sacritices and service in most difficult and
often extremely dangerous circumstances.

his latest report on UNIFK,.the.
Secretary-General has
made the observation that “the activities of UNIFIL have
remained essentially unchanged” [S/I6036 para. 183. We
all know that the Israeli invasion of June 1982 radically
changed the conditions under which UNIFIL was created
and is intended to function. Since that invasion, it has
become practically impossible for UNIFIL to carry out the
mandate given to it by the Council in resolution 425
(1978). Moreover, the capability of UNIFIL to carry out
its interim tasks after the Israeli invasion of Lebanon is
necessarily contingent upon the co-operation of the Israeli
authorities, who, as the occupying Power, are in control of
the area. We are happy to note from the report of the
Secretary-General that UNIFIL has been fairly successful
in carrying out those interim tasks in providing protection
and humanitarian assistance to the local population and in
trying to prevent activities which could endanger the restoration of the authority of the Lebanese Government in the
area.

11. The PRESIDENT
(irirerpretution from A&c):
I
thank the representative of Lebanon for the kind words he
addressed to me.
_
12. It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it
[S/Z60&J. Unless I hear any objection, I shall now put the
draft resolution to the vote.

.

17. We also note that, although the Israel Defence Forces continued to recruit and arm selected villagers in the
UNIFIL area, incidents with those armed irregulars have
occurred less frequently and have tended to be less serious
than before. We repeat our call on the Government of
Israel to respect UNIFIL’s
mandate.

A vote ‘was taken by show of hank.
h favour: China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Togo, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Zaire, Zimbabwe.

18. The situation in southern Lebanon has not changed
to the extent that the original peace-keeping functions of
UNIFIL
may be restored within the foreseeable future.
However, we realize at the same time that a decision on
our part to withdraw from UNIFIL
completely could
have an adverse effect on efforts of the United Nations to
contribute to a solution of the crisis in Lebanon. We fully
support the endeavours of the Secretary-General to that
end, and I should like to repeat what the Foreign Minister
of the Netherlands, Mr. Hans van den Broek, has recently
said in the General Assembly: “the Netherlands interest in
United Nations peace-keeping remains undiminished”.’

Against: None.
Abstaining.- Poland, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
The draft resolution was adopted by 13 votes to none, wiih
2 abstentions [resolution 536 (1983)j.
13. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): I
shall now call upon those members of the Council who
wish to make statements after the vote.

19. Moreover, we still hope that the Council, acting in
agreement with the Government of Lebanon, may devise a
more meaningful role for UNIFIL than the Force is able
to fulfil nowadays.

14. Mr. van der STOEL (Netherlands): I should like first
of all, Sir, to congratulate you on assuming the presidency
of the Council. Your wisdom and wide experience are well
known. There are few who are so well qualified for this
difficult task as you.

20. It is with those considerations in mind that the Netherlands Government, after close consultation with the
Secretary-General, the Government of Lebanon and our
friends in UNIFIL,
has decided not to ‘withdraw ,from
UNIFIL altogether but to retain a limited contingent with
the Force.

15. When the Council discussed the mandate of UNIFIL
in July of this year 12456th meeting], I had been instructed
to inform the Council that the Netherlands UNIFIL
battalion, .barring entirely new circumstances which would
enable my Government to reconsider its position, would
be withdrawn from Lebanon as from 19 October. At the
same time, we indicated our willingness to remain in close
contact with the Government of Lebanon, with the
Secretary-Genera1 and with our friends in UNIFIL
and
with all other parties concerned to assessany useful contribution UNIFIL
could make after 19 October.

21. The international community would be neglecting
its commitment to support the independence, sovereignty,
and territorial integrity of Lebanon, as expressed in so
many resolutions-of both the Security Council and the
General Assembly, if it failed to make appropriate use of
the potential of United Nations peace-keeping operations
to restore international peace and security in the area. We
agree with the Secretary-General that UNIFIL,
despite
the present circumstances, still remains an important
expression of this commitment of the United Nations to
assist the Government of Lebanon in achieving the resto-

16. The situation within the UNIFIL area of operations
in southern Lebanon has certainly not changed dramatically since we last discussed the subject in the Council. In
2

-

ration of its effective authority in southern Lebanon. At
the same time, however, we must recognize that tk international community cannot be expected to continue to
support Lebanon indefinitely.
22. It is essentiaf that all foreign forces whose presence is
not desired by the central Government should withdraw
from Lebanon. My Government wishes therefore once
again to impress upon all parties the need to co-pperate
seriously toward that end.
23. Finally, I should like to express my Government’s
concern about the increasing financial difficulties faced by
UNIFIL. The Secretary-General has informed us that, as
of the beginning of October 1983, there is an accumulated
shortfall in UNIFIL’s special account of some $173.9 million. It is most regrettable that some Member States,
while professing support for maintaining peace and security, are consistently failing to honour their obligations.
Consequently, they are placing an additional financial
burden on the troop-contributing
countries,. some of
which are developing countries that badly need their
financial resources. This attitude might, in the future,
place in jeopardy the functioning of peace-keeping operations, as well as hinder efforts to ensure wide geographical
representation in the peace-keeping forces.
.24. We therefore hope that the most urgent appeal of the
Secretary-General to all Member States to pay their assessments without delay will be promptly heeded.
25. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation jkom Arabic): I
thank the representative of the Netherlands for his kind
words about me.
26.

Mr. de la BARRE de NANTEUIL
(France) (inrerpreI should like to say’ first, Sir, how
pleased my country is to see your country assuming the
presidency-and
particularly how pleased we are to see
you presiding over our work. We recall that you represented your country in our capital in a particularly outstanding way, and that you gained many friends there, as
you have done in all the other posts you have held. We are
sure that your intelligence, your wisdom, your vast experience and your professional qualifications guarantee the
successof your term in office as President. May I add that
your personal courtesy, your kindness and your sense of
humour-which,
I would say, is another expression of
your kindness and your curiosity about others-are also
guarantees that you will have not only a very fruitful presidency but also one that will be very pleasant for all of us.
ration from French):

27. The Council has just renewed for a six-month period
the mandate of UNIFIL.
By associating itself with the
decision just taken, my delegation wished to show the
importance it attaches to UNIFIL’s role in southern Lebanon. France, in fact, shares the assessment made by the
Secretary-General in his report that .“It is evident that,
despite the present circumstances, TIFIL
remains an
important element of stability in southern Lebanon” [ibid,
para. 24. UNIFIL’s
presence also expresses the resolve of
the United Nations to support Lebanon% independence,
,sovereignty and territorial integrity.

28. It should be pointed out, how-,
that the objectives
set for .the Force by the Council in its resolution 425 (1978)
have not always been attained. The Israeli invasion of June
1982 radicalIy changed the conditious in which UNIFIL
must operate. Not only has Israel not withdrawn from
southern Lebanon but an operational battalion of its soldiers is present in the zone that is in principle controlled by
UNIFIL.
29. It is to be hoped that this will be only a temporary
situation and that there, as everywhere else in Lebanon,
the unity, integrity and independence of the country will be
restored. We think that, in the same spirit, the Council will
be called upon to give UNIFIL,in
addition to the missions
that it is already carrying out, new tasks in new areas. A
useful instrument, very well adapted and well organ&d,
the Force has demonstrated its usefulness in the field by
restoring security to the countryside. Similarly, it seems to
us that observers with the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization, who are fully qualified for the tasks
they undertake in particularly difficult conditions and who
have acquired a reputation of impartiality and objectivity,
could certainly be invited to carry out other missions in
other areas.
30. I listened most attentively to the statement made by
Mr. Turk, the Secretary-General of Lebanon’s Ministry
for Foreign Affairs. I should like to tell him on this occasion that France stands by his country’s legal Govemment, to which it will continue to give its support.
31. In conclusion on this subject, I wish to pay a tribute
to the Secretary-General for his persevering work in
respect of UNIFIL.
I express to him the complete confidence of my authorities in the delicate and di!Iicult task
that he has embarked upon, and I assure him of our
support.
32. Finally, I should like to say how much we appreciated the remarkable, brilliant and intelligent way in
which the Council was presided over last month by our
colleague from Guyana, with whose courtesy, kindness,
intelligence and skill we are all familiar; this made it possible for him to bring out the best in everyone. We thank
him most warmly for this.
33. The PRESIDENT
(inrerprerarion from Arabic): I
thank the representative of France for the kind and warm
words and particularly for the praise that he addressed to
me.
34. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): Today, the
Council is having to deal yet again-for the fourteenth
time-with
the question of the extension of the mandate
of UNIFIL. This fact is in itself eloquent testimony to the
continuing explosive situation in that country. .
35. In order to understand the true essence of the events
occurring in Lebanon, we have to place them in their
proper perspective. To this very day, the consequences of
the large-scale aggression committed against Lebanon by
Israel in the summer of 1982, with the support and patron-.

age of the United States, still remain unresolved. Incidentally, no one has any right to forget that in committing
this aggression Israeli troops grossly violated the Charter
of the United Nations and high-handedly and, I would
say, unprecedentedly, trampled underfoot the United
Nations flag by passing through regions where UNIFIL
contingents had been posted.

42. I believe that it should be pointed out, too, that the
Soviet Union was by no. means alone in its expressions of
profound concern about the despatch of- the “multinational force” to Lebanon. In this regard, I refer in particular to the report of the Secretary-General on the work of
the Organisation of 1982, in which he quite rightly pointed
out that the trend towards the creation of such forces is an
alarming one.

36. To this day the Israeli occupiers remain in possession of a considerable portion of Lebanese territory.
Israel’s recent so-called redeployment of its forces is
aimed essentially at the long-term entrenchment of the
aggressor along new lines, and at the perpetuation of
Israeli occupation of areas of southern Lebanon. In other
words, it is aimed, in the final analysis, at the annexation
of those areas. We are reminded of Israel’s true designs.by
the following fact: the lines along which Israeli troops are
at present deployed in Lebanon are almost identical to the
lines which as far back as 1919 were declared by the Zionists to be the northern frontier of Israel.

43. The Soviet Union is firmly in favour of a unified
Lebanon and of the restoration of Lebanon’s sovereignty,
security and territorial integrity. It is imperative that Israel
should withdraw unconditionally from Lebanon. Neither
American troops nor any of the foreign troops that accompanied them should remain on Lebanese soil. A settlement
of the situation in that country should be achieved not
through separate deals or arm-twistiug, but on the basis of
strict, unswerving compliance with the decisions of the
United Nations; first and foremost Council resolutions 508
(1982) and 509 (1982), which no one has rescinded. Only in
that way can we ensure a proper solution to the Lebanese
problems.

37. Washington and Tel Aviv forced Lebanon at gunpoint to agree to a capitulationist agreement with Israel,
which infringes upon the sovereignty and independence of
the Lebanese State and poses a threat to the security of
neighbouring Arab countries.

,

44. As to UNIFIL,
the Secretary-General’s report
points ‘out that in the difficult circumstances of Israeli
occupation the Force remains an important element of
stability in its area of operations.

38. Along with Israel, the so-called multinational force is
consolidating its position on Lebanese soil. The backbone
of that force is the American contingent of marines. On the
pretext of ensuring the defence of this interventionist
corps, a whole armada of naval vessels of the United States
and its allies of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization is
lying off the Lebanese coast.

45. Therefore, taking into account the request of the
Lebanese Government and the recommendation
contained in the report of the Secretary-General, and bearing
in mind that the purposes and tasks,of UNIFIL will continue to be defined by its mandate as laid down in resolution 425 (1978) and subsequent resolutions of the Council
on this subject, the Soviet delegation found it possible not
to object to the extension of the mandate of the Force.

39. It should lx recalled that a year ago, when the first
contingent of marines was sent to Lebanon, it was declared
that those troops were intended only to ensure the security
of the Palestinian and Lebanese populations. It was
further asserted at that time that the “multinational force”
was to be in Beirut for no longer than a month. It was
stated that in no circumstances would it engage in combat.
Now strenuous attempts are being made to forget those
assurances. It would appear that, like certain Council resolutions on Lebanon, these have been consigned to the
‘*redundant’* file.

46. The PRESIDENT
(inferprerariun from Arabic): I
thank the representative of the Soviet Union for the kind
words he addressed to me.
47. Mr. MARGETSON
(United Kingdom): May I join
in the congratulations, Sir, on your assumption of the
oflice of President of the Council and in the appreciation
of the personal qualities which you bring to that task.

40. Now the logic of imperialist intervention has borne
its inevitable fruit. The “multinational
force” which went
to Lebanon allegedly to defend the local civilian population, has now engaged there in actual combat, using aircraft and naval artillery. The Western press has reported
the deaths of marines, but for some reason or other has
remained silent about the number of civilians who have
been killed by foreign bombs and shells.

48. May I also join in the expressions of gratitude to Mr.
Noel Sinclair of Guyana for the excellence of his presidency of the Council last month.
49. My Government has supported the extension of the
mandate of UNIFIL for a further six months. We did so
in the light of the Secretary-General’s recommendation
favouring an extension. We have noted his view that the
Force remains an important element of stability in southem Lebanon and that it represents a commitment by the
United Nations to the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon ,itself.

41. I would remind members that a year ago, .when
deployment of the “‘multinational for&on
Lebanese soil
had just begun, the Soviet Union issued a strong warning
about the possible dangerous consequences ofthat step. At
that time there were those who were inclined to consider
that those apprehensions were excessive, but time has-only
confirmed our worst forebodings.

50. We extend again our tribute to the officers and men
of UNIFIL and our appreciation to their Governments.
4

,

51. At the time of the last renewal of UNIFIL’s
mandate, in July {2459th meeting], I said that we should perhaps be asking ourselves whether there is anything the
Council can do, beyond renewing the mandate to help the
Lebanese Government regain that independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity for which we continually
reiterate our support. We are still no nearer a response to
that question. It cannot be right simply to continue
extending the UNIFIL
mandate without giving thought
to how it can be updated to reflect the different circumstances with which we are now faced.

bilateral relations. I know you will join me in expressing
the hope that our two’countries will soon establish peace,
good-neighbourliness and friendship for their own benefit
and for the benefit of the entire region.
59. May I also take this opportunity to express our
appreciation to your predecessor, Mr. Sinclair of Guyana,
for the very able manner in which he carried out his functions as President of the Council last month.
60. It was not my intention to take the floor here today.
However, in view of the statement made by the representative of the Soviet Union, replete as it was with the customary Soviet distortions regarding the situation in Lebanon, I
feel constrained to state anew my country’s position. In so
doing, I wish to express our appreciation to the representative of the Soviet Union for his renewed assertion of his
country’s respect for the Charter of the United Nationswhich respect is so vividly demonstrated throughout the
length and breadth of Afghanistan.

52. It is saddening that the Secretary-General, in his
report, should yet again have called the Council’s attention to the increasing financial difficulties faced by
UNIFIL.
The accumulated shortfall in the UNIFIL Special Account has increased since July by a further $5.5
million, to $173.9 million. The Secretary-General rightly
expresses his extreme concern about this state of affairs,
which he warns could jeopardize the functioning of the
Force.

61. I should also like to refresh the memory of the
members of the Council. It was the Soviet Union that
opposed the establishment of UNIFIL
in the first place
and never gave its support to the establishment of the
Force and, subsequently, to the extension of its mandate.
In keeping with that position, the Soviet Union has not
contributed even one penny to the maintenance of the
Force, and it is, to say the least, exceedingly moving to
listen to the concern displayed by the representative of the
Soviet Union for the well-being and the functions of the
Force.

53. It is scandalous that some countries still refuse to
pay their assessed contributions. They are throwing the
burden onto the troop-contributing
countries, several of
which are developing countries which can ill afford it.
They are also rapidly increasing the overall deficit of the
United Nations, already in excess of $300 million, a deficit
which, in the end, has to be covered by all Member States.
54. I should like to associate myself with the remarks of
the representative of the Netherlands on this subject, and I
trust that the withholding States will reconsider their policy and pay their fair share of the costs of UNIFIL instead
of expecting other, often poorer, States to bear it for them.

62. Under the circumstances, I should like-as I have
indicated before-to
state anew my country’s position
with regard to the situation in Lebanon in general and
concerning UNIFIL’s
mandate in particular.

55. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): I
thank the representative of the United Kingdom for the
kind words he addressed to me.

63. The resolution adopted by the Council today does
not ‘change in any manner UNIFIL’s
existing mandate,
subject, of course, to the observation made by the
Secretary-General in paragraph 21 of his report, in which
he rightly stated that recent events in Lebanon had “radically altered the conditions under which UNIFIL
was
created and is intended to function**.

56. I should like to inform members of the Council that I
have just received a letter from the representative of .Israel
in which he requests to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the agenda. In keeping with the
usual practice, I propose; with the consent of the Council,
to invite him to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in conformity witb the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

64. Over the east vear the Government of Israel has
repeatedly stated thai in the new circumstances surrounding the situation in Lebanon UNIFIL
as established in
1978 has outlived its usefulness and its presence is no
longer called for in southern Lebanon.
1

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Blum (Israel) took a
place at the Council table.

65. The continuing tragedy of Lebanon is a consequence
of the havoc .wreaked by the PLO [Palestine Liberation
Organization] and its allies over the past decade. Knowing e
full well the potential for subversion inherent in the PLO,
Arab Governments were unwilling to tolerate the presence of this terrorist organization on their own countries’
soil and, as a result, dumped that group upon Beirut and
on the people of Lebanon. As a consequence, Lebanon’s
sovereignty was eroded and the country was torn apart by
violent strife. This, in turn, was seized upon by Syria as a
pretext for invading Lebanon in an attempt to realize its

57. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): I call
on the representative of Israel.
58. Mr. BLUM (Israel): Permit me at the outset, Sir, to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the month of October. You and I represent
‘in the United Nations the two States that emerged on the
territory of the former Palestine Mandate--e
Arab and
one Jewish. For reasons well known to all of us, we have
not been able thus far to enjoy the blessings of peace in onr

._

5

longstanding ambition to destroy Lebanese sovereignty
and to incorporate Lebanon as an integral part of what
the Syrians have for a very long time referred to as greater
Syria.

well in advance in order to provide the Lebanese Govemment and army with a chance to extend its control over that
area. They were prevented from doing so by Syria and its
proxies, which turned Lebanon once again into a battleground, exploiting existing enmity between groups there
and encouraging all-out war against its legitimate
Government.

66. It is well known that Israel stands for the full restoration of Lebanese sovereignty, of Lebanese independence,
of Lebanese territorial integrity and of the unity of Lebanon within its internationally recognized boundaries, as
well as for the restoration of the authority of the lawful
Government of Lebanon within the country.

73. Israel welcomes the cease-fire declared in Lebanon a
fortnight ago and expresses its hope that the cessation of
hostilities will endure, leading to true reconciliation free of
outside interventions and dictates. We are following the
situation closely and are looking forward to the establishment of conditions which will ensure security and tranquillity along the Israel-Lebanese border. Under no circumstances will Israel agree to-return to the state of affairs which
prevailed until 16 months ago, when Lebanese territory was
used .as a base for terrorist operations against our citizens,
Israel sincerely hopes for and wishes to seean independ.ent
Lebanon in which a strong and stable regime exercises
control throughout the country.

67. Israel believes that, in order to permit the attainment
of that goal, all foreign forces must be withdrawn from the
country.
68. Alongside these objectives, and bearing in mind the
experience of recent years, Israel’s legitimate security needs
must also be guaranteed and Lebanese territory must
never be used again for attacks upon our citizens.
69. The Agreement concluded by Israel and Lebanon
on 17 May 1983 is linked to these requirements. Israel was
and remains determined to proceed towards full and
speedy implementation
of this Agreement aimed at the
restoration of Lebanese sovereignty. However, it must
have become clear to everyone by now that Syria and the
PLO have no more intention of respecting Lebanese sovereignty today than they did in the past. We have all
heard Lebanon’s emphatic and repeated demands for the
withdrawal of the Syrian forces and the PLO from its
territory. Last year Lebanese President Amin Gemayel
used the rostrum of the General Assembly to call for “the
immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of all nonLebanese forces from Lebanon”.2

74. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): The
Council has heard the statement by the representative of
Israel. I should like to point out the ill will and hypocrisy
evident in that statement, especially as regards his country’s
alleged love of peace. I think it my duty as representative of
Jordan to remind the Council that Israel, which arrogantly
speaks of peace, has occupied Jerusalem, the West Bank,
Gaza and the Golan Heights for more than 16 years, in
addition to its occupation of southern Lebanon, its refusal
to be inclined towards peace ever since it was established, its
dependence on military expansion and its. attempt to
impose its domination and hegemony over the region at the
expense of its indigenous peoples.
75. I now request the representative of Israel to resume
his place at the side of the Council chamber.

70. In a letter to the Twelfth Arab Summit Conference,
held at Fez in November 1981 and September 1982, Lebanon explicitly demanded the termination of the Syrian and
PLO presence in that country. Lebanon reiterated its
demands as recently as last month. On 2 September the
Lebanese Foreign Minister wrote to the Secretary-General
of the League of Arab States [S/25953, annex] insisting
again on Syrian and PLO withdrawal. He repeated this
demand in his statement in the general debate of the General Assembly.

76. I should like to inform the members of the Council
that I have just received a letter from the representative of
the Syrian Arab Republic in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council;to invite that representative to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

71. Yet all this has been to no avail. Not only has Syria
paid no heed to these demands, but it has increased its
involvement in Lebanon and is engaged in direct warfare
against the legitimate Government of that country. President Hafez Al-Assad, backed diplomatically and militarily
by the Soviet Union, and assisted by Palestinian terrorists,
continues his ruthless operations to keep Lebanon in disarray in an attempt to force Lebanon to submit to Syrian
domination. Resorting to its well known tactics of threats
and extortion, Syria continues to undermine Lebanon’s
path to regaining its sovereignty. This is pursued by Syria
directly. or by proxy, and its uninhibited brutality stops
short of nothing.

At the invita$on of the President, Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian
Arab Republic) took a place at the Council table.
77. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation frah Arabic): I call
on the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
78. Mr. EL-FATTAL
(Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation from Arabic): I should like, Sir, to thank you and
the members of the Council for allowing.me to make my
statement. On this occasion, I should like to congratulate
you, the Arab President of the Security Council. Our relations, which are of long standing in the Counci!, have
always been constructive, and through them we have
always been able to arrive at important resolutions. I
would mention in particular resohution 509 (1982), in

72. Israel’s withdrawal from the Shouf mountains, a first
step in the direction of total withdrawal, was announced
\

\

6.

which the Council demands total Israeli withdrawal from
all occupied Arab territories.

Israel, the map included the southern part of Lebanon and
Syria, and the eastern bank of Jordan, parallel to the
Hajazi railway line from Damascus to &dina. Moreover,
the memoirs of Sharett, a ‘former Feign
Minister of
Israel, revealed that since 1954 Israel w seeking a leader
in Lebanon to be its agent in a p&+nary
attempt to
create sectarian disputes in Lebanon 48 that Israel could
achieve the division of Lebanon inso sectarian States.
Israel was able to secure Major Ha-,
who now, with
the Israeli occupation forces, controls southern Lebanon.
The savage and barbaric war launched by Israel in Lebanon in June 1982 and the criminal actions against the
Lebanese people in their cities, tom and villages, and
against social, economic, educational and health institutions, as well as the water projects, were but a step to pave
the way for the annexation of the region. It has been
revealed that Israel has incorporated this territory within
its economic sphere and exploits, that it is competing with
the people of the region by flooding them with Israeli
products, and that it diverts land, sea and air transport to
Israel.

79. I should like at the outset to thank Mr. Sinclair of
Guyana for the excellent manner in which he steered the
work of the Council and to express appreciation of his
wisdom and understanding in dealing with the problems
and issues that were before the Council during his presidency last month.
80. It was not my delegation’s ‘intention

to intervene in
of zionism
has come here to disturb the atmosphere during these
deliberations of the Council, and that has obliged me to
speak.
this discussion. However, the representative

81. How could the representative of Israel be invited to
make a statement to the Council? This is an organ of the
United Nations. I wish to remind the Council of.one thing,
namely, the crimes committed by Israel against the United
Nations. In view of the lateness ofthe hour I shall mention
just one-the crime committed by Israel’s present Prime
Minister, Shamir, who personally implemented the physical
liquidation of the United Nations mediator in Palestine,
Count Folke Bernadotte. The representative of Israel also
represents his Prime Minister, Shamir, who is a criminal
well known to everyone. That crime even motivated some
authorities in Sweden to demand that Shamir be tried as a
war criminal. How can the representative of such a person
attack Syria and its noble objectives in Lebanon, its sacrifices on Lebanese territory, made in the interests of Lebanon,
when his Prime Minister committed a crime that is punishable even by Israel’s laws themselves?

85. Because of the lateness of the hour, I shall not speak
at length, but I should like to inform the Council of the
statement made by the President of Syria to Swiss television a few days ago. Asked “Do you believe that Lebanon
can attain peace if all foreign forces withdraw from it?‘,
he replied:
“In Lebanon there is one foreign army, the Israeli
army, which is an invader. The Lebanese and Syrians
are Arabs and one people. We have one language, one
common history. It seems that this fact is not known to
many in the Western world. Despite the fact that we
are one people, we have not gone into Lebanon except
at the request of the legitimate authority in Lebanon. A
Syrian force was requested to put an end to the civil
war. If the Lebanese Government had requested the
withdrawal of Syrian forces prior to the Israeli invasion, the Syrian forces would have withdrawn at the
time set by the Lebanese authorities. Moreover, we had
at one time wished to withdraw from Lebanon, but the
legitimate authorities there insisted that we stay on. If
you refer to statements of the ,Presidents of Lebanon
from 1976 until prior to the Israeli invasion, and even
during it, you will find proof of what I have said (you
will find proof in the statements of the two Presidents
of Lebanon who were in power from 1976 until the
Israeli invasion); and you will find praise for the Syrian
forces and their role in putting an end to the civil war.
The conflicting parties had to remove the seeds of the
civil war.

82. Israel claims that zionism is a liberation movementa liberation movement that destroyed Palestine from end
to end, and led to the occupation of the Golan Heights
and the larger part of Lebanon. How can Israel call that a
liberation movement, when the real liberation movements
are bombarded and attacked in their camps, with no
regard for the civilian population made up of old men,
women and children, who are attacked and have crimes
committed against them under the protection of the
Israeli authorities? I remind the Council of the crimes
committed by Israel after that of Deir Yassin-namely,
the massacres of Sabra and Shatila, near Beirut.
83. I believe if the Council wishes to carry out its duties
towards the people of Lebanon, it must without delay~fullil
its commitments under the whole of resolution 509 (1982)
and put an end to any attempt to distort that resolution.
There are serious attempts through the current manoeuvres-and we have just heard the representative of zionism
here-to put the Syrian forces, which are part of the Arab
peace-keeping forces, on the same level as the Israeli invading forces. These attempts are rejected by Lebanon, Syria
and the other Arabs, and they have already been rejected
by the majority of members of the Council.

“Israel must withdraw from Lebanon. There is only
one foreign army in Lebanon, and that is the Israeli
army, which came in as an invader. Israel has its own
language and systems, in no way linked to Lebanon or
any other Arab country. The Israeli forces must withdraw from Lebanon without imposing any conditions
on that country. The withdrawal of the Israeli forces
will help to put an end to the Lebanese disputes, with
the help of the Arabs.

84. Israel’s ambitions in Lebanon are well known to all.
At the Versailles Peace Conference in 1919, when the zionist delegation distributed a map of the so-called territory of
7

“As far as- the Syrian forces are concerned, the
Syrian forces @F prepared to withdraw at the request
of the LebaneBECovemment
after the withdrawal of
the Israeli force& because then it would be a request
resuIting froma&cision
by the Lebanese Government
and not from mli
pressure because of Israeli occupation in Lebar@&.”
86. The PRESfDBT
(interpretation from Arabic): I
thank the represenrative of the Syrian Arab Republic,for
the kind words he addressed to me. I request him to
resume his place at the side of the Council chamber.

87. Requests have been made to be allowed to exercise
the right of reply. However, in view of the lateness of the
hour, I intend, with the consent of the Council, to adjourn
at this time. The time of the next meeting will be decided
upon after consultations with members.
7le meeting rose at 1.55 p.m.
NOTES
I Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-eighth Session,
Plenary Meetings, 10th meeting, para. 58.
2 Ibid., i%rty-seventh Session, Plenary Meetings, 35th meeting, para.
10.

.’

-:

8

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SJ3 PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Lcs publications des Nations Unies sent en vente darts les libralries et les agences dt5positaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous a : Nations Unies,
Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAK

l-IOJIY%ITb

H3,&4HbVf

OPI-AHH3AI@iH

OE’b~HHbIX

I-IAUm

ki3~mnin
Oprartrtsamm 06aeminermbrx Haturn MOXHO KymTb B KHUmib~X
Mara3maX
HaTeHT~Ba~BO~ceXp~OHaXMApa.HaaomrTeCUpaaIcu
06 H~~I~HS~KXBB~IJI~~~KHU~AOM
mra3me
WIH nmmTe
no a,qpecy:
Opramrsamra 06aemmemrbtx Ha&l. Cerorsrx no
nponame H3niuIti,HbH)-ROpK
imi
XeHeBa.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas estdn en venta en librerfas y cams distribuidoras en
todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirfjase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

00300

90-60205-January

1992-2.050
