S/PV.9151

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9151st meeting

Wednesday, 12 October 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Adamo/Mr. Biang. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault
Mr. Osei-Mensah
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Mythen
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Huitfeldt
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
Colombia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2022/715)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-62641 (E)
*2262641*

Colombia

S/PV.9151

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of Colombia to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
and the President of the Security Council
(S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2022/715)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Colombia to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Álvaro Leyva Durán, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Carlos Ruiz
Massieu, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia; His Excellency Mr. Muhammad
Abdul Muhith, Permanent Representative of Bangladesh
to the United Nations, in his capacity as Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission; and Ms. Elizabeth Moreno
Barco, Legal Representative of the Community General
Council of San Juan.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/715, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ruiz Massieu.
Mr. Ruiz Massieu (spoke in Spanish): I thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to present the most
recent report of the Secretary-General on Colombia
(S/2022/715) and to update the Security Council on
major developments since the date of its publication.
It is an honour to be at this meeting for the first
time with Foreign Minister Álvaro Leyva Durán, who
2/20

12/10/2022

has dedicated a good part of his life and his career
to the search for peace in Colombia. I greet the new
Permanent Representative of Colombia, Ambassador
Leonor Zalabata Torres. I thank the Government of
Colombia for the constructive work with the United
Nations during the first two months of the new
Administration. Likewise, I welcome the participation
of Elizabeth Moreno Barco, an Afro-Colombian leader
from the department of Chocó who knows first-hand
the harshness of the conflict and embodies the will of
the communities to end the violence through dialogue.
Colombia is experiencing a moment of renewed
expectations, product of the audacious approach of
“total peace” advanced by President Gustavo Petro
Urrego. That policy is anchored in the comprehensive
implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace
with the former Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP). In addition,
it seeks to deepen peace through the resumption of
dialogues with the Ejército de Liberación (ELN) and
through rapprochements with other armed actors to
put an end to the multiple manifestations of violence
that continue to hit communities in various regions of
the country.
As the Secretary-General states in his report, we
are encouraged that the new Government’s approach
prioritizes dialogue as the main resource to resolve
the social and armed conflict, that it focuses security
strategies on the protection of vulnerable communities
and that it recognizes the interdependence between
lasting solutions to violence and overcoming historical
inequalities, especially in rural and impoverished
areas, as well as its emphasis on the active participation
of broad and diverse sectors of Colombian society.
As we will soon commemorate another anniversary
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, it is necessary to remember that the peace
process in Colombia has been a benchmark in the
matter. The search for “total peace” is therefore an
opportunity to continue building on those foundations
while ensuring the broad and effective participation of
women. From Chocó to Catatumbo, from Putumayo to
the south of Bolívar, it is women and their communities
who confront and resist the violence caused by
different armed actors who dispute territorial control. I
therefore echo the Secretary-General’s message urging
those actors to demonstrate their will for peace and
respond positively to the call for a ceasefire proposed
22-62641

12/10/2022

Colombia

by President Petro Urrego. That would increase the
chances of ending the violence through dialogue and
would open up an opportunity for those communities
to build a life in peace and dignity.
In addition to the dialogue efforts, the consolidation
of peace requires materializing pending commitments
in the implementation of the Final Agreement. In that
connection, it is positive that in these first weeks
Congress has debated key reforms with enormous
potential, such as the bill to create the agrarian
jurisdiction and the proposal for a political reform.
Likewise, this week Congress advanced the process on
the law that provides a legal framework for the “total
peace” policy and ratified the Escazú Agreement, a
fundamental step, among others, for the protection of
environmental defenders.
In addition, Congress is moving forward in the
discussion of the national budget for 2023, in which
the Government has proposed greater resources
for comprehensive rural reform and the illicit crop
substitution programme. Those are essential elements
for the implementation of the Final Agreement. I am
confident that Congress will approve the necessary
resources for the entities responsible for implementing
the Agreement. I would also like to highlight the
importance of the recent agreement between the
Government and the Cattle Ranchers Association
for the purchase of land to be distributed among
peasants through the mechanisms established by
the peace agreement. Its implementation will be an
unprecedented boost to agrarian reform, addressing
one of the structural causes of the conflict.
(spoke in English)
Bringing the promises of the agreement to fruition
requires continuous and constructive dialogue between
the parties and with civil society, including women’s
and ethnic organizations, within the framework of
the institutions created by the Final Agreement.
Importantly, the Commission for the Follow-up,
Promotion and Verification of the Implementation of
the Final Agreement and the National Commission
on Security Guarantees met recently for the first time
under the new Administration, with both being chaired
by President Petro Urrego. I truly believe that the full
use of those mechanisms will be key to helping to
resolve the many urgent challenges facing the work of
implementing the peace.

S/PV.9151

It will also be important for the Government to
appoint a new Director of the Agency for Reintegration
and Normalization as well as representatives to the
National Reintegration Council, so that important
forum can fully resume its work in supporting more
than 13,000 ex-combatants on matters ranging from
gender and ethnic affairs to land and housing. That
would definitely help to provide former combatants
with some certainty and continuity in their dialogue
with the Government with a view to consolidating the
process, starting with the pending discussions on how
to guarantee the sustainability of reintegration.
Recent developments within the Comprehensive
System for Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition
illustrate the centrality of victims to peace and
reconciliation. The report of the Truth Commission,
whose recommendations the new Administration has
committed to implementing, was inspired by the voices
of thousands of victims. The Unit for the Search for
Persons Deemed Missing has responded to the calls of
indigenous and Afro-Colombian communities and has
reached important agreements with them to strengthen
search efforts in their territories. The Special
Jurisdiction for Peace continues to make progress on
issuing its first restorative sentences. Important steps
in that direction include the holding of public hearings
for the acknowledgement of truth and responsibility,
as well as discussions involving both perpetrators
and victims regarding proposals for tasks, work and
activities with reparative and restorative content. The
Special Jurisdiction has also opened new cases aimed
at addressing crimes committed by all parties, as well
as their impact on ethnic peoples and territories, and
has announced an upcoming case on crimes related to
gender-based and sexual violence, as called for by civil
society and women’s organizations.
(spoke in Spanish)
In my recent visits to a number of regions of the
country, community representatives expressed their
concerns about the constant threat posed by the presence
of illegal armed actors and their frustration at unmet
expectations regarding the State’s slow delivery of basic
services and development opportunities. I therefore
welcome the Government’s willingness to adopt a
new approach to human security aimed specifically at
strengthening the comprehensive deployment of State
services, citizens’ trust in civilian institutions and the
security forces, and gradually eliminating the causes
of violence. I am confident that thanks to the measures

22-626413/20

S/PV.9151

Colombia

taken by the Government in that regard — among them
an emergency plan for the protection of social leaders,
human rights defenders and ex-combatants — the
communities in the regions most affected by the conflict
will see improvements in terms of security and quality
of life.
The decision announced last week by the
Government of Colombia and the ELN to resume
peace talks is encouraging. With the will of the
parties and the support of Colombian society and the
international community, it will be possible to bring an
end to a conflict that has lasted for decades and whose
resolution is essential to expanding the reach of peace
in the country. We are confident that Colombia can
once again demonstrate to the world that the best way
to end conflicts is through dialogue.
The support of the Security Council has been
decisive in securing important achievements and
overcoming countless obstacles. In view of the
new scenario of renewed opportunities for peace,
the Council’s firm and unanimous commitment to
Colombia will continue to be of vital importance.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Ruiz
Massieu for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Muhith.
Mr. Muhith: I thank you, Mr. President, for inviting
me to this important meeting to share the views of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) on Colombia.
In the past few years, at the request of the Government
of Colombia, the Peacebuilding Commission has sought
to mobilize support for the country’s efforts to build
peace following the ratification in 2016 of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace. The Commission reiterates
the importance of Colombia as a successful example of
inclusive peacemaking and expresses its appreciation to
the Government of Colombia for its strong engagement
with the Peacebuilding Commission and for sharing
its experiences with conflict-affected countries and
regions. Drawing on the Commission’s engagements
with Colombia, I would like to bring following points
to the Security Council’s attention.
First, the Commission commends President Petro
Urrego and his Government for their commitment
to peace, including the full implementation of the
Final Agreement. That includes its four elements of
comprehensive rural reform — political participation, a
4/20

12/10/2022

solution to the illicit drugs problem, the Comprehensive
System of Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition
and mechanisms for dialogue on implementation.
Progress in its transformative chapters will help
consolidate peace, narrow the development gap in rural
Colombia, contribute to reconciliation based on a shared
understanding of the past, ensure justice and the rights
of victims, and bring closure to the many Colombians
who lost loved ones. The Commission expresses its
recognition of the Government’s determination to
reactivate the dialogue between the signatory parties
and civil society.
Secondly, the Commission also welcomes the
Government’s commitment to reducing inequality,
governing with and for women, ensuring zero tolerance
for corruption and holding regional dialogues, as critical
steps towards building lasting peace in Colombia.
Thirdly, the Commission underlines the importance
of inclusive approaches to addressing inequalities
as drivers of conflict, and in that regard commends
President Petro Urrego for appointing a gender parity
Cabinet and for his announcement that he is creating a
Ministry of Equality to address issues related to gender,
ethnic communities, youth and children, among others.
In line with its gender action plan, the Commission
encourages the full implementation of the gender
provisions of the Final Agreement and the inclusion
of the women and peace and security agenda in all
discussions relevant to peacebuilding in Colombia.
Fourthly, the Commission encourages the full and
effective use of mechanisms that draw on the inputs
of Colombian civil-society actors, victims and former
combatants to build consensus towards the success
of peace efforts, and in that regard welcomes the
installation of the National Youth Council in July and
encourages further dialogue with young people in all
aspects of peacebuilding.
Fifthly, the Commission welcomes the invaluable
and complementary support that the Verification
Mission and the United Nations country team provide
to peacebuilding in Colombia, as well as the catalytic
contribution of the Peacebuilding Fund through
the multi-partner trust fund for sustaining peace.
We stress the need for complementarity among the
various strands of technical assistance and funding,
including domestic resources, innovative financing,
local entrepreneurship, private-sector investments
and public-private-sector partnerships. Additionally,
22-62641

12/10/2022

Colombia

the Commission welcomes consistent civil-society
engagement in Colombia, including through the
Peacebuilding Fund via the multi-partner trust fund for
sustaining peace in Colombia and the annual Gender
and Youth Promotion Initiative, which supports national
initiatives to enhance women and young people’s
participation in peacebuilding.
Sixthly, the Commission welcomes the recent
decision by the Government of Colombia and the
Ejército de Liberación Nacional to resume peace
dialogues, which will help broaden the scope of peace.
We urge the international and regional partners of the
United Nations to lend their full support to the process
and the implementation of agreements to ensure a
sustained path towards peacebuilding in Colombia.
Finally, the Commission reiterates its commitment,
within its mandate, to continuing to accompany
Colombia in its peacebuilding efforts and calls on
partners to increase their efforts to support Colombia
in that endeavour.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Muhith for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Moreno Barco.
Ms. Moreno Barco (spoke in Spanish): My
name is Elizabeth Moreno Barco, and I am the legal
representative of the Community General Council of
San Juan (ACADESAN). I want to thank God for the
life of each and every person listening to me, for my
ancestors and for the leaders and communities that for
decades have defended our territories and our right to
a dignified life. I thank the delegation of Gabon, as
President of the Security Council, for inviting us into
this Chamber.
I am a Black person from the department of
Chocó, a subregion of San Juan. I represent 72
communities — approximately 4,500 families — across
an area of 683,591 hectares. I will speak about the
communities that I represent, but also about the Black,
indigenous and peasant communities throughout the
entire Colombian Pacific who are undergoing a process
of physical and cultural extinction. There are two
main causes of the ethnocide that Colombia’s black
and indigenous communities are enduring, the first
being the systematic violation of our economic, social,
cultural and environmental rights. The State’s racist and
classist abandonment of us means that our human rights
are not guaranteed. That has led to the destruction of

S/PV.9151

one of the most biodiverse places in the world through
legal and illegal extractive industries.
The second cause is the armed conflict that has
brought war to our territories. We have been massacred,
displaced, confined, threatened and killed, leaving
our lands to be occupied and exploited by narrow
economic self-interests against our will. ACADESAN
and the indigenous communities in San Juan are
facing dispossession of more than 32,450 hectares by
extractive industries and foreign megaprojects. Only
when total peace is achieved and a comprehensive State
presence established will it be possible to guarantee our
rights and permanence on the land in accordance with
what we have established independently in our plans for
ethnic development.
The San Juan River and the Pacific are suffering
because of a never-ending war in which armed
actors — legal or illegal — want to subject us to their
ideals. They all believe themselves to be benevolent
saviours, but their actions nonetheless make us a
military target. Today, as the ethnic populations of
the territories, we ask that all armed actors, legal or
illegal, refrain from making us part of their conflict
and respect our decision to be neutral. We are neither
for nor against any armed actor, legal or illegal. We are
for our communities, for dialogue and for negotiations
and agreements to end violence in the territories.
Behind me there are two photographs. One is of
Valeria Murillo, a 10-year-old girl who was killed in
January during an illegal armed group’s incursion
into the territories. Valeria was attending school and
dreamed of becoming a dance teacher. She longed
for a life of peace and freedom from violence. The
other photograph is of Yuver Moreno, a boy who was
recruited at the age of 12 by another illegal actor. In
September 2021, at the age of 13, he died in a bombing
by the security forces in which three other teenagers
were also killed. But I also want to speak about the
suffering of women. We endure the war in our own
bodies, through sexual violence, among other forms of
violence, and also as the mothers of both victims and
perpetrators. War and violence are equally tragic for
those who bear arms, since most people are revolted by
such acts.
Today we want the entire world to know that our
ancestral vision and the wisdom of our ethnic peoples
are essential and must be included in the humanitarian
dialogues in the quest for the peace we yearn for and

22-626415/20

S/PV.9151

Colombia

for environmental conservation in our lands. Today in
Colombia, we have hope. It is a dream come true to
have Francia Márquez Mina — a Black woman born
poor, a victim of the armed conflict, a defender of
human rights, the environment and our territories — as
Vice-President. We trust that the Government of Gustavo
Petro Urrego and Francia Márquez Mina will guarantee
human dignity and that we ethnic peoples can be free
to decide how we wish to live our lives, individually
and collectively.
We have suffered in the armed conflict. We have
been confined and displaced, but today we dream of
returning to our lands, where we were happy, to revel
in our songs and dances, tell our stories as evening
falls and when night comes, tend to our animals and
our plants, sow seeds for food and for peace, frolic in
the river and fish and experience the joy of climbing
in the mountains and walking on the beaches with the
sand between our toes. We dream of living freely and
enjoying life in our territories.
As we strive to make that dream a reality, we
ask the international community to strengthen the
direct presence of United Nations agencies and other
humanitarian organizations in the territories most
affected by war and violence by sending more frequent
humanitarian missions to help safeguard the lives
of people in the communities. We call for support
for efforts to achieve humanitarian agreements and
multilateral ceasefires, especially among the illegal
armed actors who are in ethnic territories. We know
from experience that humanitarian agreements and
ceasefires save lives. We ask that more resources be
allocated to strengthen grass-roots organizations
and human rights defenders, especially for initiatives
that allow us to build economic self-sufficiency in
balance with nature and the environment and to combat
climate change.
On behalf of my communities, my ancestors and
the leaders of Colombia, I thank the Security Council
very much for this opportunity and for allowing us to
relate our story, our reality, our suffering and our hope
that we experience in the ethnic territories in Colombia.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Moreno Barco for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Gabon.
6/20

12/10/2022

(spoke in English)
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf
of the three African members of the Security Council
(A3), namely, Gabon, Ghana and Kenya.
We thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Ruiz Massieu, Ms. Elizabeth Moreno Barco
and Mr. Muhith for their briefings. We also welcome
the participation of His Excellency Mr. Álvaro Leyva
Durán, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Colombia.
We warmly congratulate His Excellency
Mr. Gustavo Petro Urrego and Her Excellency
Ms. Francia Márquez Mina on their electoral victories.
We believe that their election heralds new hope for
Colombia and its resilient, peace-loving people.
The election of President Petro Urrego and
Vice-President Márquez Mina is a statement of
Colombia’s desire for fundamental change, particularly
with regard to the inclusion of those who were left
behind and were consigned to the margins of economic,
cultural and political life. We applaud the President’s
inclusive efforts, as reflected in his appointment of
Afro-Colombian and indigenous professionals to key
public positions.
As States with a multi-ethnic, multireligious and
multicultural basis, we recognize that the practical
and fair embrace of inclusion by the State is a key
competence. It is required by all States, no matter their
wealth or might, as a foundation for their sustained peace
and security. The people of Colombia demonstrated
their recognition of that requirement in their country.
There are many Colombians yearning for fairness
and inclusion. We focus the most on Afro-Colombians
and the indigenous community because they have
suffered the most historically. We also focus on them
because, as the A3, we are guided by the Constitutive
Act of the African Union and its embrace of our
continent’s diaspora.
The world over, all people of African descent
whose ancestors left our shore in duress or in search of
opportunity are our kin. We care for the fates that they
met, and we will do our utmost to encourage all States
and institutions to treat them with dignity and fairness.
Inclusion, equity and justice for all Colombians
is the promise of the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.
22-62641

12/10/2022

Colombia

We believe that, by raising such high expectations for
themselves, Colombians have given the world a precious
example to follow. We also recognize, with profound
respect, the victims and survivors who suffered greatly,
but who are still willing to offer forgiveness for the
sake of peace.
For the agreement to truly deliver peace, it is
critical that the principles and provisions of the ethnic
chapter, as a cross-cutting measure, be implemented.
A lack of progress in that part of the agreement and
in the economic and political empowerment of the
most vulnerable is an early-warning signal of future
conflicts. The A3 will continue to support tangible
action regarding the ethnic chapter as the clearest
proof of a commitment to, and the success of, the
peace process. Unfortunately, until now, the level of
compliance with the ethnic chapter has been low. Its
principles and goals, cutting across different parts of
the Final Agreement, have not been addressed with the
level of attention and seriousness that they deserve.
It is particularly important that the lands in which
indigenous and Afro-Colombian communities live and
their economic life involve the implementation of the
Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation
and Non-Repetition. Safe participation in all relevant
processes should be assured. The brutal killings of
human rights defenders, particularly from ethnic
and indigenous communities, should be aggressively
investigated, and those responsible held accountable.
We underscore the need for the urgent
implementation of the National Commission security
guarantees extended to the vulnerable, taking into
consideration specific gender needs. In that regard, we
commend the Government’s efforts to highlight the
need for integrated State response to address persisting
violence in conflict-affected areas.
We pay particular attention to the measures aimed
at providing specific responses to the challenges that
women, in particular Afro-Colombian and indigenous
women, continue to face, whether regarding their
security, their participation in political life or their
economic empowerment. The initial measures taken by
the new President gave us the hope that women would
take a greater part in building peace in Colombia.
We condemn any attacks directed at Government
security forces. In particular, we are concerned by the
attack in the Huila department, where seven policemen
were recently killed.

S/PV.9151

Beyond the Final Agreement, the A3 supports
all efforts that seek to consolidate the peace process,
including through the incorporation of groups that are
not parties. We support the willingness of the Ejército
de Liberación Nacional and other armed groups to
engage in dialogue with the Government. That is a
positive step in the realization of total peace.
The normalization of relations with its neighbours
remains key to the continued security and prosperity
of Colombia and to regional stability. We therefore
welcome the steps taken to normalize relations
with Venezuela.
The United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia has been instrumental in monitoring and
verifying the progress in the implementation of the
Final Agreement. It remains particularly critical at this
moment. The A3 therefore supports the renewal of the
Verification Mission’s mandate for another year.
We urge the international community to continue
to support the Government’s efforts technically and
financially. Some of that support, particularly from
the United Nations, can involve mainstreaming the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), with a specific
focus on their impact on the most vulnerable. The
SDGs have specific goals and benchmarks. Making
them part of measurable action by the Government will
be key to demonstrating inclusivity, fairness, justice
and sustainable development for the most vulnerable
Colombians. For that to work most effectively, all efforts
should be made to concretely link the coordination,
deliverables and learning between the Verification
Mission and the United Nations country team.
In conclusion, I would like to make a special
mention of the leading efforts of Kenya in bringing
a strong focus to the linkage between Africa and its
diaspora in the work of the Security Council. That is
particularly the case with the efforts of the A3, which
has led to more delegations taking up aspects of the
cause. As Kenya winds down its term, it can take pride
in having tangibly contributed to the strengthening of
pan-African solidarity. It is an effort that the A3 will
continue into the future.
The A3 reaffirms its solidarity with the Government
and the people of Colombia in their tireless pursuit of
total peace and prosperity.

22-626417/20

S/PV.9151

Colombia

(spoke in French)
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Norway.
Ms. Huitfeldt (Norway): We thank Mr. Ruiz
Massieu for his briefing and offer our congratulations
to President Gustavo Petro Urrego, represented in the
Chamber today by Foreign Minister Leyva Durán, on
his election victory. We wish to extend a warm welcome
to Foreign Minister Leyva Durán. Let me also thank
the briefers for their valuable insights.
As a former Minister of Children and Equality,
I would first like to commend Colombia for taking
major steps towards greater inclusiveness. A cabinet
with gender parity is a sign of a Government that
takes equality seriously. Women’s representation in
Congress, where one out of three members are now
women, is equally encouraging.
We also celebrate the first meeting of the Commission
for the Follow-Up, Promotion and Verification of the
Implementation of the Final Peace Agreement. The
new Government and the representatives of the former
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército
del Pueblo (FARC-EP) renewed their unconditional
commitment to the peace agreement. This and the other
bilateral arenas for dialogue must be used effectively.
They are crucial to the successful implementation of
the peace agreement.
Peace is at the top of President Petro Urrego’s
agenda. His flagship policy — “total peace” — is
ambitious. Yet achieving nationwide peace and security
is long overdue. Norway remains fully committed to
the Colombian peace process. We remain a guarantor
country in the implementation of the 2016 peace accord,
and we have been asked to continue in the negotiations
with the Ejército de Liberación Nacional (ELN). I
would like to commend the Government for moving
quickly to re-engage with the ELN, and not least for
working closely with Cuba.
“Total peace” is a tall order. It will be complicated.
It will take time. And it will call for approaches and
methods different from the ones we are used to. But
we stand ready to assist in the Government’s effort to
promote dialogue and the disarmament of other armed
groups, if so requested.
8/20

12/10/2022

Land reform and access to land are key to a
peaceful and prosperous Colombia. I am pleased to see
that the Government is working hard to find just and
sustainable solutions to the root causes of the conflict.
International support has been proved to be
essential for the implementation of the agreement. I
applaud the United States for recently taking a special
role in the implementation of the ethnic chapter of the
accord. It is an important job, as much still needs to be
done on questions where ethnicity is a factor.
Colombia’s transitional justice system continues
to impress us. The Truth Commission’s final report
contains important recommendations, which I am
pleased to see the Government is taking seriously.
We also commend the Government for convening
the National Commission for Security Guarantees.
This Commission has the potential to address the
root causes of violence, which would in turn improve
security conditions for human rights defenders and
former combatants. That is vital, given the dire security
situation of these groups. More than 340 former
FARC soldiers have lost their lives since 2016. This
cannot continue.
A specific focus on the challenges faced by women
human rights defenders is also needed. And I echo the
Secretary-General in urging full implementation of the
Comprehensive Programme for Safeguards for Women
Leaders and Human Rights Defenders. Likewise, we
call upon all parties to uphold their obligations under
international law and implement in Colombia the
conclusions of the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict.
Council members must agree on a renewal of the
mandate that will enable the United Nations Mission to
continue its support for peace and stability in Colombia.
Norway remains committed to working with Colombia
to secure lasting peace.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Ambassador Muhith and Ms. Elizabeth
Moreno Barco for their briefings. We greatly value their
testimony. I am very pleased to welcome to the Security
Council Minister Álvaro Leyva Durán, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Colombia. I also welcome the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway.
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the Verification Mission in
Colombia, Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, for his briefing
22-62641

12/10/2022

Colombia

and express my appreciation for the work he has carried
out together with his team.
Mexico welcomes the resumption of the dialogue
between the Government of Colombia and the Ejército
de Liberación Nacional and its willingness to extend
the dialogue to other groups. This is a fundamental step
towards sustainable peace.
We recognize President Petro Urrego’s decision
to put peace at the centre of his public policies. We
welcome the “total peace” initiative, which is based on
the pillars of the rights to truth, justice and reparation.
The comprehensive implementation of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable
and Lasting Peace is also an opportunity to address the
historical inequalities and structural factors that help
explain the persistence of violence in Colombia. The
reactivation of the Commission for the Follow-Up,
Promotion and Verification of the Implementation of the
Final Peace Agreement and the National Commission
for Security Guarantees are concrete actions that
underpin the path to sustainable peace.
We join the Secretary-General in recognizing the
efforts made by local authorities and representatives
of civil society — particularly those of indigenous
and Afro-Colombian communities — to strengthen
peacebuilding. The ethnicity chapter is a fundamental
pillar for peace. With its experience as a multiethnic
and multicultural country that recognizes its own
challenges and which is well aware of the magnitude of
the historical debt owed to the native, indigenous and
Afro-descendant peoples, Mexico is fully prepared to
collaborate in this area.
We also recognize the new Colombian
Government’s commitments to promoting progress
on pending issues of the Final Agreement, including
agrarian reform, and to strengthening development
programmes with a territorial approach. In particular,
we highlight its willingness to involve communities
as key actors in the implementation of the illicit crop
substitution programme. The foregoing is consistent
with and supports President Petro Urrego’s remarks on
drug policies in his address to the General Assembly
last month (see A/77/PV.4).
We share his vision: it is time to review global drug
policies and the role the United Nations plays in them,
and to bolster actions that protect the communities that
are most vulnerable to the scourge of drug trafficking.

S/PV.9151

Mexico takes note of the progress in the work
of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and its focus on
victims. We commend it for its decision to consider
its first case of crimes related to sexual and genderbased violence — a historic request from victims’
organizations. Similarly, we welcome the creation of a
Ministry of Equality.
Mainstreaming women’s rights and gender equality
is essential for achieving total peace. The Cabinet’s
current gender parity and the nomination of Colombia’s
first
female
Afro-Colombian
Vice-President,
Ms. Francia Márquez Mina, is concrete proof of
that commitment.
The Colombian Government’s renewed push for
peace is also being reinforced by actions such as the
normalization of relations with Venezuela. As a member
of the Latin American and Caribbean community,
Mexico firmly believes that improving the relationship
between the two neighbours, which share cultural,
historical and economic ties, will be beneficial for
addressing common challenges, and our entire region
will benefit from this improved relationship.
In conclusion, we reaffirm our commitment to
carefully considering Colombia’s requests to the
Council with a view to renewing the Verification
Mission’s mandate in our capacity as co-penholders on
that issue, together with the United Kingdom.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ruiz Massieu, Ms. Moreno Barco and Mr. Muhith, for
their briefings. I warmly welcome Foreign Minister
Leyva Durán. and Ambassador Zalabata Torres to
the Security Council. Their presence here today is a
reflection of their personal commitment to the peace
process and to working in partnership with the Council.
I would like to make the following three remarks.
First, the United Kingdom welcomes the
renewed momentum for peace in Colombia. The
new Government’s commitment to implementing
the peace agreement was clearly demonstrated
through President Petro Urrego’s attendance at the
first meeting of the Commission for the Follow-up,
Promotion and Verification of the Implementation of
the Final Agreement and the National Commission on
Security Guarantees on 2 October. We commend the
Government’s focus on vital rural reforms, including
the intention to accelerate the titling and purchase
of land. We note the progress made by the Special

22-626419/20

S/PV.9151

Colombia

Jurisdiction for Peace, with the opening of three new
cases and another due to be opened on sexual and
gender-based violence.
Secondly, we encourage the Government to continue
to focus on the comprehensive implementation of the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace, despite the challenges. We
remain deeply concerned about the ongoing threats
and violence faced by former combatants and human
rights defenders. We welcome the swift action taken
by the Government to set up 14 command posts, as
recommended in its emergency protection plan. It is
clear that additional security initiatives are urgently
needed. We welcome the new Government’s further
commitment to making additional progress on
implementing the gender and ethnic provisions of the
Final Agreement, including on land ownership.
Thirdly, we recognize the complexity of
the instability in Colombia and the need for a
multidimensional approach to address violence and
ensure human security. In that light, the United Kingdom
welcomes the progress made towards reinitiating talks
with the Ejército de Liberación Nacional. We hope
that the delegations sent to the peace talks will be
representative and that lessons will be learned from
the process that led to the 2016 agreement. The United
Kingdom also welcomes Colombia’s commitment
to reinforcing international cooperation to tackle
narco-trafficking and bring to justice those who profit
from the misery of the drug trade, in both producer and
consumer countries.
Finally, let me reaffirm the United Kingdom’s
support to Colombia and the Colombian people,
who remain committed to implementing the peace
agreement, despite the many challenges they face. In
particular, we look forward to working with Colombia,
the United Nations and our co-penholder, Mexico, on
the upcoming renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Ruiz
Massieu for his briefing and for the work of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia. Ireland also
welcomes the valuable perspectives of the Peacebuilding
Commission and thanks Ambassador Muhith. I would
also like to thank Ms. Moreno Barco for her inspiring
and important testimony. I further want to recognize
10/20

12/10/2022

the participation here today of Foreign Minister Leyva
Durán and Ambassador Zalabata Torres.
At a time of significant change in Colombia, the
peace process has remained steadfast. It continues to
provide a shining example of inclusive peacebuilding
and a comprehensive peace accord. Ireland reiterates its
support to all those building a durable and sustainable
peace in Colombia. We welcome the new Government’s
commitment to intensifying the implementation of the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace, and we will continue to
accompany it on this journey as friends and partners
in peace. I would like to focus my remarks on three
key issues.
First, the true potential of the accord can only be
fully realized through its complete implementation.
That will require greater prioritization, in particular,
of the rural reform and ethnic chapters, and renewed
dedication to the gender chapters. Ireland welcomes
the reinvigoration of the Commission for the Followup, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation
of the Final Agreement. We know from our own peace
process on the island of Ireland that inclusive dialogue
is essential for enduring and sustained peace.
Peace is the primary precondition for progress.
Peace is integral for Colombia to advance its
socioeconomic development, protect its unique
biodiversity and overcome historic inequalities. We
welcome the announcement by President Petro Urrego
of the re-establishment of peace talks between the
Government and the Ejército de Liberación Nacional, as
well as ongoing efforts for a ceasefire with other armed
groups. That is potentially another transformational
moment on Colombia’s path to lasting peace.
Secondly, Ireland reiterates its support to
Colombia’s transitional justice system. We welcome
the commitment to victims and survivors demonstrated
by the opening of three new cases at the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace. We recognize the important
acknowledgements of truth and responsibility by many
indicted under Case 03, as well as the welcome progress
made in other cases. Ireland fully supports the intention
to open a macro-case on crimes related to sexual and
gender-based violence.
I also want to recall the recent return of four young
persons by the Unit for the Search of Persons Deemed
Missing in the context of and due to the armed conflict.
22-62641

12/10/2022

Colombia

This brings invaluable closure to their families
and communities.
President Petro Urrego’s commitment to
implementing the recommendations of the final report
of the Truth Commission in full is very welcome. Those
processes, individually and collectively, will have
a transformative impact on the lives of victims and
survivors and for true reconciliation for all Colombians.
Thirdly, the continuing levels of violence are a
deep stain on the tapestry of peace in Colombia. Ireland
condemns the recent deaths of 20 police officers at
the hands of illegal armed groups. We deplore the
persistently high level of killings of indigenous people,
Afro-Colombians, children, former combatants and
human rights defenders. Ireland condemns in the
strongest terms the killing of José Quiñones — the
fourth leader of his organization killed in less than
a year. The protection of all who work for peace is a
critical requirement for a peaceful, stable and equal
future. We welcome the recent meeting of the National
Security Guarantees Commission, whose work
is essential.
Recognizing the particular challenges facing women
peacebuilders, Ireland encourages the full and timely
implementation of the Comprehensive Programme for
Safeguards for Women Leaders and Human Rights
Defenders. As a country that understands the centrality
of women to sustainable peace, Ireland stands ready to
work with Colombia on the development of its national
action plan on women and peace and security.
It is rare that we speak of hope around this table.
But in the case of the Colombian peace process there
are compelling reasons for such hope. The soil for
enduring peace is fertile in Colombia. We must tend that
field carefully. With the continued commitment of the
Colombian Government and people and with the support
of the Council, the harvest can be plentiful. Ireland will
continue to do its part to see a peaceful, prosperous and
inclusive future realized for all Colombians.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, Mr. Álvaro Leyva
Durán, in today’s consultations. We thank Carlos Ruiz
Massieu, Head of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, for his briefing on the situation in
the country and for his assessments. We also thank the
Permanent Representative of Bangladesh, Mr. Muhith,
and Ms. Moreno Barco for their opinions.

S/PV.9151

We welcome the general course towards peace
outlined by the Administration of Gustavo Petro
Urrego. The new Government’s first steps instil
optimism and confidence that the authorities are truly
committed to fully implementing the provisions of the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace. This approach is drastically
different from that of the previous Administration,
which used various pretexts to avoid fully implementing
the Final Agreement.
At the time, we saw a desire to reduce the
peace process to integrating one part of society into
another — in other words, to absorb rather than to
merge. That was also one of the root causes of the
conflict. Such an approach also did not address the
issues of ensuring the physical safety of peace-process
participants and community leaders, remedying the
vacuum of State power in certain regions of the country
or conducting comprehensive agricultural reform and
crop-substitution programmes. Many public figures in
Colombia believe that the past four years did nothing to
advance the peace process, or even caused a regression
of the security situation to the level before the Final
Agreement was signed.
The incumbent President and his team are faced
with a complex and ambitious goal of overcoming
all of those accumulated challenges. As we noted on
several occasions, the achievement of a sustainable
and lasting peace in Colombia is not possible without
the engagement of all major stakeholders, including
the Ejército de Liberación Nacional. It is heartening
that the resumption of negotiations with the Ejército
de Liberación Nacional is one of the priorities of the
new Administration. Meetings of the sides in Cuba and
Venezuela and their mutual commitment to continue
dialogue in November signal a genuine desire to
move towards national reconciliation and a complete
cessation of hostilities in Colombia.
We welcome that external guarantors and mediators
who are trusted by all parties and can add value to
negotiations have joined the settlement process. We are
pleased to see Venezuela again in that capacity, as it
is Colombia’s most important and closest neighbour, in
every sense of the word.
We note the consistent steps of Bogotá to restore
dialogue and cooperation with Caracas, which is in the
basic interests of both nations. We are convinced that the
normalization of Venezuelan-Colombian relations will

22-6264111/20

S/PV.9151

Colombia

12/10/2022

help address the migration situation and help combat
transnational organized crime and drug trafficking.

by a strengthening of the State’s presence in areas
historically neglected by the agreement.

Under these new circumstances, United Nations
assistance in implementing peace agreements is more
relevant than ever. We note that the mandate of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
which we will have to renew before the end of this
month, covers only the implementation process of
the Final Agreement. We will be ready to support the
renewal of the mandate after a thorough consideration
of the text. At the same time, we draw the attention
of the Secretary-General and the Security Council to
the fact that the implementation of the peace agreement
and the achievement of “total peace”, which provide for
a broader interpretation of the tasks of the Government,
are currently beyond the scope of the Mission’s mandate.

In order to build peace, viable socioeconomic
opportunities must be offered to the populations that
have suffered from the conflict. We welcome the
Government’s commitment to do more on land access
and rural reform. The authorities’ new approach to
illicit-crop substitution is also welcome.

Russia is prepared to continue actively participating
in international efforts to provide comprehensive
assistance with peacebuilding in Colombia. We reiterate
our full support for the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, under the leadership of Carlos
Ruiz Massieu.
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault (France) (spoke in French):
I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Mr. Muhammad Abdul
Muhith and Ms. Moreno Barco for their briefings. I also
welcome the presence of Mr. Álvaro Leyva Durán in
today’s meeting.
France welcomes the commitment made by
the President of Colombia to implement the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace in its entirety. The reduction
of inequalities, agrarian reform, governance by and
for women, dialogue with local communities and
environmental protection are all essential to the full
implementation of the agreement and are positive
steps. The resumption of negotiations with the
Ejército de Liberación Nacional is encouraging, as is
the willingness of other armed groups to engage in
dialogue. We support President Petro Urrego’s call for a
ceasefire with all armed groups.
France remains very concerned about the level
of violence in many parts of Colombia. Security
guarantees for former combatants who have laid down
their arms and for human rights defenders and social
leaders must be strengthened. The approach proposed
by the Colombian authorities, based on local dialogue,
is promising. To be effective, it must be accompanied
12/20

Finally, France welcomes the progress made by
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace. The opening of
three new cases is a positive step. The report of the
Truth Commission was a crucial advancement towards
reconciliation and is truly commendable. All parties
to the conflict must commit to these efforts to ensure
justice and truth, which are essential for the return of
lasting peace to the country.
France welcomes the progress made by Colombia
since 2016. The peace agreement is a historic
achievement. We call on the Colombian authorities to
continue and accelerate its full implementation and to
dedicate the necessary resources in that regard. That is
the surest way to entrench peace in Colombia.
Mr. Spasse (Albania): I would like to join others
in expressing our appreciation for the work that Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Massieu has
accomplished with the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia and for his briefing today. I also
thank Ms. Moreno Barco and Ambassador Muhith for
their insights.
It is not very often that the Security Council
deliberates on cases where real progress is made, where
conflicts are resolved and not simply managed, where
hope prevails in bringing hard-won solutions that shape
human life. Colombia is an example of courageous
choices for peace, for the path of dialogue and genuine
recognition of the grievances and aspirations of
all parties.
Peace never falls from the heavens. It is a result of the
hard work of leaders who show courage, determination
and vision. We welcome the commitment shown by
President Gustavo Petro Urrego and his Administration
to further deepen the accomplishment of the peace
agreement by reinforcing the dialogue and reconciliation
among all political forces, including marginalized
ethnic groups and civil society. The peaceful electoral
process in Colombia is a major accomplishment and a
clear demonstration that the Colombian people have
22-62641

12/10/2022

Colombia

made the choice of upholding and implementing the
agreement as the right investment to consolidating their
democracy and preparing their future. We welcome the
support of the incumbent Government to implement the
peace agreement and pursue total peace.
Achieving total peace and consolidating democracy
in a country that has been ravaged by civil war for
decades is not an easy task. We recognize the enormity
of the challenge and are encouraged by the level of
commitment and determination to move forward shown
by the Colombian leaders.
There is undeniably still a long way to go,
especially in improving security in conflictaffected areas. Vulnerable communities and groups,
including women, indigenous communities and AfroColombians, must see as soon as possible the benefits
of the Final Agreement. We call on the Government to
maintain the momentum and proceed with the adoption
of the different chapters and reforms on pending issues
necessary for the fulfilment of the peace agreement.
That is a process that requires the continuation and
reinforcement of dialogue and cooperation at all levels.
The announcement of the resumption of peace
talks with the Ejército de Liberación Nacional is a
meaningful and fundamental step towards building
peace. Total peace requires full inclusivity, which
becomes a guarantee for a lasting solution in upholding
the rule of law.
Restoring order is a necessary condition for any
other socially desirable goal to be attained, but order
and security alone are not enough. There is an urgent
need for the newly elected Government to strengthen
the judiciary in order to ensure justice, protect
vulnerable groups and dismantle illegal armed groups
and criminal organizations.
Impunity for serious crimes remains a problem.
It must be addressed properly and in a timely manner,
since the lack of accountability leads to resentment and
tensions. Land reform, the ethnic chapter and gender
provisions must be prioritized. They are key to restoring
peace and addressing inequalities.
Finally, allow me to mention that the re-establishment
of diplomatic ties with the Government of Venezuela,
after years of closure, and the reopening of the border
is another crucial factor in demonstrating goodwill
towards the achievement of total peace.

S/PV.9151

Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Carlos Ruiz
Massieu for updating the Security Council on the recent
developments in Colombia. I also thank the Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission, Mr. Muhammad Abdul
Muhith, for his statement, as well as the civil society
representative, Ms. Moreno Barco, for her insights. I
also welcome the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia at today’s meeting.
Since our most recent meeting in July (see
S/PV.9094), we are happy to note that a peaceful
transition has taken place in Colombia and a new
President was sworn into office on 7 August. That
peaceful transition is a testament to the successful
implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace,
which we continue to support.
While the greater gender inclusivity and indigenous
representation in the new Government and Parliament
are welcome developments, the comprehensive
implementation of the Final Agreement’s interrelated
elements represents an opportunity for the new
Government to address the persisting inequalities and
the underlying factors behind the continuing violence.
We also must be aware that the objectives of the
peace agreement are ambitious and, therefore, their
realization will require time.
While we appreciate the positive developments
that Colombia has witnessed in the past few years,
we remain cognizant of the impediments to the
implementation of the peace agreement that remain.
We believe that the solutions to issues such as security,
rural reforms, crop substitution and the rehabilitation
of ex-combatants are intrinsically linked to political
reforms, decentralization, the extension of State
authority and reconciliation.
We appreciate that, despite facing several
challenges, the Colombian authorities are making
progress on addressing the security, housing and land
guarantees enshrined in the peace agreement. The new
Government has also underscored the importance of
broadening the implementation of the peace agreement
by including more parties in the process. In that
regard, we welcome the renewed initiative to engage
with the Ejército de Liberación Nacional as part of the
reconciliation initiatives.

22-6264113/20

S/PV.9151

Colombia

We also note the recent legislation approved by
Congress and the agrarian reforms. We hope that
positive trend will continue in the coming months and
help to consolidate the gains achieved thus far.
We believe the prioritization of rural reforms aimed
at increasing employment and livelihood opportunities
is fundamental to sustaining peace. There is also a need
for more effective measures, both in Colombia and in
the region, to tackle the issue of drug trafficking to
sustain peace and stability in Colombia.
Separately, we also welcome the steps taken by
the Government of Colombia to improve relations
with Venezuela.
India values its bilateral ties with Colombia, with
whom we share a relationship spanning more than six
decades. Over the years, our bilateral relations have
deepened and diversified in areas such as space, health,
science, technology and biotechnology. As a longstanding friend of the Colombian people, we hope that
the international community will continue to shoulder
its responsibility to support the people and Government
of Colombia in their journey to consolidate and sustain
peace. India stands ready to play its part in that
larger pursuit.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): It is
an honour for me and my country to take the floor to
comment on the implementation of the Final Agreement
for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and
Lasting Peace in Colombia. I thank the briefers for their
briefings. I welcome Minister Álvaro Leyva Durán. to
the Security Council and wish him every success in
his work.
Today, for the first time in the Council, we have
listened closely and with great interest to the new
Government’s plans and strategy to advance the
comprehensive implementation of the peace agreement
with the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo. We are pleased to recognize that the
Government of President Petro Urrego has expressed,
since its electoral campaign, its commitment to the full
implementation of the peace agreement, to stepping
up efforts to guarantee the security of ex-combatants
and to strengthening policies with respect to women,
indigenous peoples and Afro-descendants.
We are not surprised that the Secretary-General,
in his most recent report to the Security Council,
praised the “renewed momentum and sharpened focus
14/20

12/10/2022

on consolidating peace” (S/2022/715, para. 104) of the
new Colombian Government. Indeed, President Petro
Urrego has stated that he intends to pursue total peace
and has already begun to take steps in that direction. In
the context of the Final Agreement, we take note of the
recent reactivation of the Commission for the Followup, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation
of the Final Agreement. We also note the evolution and
progress of the dialogue with the Ejército de Liberación
Nacional, which we hope will be successful.
We are aware, however, that total peace will be
possible only when the presence of the Colombian State
effectively reaches all corners of its territory. As the
Secretary-General acknowledged in his June report
to the Council (S/2022/513), the persisting violence in
several regions of Colombia requires a full deployment
of the State’s capabilities and the confrontation of
illegal armed groups and criminal organizations that
continue to operate in regions characterized by poverty,
illicit economies and ineffective territorial control by
the State.
We are fully aware that improving social policies in
historically neglected areas that have also been affected
by decades of conflict requires time and incremental
work. In that regard, as we have reiterated in our
recent contacts with the new Colombian authorities,
the Brazilian Government is willing to support
initiatives aimed at promoting the economic and social
development of those communities.
This month we will negotiate the adoption of
the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia. In that context, it
is our duty to underline, as we have done on several
occasions, that Colombia is a special case on the agenda
of the Security Council. Colombia is on the Council’s
agenda through its own initiative. It was Colombia that
invited the Council to play a role in the implementation
of the peace agreement, which was achieved exclusively
by the Colombian people themselves. The Council
should not lose sight of its subsidiary role in the
process. Broader development and security strategies
are the sole prerogatives of the Colombian State. Brazil
is and will continue to be very clear on that fact during
negotiations. From another perspective, the verification
of the peace agreement in Colombia allows the Council
to play an innovative role that is distinctly different
from its part in other conflict situations. In that regard,
we are pleased to reiterate that while the Council may
22-62641

12/10/2022

Colombia

be important for Colombia, Colombia is also important
for the Council.
Brazil congratulates the Colombian Government
and people for their tireless efforts to find and consolidate
a path of peace and prosperity for all Colombians.
Colombia has shown that it has been able to create the
political will and the conditions to halt the violence and
bring development to rural areas and others that have
historically lacked State support. We hope that the new
Government will continue and strengthen that process.
We are aware of the difficulties of the challenge but we
trust in the willingness and ingenuity of the Colombian
people to overcome it.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): We
thank Special Representative Ruiz Massieu for his
briefing and for presenting the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2022/715). We appreciate the vital role that
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
continues to play in supporting peace in the country.
Let me also thank Ambassador Muhith and Ms. Moreno
Barco for their contributions today. The United States
congratulates President Gustavo Petro Urrego and
Vice-President Francia Márquez Mina on taking office
and looks forward to continuing its strong relationship
with Colombia and its people. In that regard, we
particularly welcome the presence of Foreign Minister
Leyva Durán and Ambassador Zalabata Torres and
their team to today’s meeting.
Just last week, our Secretary of State, Antony
Blinken, visited Bogotá, and at a signing ceremony
with Vice-President Márquez Mina marked the fact
that the United States has become the first international
accompanier to the ethnic chapter of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace. As Secretary Blinken said,
that chapter

S/PV.9151

introduced into the Colombian Congress to advance
those efforts, which are vital to securing the advances
Colombia has made since the peace accord was adopted.
That said, all the parties must also work to improve
the security situation. Several civilian massacres and
police ambushes have taken place since we last met
in the Council to discuss Colombia (see S/PV.9094).
Several members of the Awá indigenous community
were killed in the Nariño and Putumayo departments
and violence against indigenous communities remains
a significant problem. The Colombian National Police
have been targeted, with attacks by drug cartels in which
more than 20 officers were killed. Terrorist groups also
targeted the police, with seven more officers killed
during an attack in Huila. Former combatants have
also suffered, with 11 killed in July alone, the deadliest
month for former combatants since 2019. Human rights
defenders continue to be targeted, with the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights receiving
allegations of 45 homicides, including of seven women,
during the current reporting cycle from 28 July through
26 September. It is crucial for Colombia to ensure that
it avoids backsliding on security, as insecurity will
hamper its ability to address the other provisions in the
peace accord. In our view, it is crucial that the United
Nations Mission be able to continue its work and that
all chapters of the peace accord move forward.
The United States remains committed to supporting
Colombia and the peace accord, while also maintaining
its interest in bringing drug traffickers to justice
and avoiding impunity for acts committed by illegal
armed groups.

“recognizes that there can be no lasting peace
without justice and equality for the AfroColombian and indigenous peoples who have been
disproportionately harmed by the conflict.”

Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I would like to welcome Foreign Minister
Adamo and thank him for presiding over today’s
meeting. I also welcome the Colombian Foreign Minister
and the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission to this
meeting. I thank Special Representative Ruiz Massieu
for his briefing. I also listened carefully to the statement
by the civil-society representative.

We also want to congratulate the new Congress, which
for the first time includes 16 representatives from
conflict-affected areas elected through the special
transitional electoral districts created by the peace
accord. The United States welcomes President Petro
Urrego’s commitment to the full implementation of the
peace accord and shares that resolve. We recognize that
commitment through the variety of bills that have been

Since President Petro Urrego took office in August,
the new Colombian Government has actively promoted
the implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace and
has set forth the concept of “total peace”, demonstrating
its firm determination to achieve lasting peace and
stability in the country, which China commends. We
support the Colombian Government in its efforts to

22-6264115/20

S/PV.9151

Colombia

12/10/2022

promote dialogue and reconciliation, foster economic
and social development and pursue national peace and
stability. We expect all the parties in Colombia to unite
as one to meet the challenges in the peace process and
continue to consolidate and expand on their hard-won
peace gains.

the improvement of relations between Colombia and
neighbouring countries, and we hope that regional
countries and regional organizations will make greater
contributions to consolidating the momentum for
peace and promoting economic and social development
in Colombia.

Dialogue is an effective way to resolve differences
and settle disputes. China welcomes the Colombian
Government’s commitment to ending the conflict
through dialogue and appreciates the announcement
by the Government and the Ejercito de Liberación
Nacional regarding a resumption of peace talks. We
believe that with the support of the United Nations and
the relevant guarantor countries, the two parties will
reach a permanent ceasefire and a political settlement
through negotiations aimed at creating more favourable
conditions for Colombia to realize comprehensive and
lasting peace as soon as possible. We also hope that the
other armed groups will return to a path of peaceful
dialogue without delay.

Under the leadership of Special Representative
Ruiz Massieu, the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia has played an active role in promoting the
implementation of the Colombian peace agreement,
which China fully recognizes. We support the extension
of the Verification Mission’s mandate and are willing to
work with the other members of the Security Council
to push for the provision of more targeted assistance to
Colombia’s peace process by the Verification Mission.
China stands ready to work with the international
community, on the basis of respecting Colombia’s
ownership, to support Colombia’s ongoing efforts for
new achievements on the path to comprehensive peace,
stability and development.

The comprehensive implementation of the peace
agreement is key to eradicating violence and achieving
peaceful development, and an integrated approach to
policy implementation is needed to ensure a continued
flow of inputs. It is therefore imperative to improve
Colombia’s security governance capabilities, bolster
the presence of security forces in former conflict areas
where the Government lacks effective control and
crack down on violence and organized criminal activity
by armed groups. It is also vital to protect vulnerable
groups such as women, children and Afro-Colombian
communities, while actively promoting the integration
of former combatants into society by helping them
to find employment opportunities and encouraging
their participation in productive projects, providing
technical support and training to that end. We must
expedite reforms in all socioeconomic fields, address
poverty, social injustice and underdevelopment in rural
areas and leave no one behind. We must also continue
to promote the substitution of illicit crops and focus on
resolving the root causes of the drug epidemic. In that
regard, agencies such as the Peacebuilding Commission,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
the United Nations Development Programme should
provide more support.
As Secretary-General Guterres said, the Colombian
peace process is taking root. At the same time, Colombia
cannot build peace without the robust assistance of the
international community. We welcome and support
16/20

Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I thank the briefers for their
valuable briefings. We express our appreciation to
Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia, for his efforts, and
we welcome the participation of the Foreign Minister
of Colombia in today’s meeting.
At a time of increasing tensions and crises
around the world, preserving and building on the
peace achievements of many countries have become
an utmost necessity, such as the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace, which represents an example of the importance
of dialogue.
We welcome continued efforts by President Gustavo
Petro Urrego to fully and comprehensively implement
the Final Peace Agreement, as crucial to building on
Colombia’s significant progress to achieve lasting peace
and stability. That includes the commitment of the
Colombian Government to essential mechanisms such
as the National Commission on Security Guarantees
and the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion
and Verification of the Implementation of the Final
Agreement, as well as the Government’s endeavours
and efforts to ensure inclusivity such as gender parity
reforms, establishing the new Ministry of Equality and
22-62641

12/10/2022

Colombia

the National Youth Council. We look forward to the
Government’s continued commitment in that regard.
Initiatives such as the Community-based initiative
for promoting peaceful coexistence and reintegration
remain a fundamental tool to protect the hard-won
achievements of former combatants and address the
persistent security concerns in Colombia, including
violence against community leaders. Developing local
strategies that include former combatants and youth,
concurrently with implementing the security guarantees
of the Final Agreement, will undoubtedly contribute to
securing peace among the communities. In that context,
we commend the ongoing development of reintegration
action plans and strategies across municipalities in
coordination with local authorities, communities and
former combatants. We are hopeful that those efforts,
in conjunction with any other measures in pursuit
of broader peace, can support Colombia on its path
towards building a peaceful future.
We are encouraged by the people of Colombia in
their steadfast dedication to achieve reconciliation,
and the President’s commitment to implementing
the recommendations of the final report of the
Truth Commission. That report, as well as the other
elements of the Comprehensive System for Truth,
Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition, constitutes
an important reconciliation pillar in Colombia. That
includes the expanded cases of the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirate reaffirms
its commitment to supporting Colombia om its
journey to achieve sustainable peace and stability. We
also reaffirm our full support for the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia and its efforts in
that regard.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia.
Mr. Leyva Durán (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I extend my warmest greetings to the ambassadors,
members of the Security Council.
As representatives are all aware, I will refer to the
report (S/2022/715) submitted to the Security Council
by the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
on the implementation of the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace, signed between the Colombian State and the
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-

S/PV.9151

Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP), in accordance with the
provisions of resolutions 2603 (2021) and 2366 (2017),
whereby the Security Council extended the political
mandate requesting the Secretary-General to report on
the implementation of the Mission’s mandate every 90
days. The report before us today covers the period from
28 June to 26 September.
I would like to express my complete satisfaction
at witnessing the way in which the work has been
presented, that is to say, the report that I just mentioned,
which, although it appears to be a continuation of what
has come before, is in fact an evocation of the title of
Marcel Proust’s masterpiece In Search of Lost Time.
I had the honour of being involved in several
Colombian peace processes, particularly the most
recent one in Havana under the leadership of Mr. Juan
Manuel Santos Calderón, for which he was awarded
the Nobel Peace Prize. In key moments of the process,
it gave the impression that, as in Charles Dickens’s A
Tale of Two Cities, it was the best of times, the age of
wisdom, the epoch of belief, the season of light and the
spring of hope. We had everything before us; we were
direct straight to heaven.
In those days, the Security Council, as it had done at
the time with the peace accord achieved in the Republic
of Mali, took up the Colombian State’s proposal, made
by its President, to transform the agreement into a
formal document. It did so. The six agreed points, in
addition to the protocols and annexes to the Agreement
on the Bilateral and Definitive Ceasefire and the
Cessation of Hostilities and the Laying Down of Arms
between the national Government and the FARC-EP,
were recorded on its own pages forever. It therefore
included in its core documents the special agreements
to which the State and the rebels had submitted in the
light of common article 3 of the Geneva Conventions
and article 6 of the Geneva Convention relative to
the Treatment of Prisoners of War of 1949. Likewise,
the commitment to issuing a unilateral declaration of
statehood was made.
But, on a wrong day for democracy, because
democracy unfortunately sometimes gets it wrong,
Dickens’s paradoxical quandary came to the fore: there
was the worst of times, the age of foolishness, the epoch
of incredulity and of darkness and the winter of despair.
We stopped going to heaven to lead us to nothing. That
is because on Sunday, 17 June 2008, someone who had
received the order to tear peace to shreds took power. A

22-6264117/20

S/PV.9151

Colombia

destructive will was expressed at the ballot box, driven
by a not-so-invisible hand from beyond our borders,
which did us great harm.
But, as paragraph 2 of today’s report notes,
“On 7 August, Gustavo Petro Urrego was sworn
in as President of Colombia and Francia Márquez
Mina was sworn in as Vice-President. In his
inaugural speech, President Petro Urrego reiterated
his call upon political parties and Colombian
society to build a national agreement in support of
urgent changes. He has outlined his main priorities,
notably his commitments to peace, including the
implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace; to reducing inequality; to governing with
and for women; to ensuring zero tolerance for
corruption; and to holding regional dialogues for
local authorities and communities to contribute
to policymaking. He has also pledged to transition
towards clean energy and to protect the Amazon
while also promoting a new global approach to illicit
drugs. The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Colombia and Head of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia has met
with President Petro Urrego and Vice-President
Márquez Mina, affirming the support of the United
Nations for their efforts towards peace.”
President Petro Urrego wanted it to be understood that
a special time has come for Colombia: the time of “total
peace” and the time of peace beyond our borders.
With regard to the first chapter of the Havana
agreements, on comprehensive rural reform, the
Secretary-General’s report notes, in paragraph 9, how
the Government of our new President
“has emphasized that agrarian reform is one of its
key priorities”
and indicated that its implementation will be
fundamental. It has already demonstrated this intention
by strengthening the National Land Agency, seeking the
creation of the special agrarian jurisdiction, initiating
the consolidation of the multipurpose cadastre and
updating the rural property regime.
The purchase of 3 million hectares to be delivered
to the dispossessed has already begun. We understand
that it is not possible for a Government that has been in
power only 65 days to amend a plan that should never
have deviated from the initial road map to begin with;
18/20

12/10/2022

still, progress in relaunching what had been agreed
cannot be reversed.
With regard to political participation, as the
Secretary-General’s report rightly points out,
“The Government presented a draft political
reform aimed at ensuring, among other things,
gender parity in Congress and political campaigns
funded exclusively through public funds. The
Government also presented, together with electoral
institutions, a draft bill to reform the electoral
code” (S/2022/715, para. 14).
Implementation efforts in this area are very ambitious:
guaranteeing rights that facilitate the exercise of political
opposition (section 2.1 of the Havana agreements),
democratic mechanisms for citizen participation
(section 2.2), guarantees for mobilization and social
protest (section 2.2.2), guarantees for reconciliation,
coexistence, tolerance and non-stigmatization (section
2.2.4). The work before us is arduous but rewarding.
There is much to be said on the subject of illicit
drugs. The Secretary-General’s report highlights that
“[a]mong his administration’s priorities, the
need for a revised approach to the issue of illicit
drugs, both within Colombia and internationally, is
one that President Petro Urrego has discussed. He
has committed to prioritizing voluntary substitution
over forced eradication, as envisioned in the Final
Agreement, and to strengthening the National
Comprehensive Programme for the Substitution of
Illicit Crops” (ibid., para. 15).
The fact is we have had enough when it comes to
the violence caused by the infernal business of
drug trafficking in the Colombian homeland. The
uncontrolled international demand for drugs stemming
from vice continues trouble us, as it sows death and
desolation. Accordingly, in his poignant address to the
General Assembly on 20 September, President Gustavo
Petro Urrego evoked a national reality that is worth
remembering in this regard:
“I come from one of the three most beautiful
countries on Earth. There is an explosion of life
there — thousands of multicoloured species in
the seas, skies and lands. I come from the land of
yellow butterflies and magic. Water cascades down
the lush green mountains and valleys — but so do
torrents of blood. I come from a country of bloodsoaked beauty.
22-62641

12/10/2022

Colombia

“My country is both beautiful and violent.
How can beauty co-exist with death? How can the
biodiversity of life flourish alongside the dance of
death and horror? Who is to blame for breaking the
spell with terror?” (A/77/PV.4, p.18)
“Narco-trafficking, narco-trafficking,” I say. We
all know the vices of the world. They are what led
us — the Colombian Ambassador to the United States,
Mr. Luis Gilberto Murillo-Urrutia, our Ambassador
to the Organization of American States, Mr. Luis
Ernesto Vargas Silva, our Permanent Representative to
the United Nations, Mrs. Leonor Zalabata Torres and
I — to meet with Secretary-General António Guterres
yesterday to discuss convening a global conference of
consumer countries of hallucinogens and other drugs,
in order to raise awareness and take collective measures
to solve a problem that should not be allowed to bring
death to the weakest in the chain of a dirty business
that ends up destroying lives, mostly of the innocent.
In my homeland, that would be the small farmer, the
Afro-descendant and indigenous peoples, together with
the defenceless members of civil society who defend
human rights and total peace, including a significant
number of former combatants who have laid down their
arms. We agreed to submit a formal proposal to the
Secretary-General, which will be accompanied by a
statement of purpose that will be difficult to overlook.
It will be done.
I continue to rejoice at the way in which the
implementation of the accords is beginning to
accelerate. Issues relating to gender equality, rights
guaranteeing the free development of the person,
protection of minors — girls, boys and youth — and
rural women, the right to education, food independence,
and the integration of regions that had previously been
overlooked by the State into the nation are all exciting.
We are focusing on the value of prospective justice,
keeping in mind that our objectives are not limited to
solving the problems of our contemporaries. We know
that generations are linked in time, as the philosopher
says, and that one era inevitably influences those
that follow. That is why the Havana agreements are
concerned with the rights of those who have yet to come.
With regard to the important section of the agreement
entitled “Chapter on Ethnic Perspectives” (section 6.2).
In its subsection 6.2.1, entitled “Considerations” it is
recognized that

S/PV.9151

“the ethnic peoples have suffered historical
conditions of injustice, resulting from colonialism,
slavery and exclusion and from having been
dispossessed of their land, territories and
resources; that they have also been seriously
affected by the internal armed conflict and the
maximum guarantees need to be fomented for the
full exercise of their human and collective rights in
the framework of their own aspirations, interests
and world views”.
Therefore, as the text further indicates, it is worthwhile
in this case to uphold the principle of “non-regression”
as well as the principles of
“free determination, autonomy and selfgovernment, participation, consultation and prior
free and informed consent; social, economic
and cultural identity and integrity, rights over
land, territories and resources, which involve the
recognition of their ancestral territorial practices,
the right to restitution and strengthening of
territoriality, the current mechanisms for legal
protection and security of the land and territories
occupied or owned ancestrally and/or traditionally”.
I have placed this text on the desk of each Council
member because it calls for a reflection on how, through
dialogue, “total peace” can be achieved. President
Petro Urrego calls it “total peace”. We want and seek
it nationally, and we aspire to seek and find it beyond
our borders.
Meanwhile, the planet is heating up, and we have
to be firefighters. We are concerned about the conflicts
that delay the Paris timeline on climate change, the
Kyoto Protocol and the outcomes of the twenty-sixth
session of the Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in
Glasgow. President Petro Urrego has explained how
Colombia can be the world’s sponge — for peace, for
universal peace.
Locally, in order to continue setting an example
and showing that we can do this, we resumed dialogues
with the Ejército de Liberación Nacional, and we are
reaching out to those who were left out of the agreement
that we are implementing under the watchful eye and
guidance of the Security Council. For those matters we
will always turn to the Security Council.
We are also taking the opportunity make
improvements to the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, an

22-6264119/20

S/PV.9151

Colombia

institution that the Council admires and commends. We
seek make it into a court that requires the participation
of all parties, combatants and non-combatants alike,
as well as those directly or indirectly linked to the
internal conflict, and that attends to them all. As an
internationalized judicial body, it must fulfil its duty by
ensuring the application of all procedural safeguards,
without reversing the burden of proof. It must seek
to establish the responsibility of individuals and
the responsibility of the State, whether by action or
omission. This will be a new chapter. A truth mechanism
must be established that focuses on victims, reparations
and non-repetition.
I would like to thank the members of the Security
Council. We understand that peace in our country,
which is in the Council’s hands, has become an example
for the world — not only as a lovely idea that, in
principle, has not encountered any major hiccups, but
also because the Council, as a body, have never failed
to act unanimously on it. It can be done — yes indeed
it can.
I will set aside other issues that would unnecessarily
prolong my statement, since Council members can
find that information in the report submitted for their
consideration by the Verification Mission. Our thanks
go to the Mission, and we hope that the Council will
extend its mandate under the conditions requested.

20/20

12/10/2022

I want to express my most sincere appreciation to
the Council on behalf on the President of Colombia,
Gustavo Petro Urrego, and my entire nation.
Allow me simply to add something that comes
from my heart. We are experiencing a scale of global
problems not seen since the Second World War. I ask
the Council to prevent the world from being destroyed.
Allow me to say, I hope not foolishly, that some
judgments are rendered more justly than others, and
are generally wise if they are in the realm of magical
realism. They are realistic and very real, even if they
are magical — as shown in the works of our Nobel
Prize laureate Gabriel García Márquez.
I urge the Security Council to intervene in a united
manner to prevent the world from turning into the
fictional village of Macondo, in which the legendary
races, falsely believing themselves to be masters of the
universe, end up condemning themselves to 100 years
of solitude. Because if that happens — and it can — we
will not get a second chance on Earth. The time for
action is now or never.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.

22-62641
