United Nations

S/PV.4647

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-seventh year

4647

th meeting
Thursday, 21 November 2002, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wang Yingfan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (China)

Members:

Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Tafrov
Mr. Tidjani
Mr. Valdivieso
Mrs. d’Achon
Mr. Traoré
Mr. Corr
Mr. Koonjul
Mr. Aguilar Zinser
Mr. Kolby
Mr. Konuzin
Mr. Mahbubani
Mr. Mekdad
Mr. Harrison
Mr. Williamson

Agenda
Letter dated 31 March 1998 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Papua New Guinea to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/1998/287)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

02-70338 (E)

*0270338*

S/PV.4647

The meeting was called to order at 10.40 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 31 March 1998 from the Chargé
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Papua
New Guinea to the United Nations (S/1998/287)
The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Australia, Fiji, New Zealand and
Papua New Guinea in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Aisi (Papua
New Guinea) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Dauth (Australia), Mr. Naidu (Fiji) and
Mr. MacKay (New Zealand) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Kieran Prendergast, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Kieran Prendergast, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Prendergast: During the last briefing on
Bougainville, on 29 August, the Council was informed
of progress achieved in implementing stages I and II of
the weapons disposal plan, the target dates for which

2

were 31 August and 30 September, respectively. As the
Security Council may recall, the forward movement in
the peace process was welcomed by the Council.
I have to report today that developments since
August have included setbacks. The Bougainville
parties have completed stage I. However, stage II
containment has been completed in only half of the
districts on the island. The number of new weapons
collected since the last briefing grew only by a little
more than 100, reaching a total of 1,684. More
worrying still, seven containers were opened and 212
weapons removed from them. I shall say more about
this later. The momentum for weapons disposal has
definitely slowed down, and, as a result, the entire
peace process has come under some strain.
It may be helpful if I give our assessment of what
lies behind these developments. I would also like to
inform the Council of what steps are being taken to
address the difficulties that have arisen.
The setbacks in weapons containment can be
explained essentially by two factors. The first lies in
well-intended efforts to address the impatience of many
ex-combatants, who are frustrated with the slow pace
of their reintegration and rehabilitation. Two funds
were created to assist the ex-combatants, one by the
national Government and one by a bilateral donor.
Problems related to disbursement from these funds and
the erroneous perception that ex-combatants would
now, in effect, be paid for turning in their weapons has
led some of them to refuse to participate in the
weapons-disposal process. Other broke into containers
and retrieved their weapons.
The second factor has been a deliberate campaign
of falsification and misrepresentation regarding the
nature of the peace process by the followers of Francis
Ona, the main Bougainvillian leader remaining outside
of the peace process. Some people calling themselves
Ona’s affiliates or supporters have also broken into
containers and stolen weapons, claiming that they were
acting on his orders.
Discouraging as these developments are, I am
pleased to report that, to the great credit of the excombatant leaders, they have responded with vigour to
these challenges. A Peace Process Consultative
Committee meeting was held in Arawa on 30 October.
The meeting, chaired, as usual, by the United Nations
mission — the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville (UNPOB) — adopted a number of

S/PV.4647

decisions designed to make containers more secure, to
foster more positive attitudes to weapons containment,
and to place weapons collection back on track.
Decisions were also taken to address problems related
to usage of the two funds mentioned earlier. We were
encouraged by the decision of former combatants to
complete stage II containment by 24 December,
declaring this to be a Christmas present for
Bougainville.
As a follow-up to the Peace Process Consultative
Committee and the decision on the new deadline for
stage II containment, the two Bougainville faction
leaders convened an extraordinary session in Arawa at
the beginning of November. Participation extended
beyond the usual Peace Process Consultative
Committee membership to include unit, platoon and
company commanders, as well as the provincial
Administration. At this session, the participants
received a briefing on all aspects of the Peace
Agreement, examined issues which were impeding
weapons collection and took corresponding actions.
The session adopted a joint ex-combatants resolution
that, among other things, called for their political
leadership to enter into dialogue with the Me’ekamui
Defence Force of Francis Ona. Following the Peace
Process Consultative Committee meeting and the
subsequent extraordinary session, the ex-combatants
initiated direct contact with the military commander of
Francis Ona.
The ex-combatants also adopted a detailed
calendar of activities to be completed throughout the
island leading up to 24 December, when the close of
stage II containment should be declared. It is
understood that the Alpha Company, the core of the
Me’ekamui Defence Force, which has reaffirmed its
commitment to work along with the other districts in
weapons disposal, could take a bit longer to reach stage
II. UNPOB is expected to witness the signing of the
declarations that individual districts will make
confirming that they have completed stage II.
Meanwhile, beginning in September, UNPOB
held a series of meetings throughout the island with the
chiefs, with churches and with women’s groups. The
purpose of those encounters was to mobilize and
engage these important groups in order to promote
maximum community participation in the weaponsdisposal process.

In all of its activities relating to weapons
collection, UNPOB has enjoyed a close and fruitful
working relationship with the Peace Monitoring Group.
The Peace Monitoring Group has provided valuable
logistical support to the collection of weapons and their
storage. It has also served as a reliable link among the
various communities of the island. Thanks to its islandwide patrols, the Monitoring Group brings to UNPOB’s
attention particular issues requiring our joint
intervention. In addition, the Group facilitates the
settling of many cases on its own. We very much look
forward to continued fruitful cooperation with the
Peace Monitoring Group.
I might say a word about the Bougainville
Constitutional Commission. The Commission has been
consulting with the people of the various districts of
the island to ascertain their views on what should be
the content of the Bougainville constitution. The
Commission is expected to produce the first draft
constitution by 1 January 2003. Following that,
consultations will be held with the Bougainville
interim provincial government, the Bougainville
People’s Congress and, of course, the national
Government. The target date for the completion of the
final draft constitution and for a report on it is the end
of January 2003.
The draft constitution will then be considered by
the Constituent Assembly, which is expected to be
established by February 2003 and to complete its work
by March 2003. However, the actual start of its work
will, among other things, depend on the verification by
UNPOB of the satisfactory completion of stage II of
weapons containment.
A word about the challenges ahead: I ought to
point out that little more than four weeks remain before
the 24 December deadline set for the completion of
stage II of the Bougainville Peace Agreement. At the
last Peace Process Consultative Committee meeting
and the follow-up session, UNPOB sent a very clear
message to the ex-combatants that the credibility of
weapons disposal and, perhaps, of the entire peace
process would be at stake if the deadline were not met.
We also re-emphasized that progress towards autonomy
depended on the completion of stage II and on its
verification.
Even if the ex-combatants were to declare that the
24 December target date had been met, UNPOB would
still have to verify and certify that the weapons had,

3

S/PV.4647

indeed, been committed to containers, as called for by
the plan. This process, on current form, seems most
unlikely to be completed by 31 December, especially in
view of the recent break-ins and the stealing of 212
weapons. UNPOB’s continued presence will be needed
on the island to help Bougainvilleans return those
weapons and complete stage II, including certification
by UNPOB. Stage III of the weapons disposal plan, at
which time the parties must decide on the final fate of
the weapons, is still ahead. A decision on the fate of
the weapons is to be made within four and a half
months after the coming into force of the constitutional
amendments. UNPOB is required to be available to
verify and certify whether there has been substantial
compliance by the parties in the handing in of weapons
and whether the level of security of the weapons
creates a situation which is conducive to the holding of
elections. Assuming, therefore, that the December
target date is respected, UNPOB needs to have a
reasonable amount of time to verify and to certify stage
II containment.
Finally, the Peace Process Consultative
Committee meeting held at the end of October formally
requested that UNPOB and the Peace Monitoring
Group remain on Bougainville until after the elections
for the autonomous government have been held.
According to the current timetable, these elections
should be held before the end of June 2003. But,
naturally, the actual date will depend on the extent to
which the Bougainville Constitutional Commission and
the Constituent Assembly stick to their present
programmes of work.
In view of the critical tasks to be performed by
UNPOB in the coming year, the Secretary-General has,
as the Council knows, written to the Council
recommending the extension of UNPOB’s mandate for
a further year. We fully expect that all of the stages in
the peace process will be completed during that period.
As the Council is also aware, the Government of Papua
New Guinea has requested such an extension. Before
deciding to write to the Council, the Secretary-General
dispatched an assessment mission to Bougainville. The
mission, led by the Director of the Asia and Pacific
Division of my Department, arrived on the island in
time to attend the Peace Process Consultative
Committee meeting. The mission held wide-ranging
consultations with the Papua New Guinea Government,
the Bougainville parties and the countries participating
in the Peace Monitoring Group, all of whom confirmed

4

that the continued presence of UNPOB was essential
for the successful completion of the peace process.
Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
First, my country welcomes your return, Sir, and the
fact that you are presiding over this public meeting of
the Security Council. We congratulate China on the
political process it conducted through its Party
Congress.
My delegation wants to thank the UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Kieran
Prendergast, for the information he has just given the
Council in his briefing on developments in the situation
in Bougainville. I also wish to express my country’s
recognition of the work of the representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Noel Sinclair, head of the
United Nations Political Office in Bougainville, and of
his staff. We also recognize the work and support of
Governments that have participated in the Peace
Monitoring Group: the Governments of Australia, Fiji,
New Zealand and Vanuatu.
I also reiterate Mexico’s support for the peace
process and our wish that all the parties concerned will
continue to work for a peaceful and definitive solution
to the conflict. We also support continued cooperation
by the United Nations and the international community
as a whole with the Bougainville authorities in order to
achieve the economic and social recovery of that
country.
In that context, my country emphasizes how
important it would be for the Security Council to
appeal to donor countries to support the establishment
of the economic and social conditions and
infrastructure conducive to consolidating a peaceful
transition towards Bougainville’s political future.
My country is concerned at the delays and
obstacles to the process in Bougainville, on which Mr.
Prendergast has fully briefed us. We believe that it is
essential that this process be completed and that it
would be desirable to conclude the process within the
deadlines established for it. One crucial element for
meeting
those
deadlines
is
the
complete
implementation of the weapons disposal plan which is
under way, in the circumstances that have been
reported to us.
There are therefore a few questions that we would
like to ask Mr. Prendergast on the possible impact of
that delay. We wish to emphasize the possible impact

S/PV.4647

that a delay in weapons collection might have on the
very process of drafting the constitution and on the
establishment of the autonomous government. What
would be the consequences of a delay in the work of
the Consultative Committee and of a delay in meeting
the deadlines set for the adoption of the constitution
and the holding of elections leading to establishment of
autonomous government, taking into consideration that
elections are planned to be held, as Mr. Prendergast
recalled, by the end of June 2003? Some authorities in
Papua New Guinea, for example the Minister for InterGovernmental Affairs, have said that as of now it
seems unlikely that that date will be met. What are the
prospects in view of this likely failure to meet this
schedule, and what would be the consequences of the
above-mentioned delay on the conclusion of the work
of the United Nations Political Office in Bougainville
(UNPOB) and of the Peace Monitoring Group?
In addition, my Government wonders what might
happen if some members of the Peace Monitoring
Group were to withdraw before the scheduled dates.
Once again we thank Under-Secretary Prendergast for
the information he has given us.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank the
representative of Mexico for his kind words addressed
to me and my country.
Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French):
Welcome, again, to New York. My country would like
to hail the determination and the sense of political
responsibility of the leadership of Papua New Guinea
and also the peace efforts made, especially by
Australia, New Zealand, Fiji, the Solomon Islands and
Vanuatu, who are giving substantial assistance in the
implementation of the ceasefire agreement and are
helping to assure political stability in Bougainville.
Considerable progress has been achieved in the
implementation of the Peace Agreement signed on 30
August 2001, and this should be welcomed. The Peace
Agreement constitutes indisputable success for the
people of Bougainville, as well as for Papua New
Guinea, which has clearly shown its good will in
settling the conflict in a peaceful and democratic
manner.
Bulgaria also welcomes the adoption of the
legislative acts for the implementation of the Peace
Agreement, especially the amendments to the
constitution and basic law regarding peace talks in
Bougainville. While we note with satisfaction the

progress achieved for the implementation of the
weapons disposal plan, my delegation is still concerned
over information given us by Sir Kieran regarding
some difficulties in the process, which is, however,
essential for organizing elections in order to set up an
autonomous Bougainville government. These are
important safeguards for the holding of a referendum
on the future of Bougainville.
Bulgaria supports the joint efforts of the United
Nations Political Office in Bougainville (UNPOB) and
the Peace Monitoring Group, as well as the efforts of
the parties to find clear-cut criteria for implementing
stage II of the weapons disposal plan.
Finally, Bulgaria welcomes the intention of the
Secretary-General to extend the mandate of the office
for a one-year period. This will enable us to ensure the
implementation of stage II of the weapons disposal
plan, organize elections for an autonomous
Bougainville government, and complete the peace
process.
Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): Like other delegations,
let me thank you, Sir, for convening this open meeting
today on Bougainville. I also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Sir Kieran Prendergast, for his useful and
comprehensive briefing on developments in the
Bougainville peace process.
We commend the authorities and the people of
Bougainville for their continuing commitment to
implement the Bougainville Peace Agreement.
Bougainville is yet another concrete example where the
Security Council and the international community, and
especially the neighbouring countries, are playing a
significant role in taking the peace process forward.
We take particular note of the progress towards
achievement of the goals set in the Peace Agreement,
signed at Arawa on 30 August 2001. We are happy to
learn that agreements have now been concluded on the
issue of a referendum to determine the eventual
political future of Bougainville, within the framework
of the constitution of Papua New Guinea.
We share the view that the peace process is on the
right track, despite some setbacks. The Bougainville
Peace Agreement is indeed a major watershed in the
political history of Bougainville and Papua New
Guinea.
My delegation wishes to express its appreciation
and support to the United Nations Political Office in

5

S/PV.4647

Bougainville (UNPOB) which, despite its small size,
has done a remarkable job in actively coordinating,
implementing and carrying out the agreed weapons
disposal plan. We are happy to note that, despite
practical difficulties, UNPOB has successfully carried
out the stage I process in the weapons disposal plan.
We are, however, concerned about the information Sir
Kieran has just given us on the growing number of
incidents in which trunks and containers have been
forced open and guns removed. These incidents would
negatively impact on the good work performed by
UNPOB and the Peace Monitoring Group and can risk
derailing the whole process, thereby hampering the
completion of stage II. We commend, however, the
initiatives undertaken by the senior commanders, both
from the Bougainville Revolutionary Army and the
Bougainville Resistance Forces, in investigating,
advising and encouraging the offenders to return these
weapons. We hope those responsible will do so in the
interest of peace and stability.
The progress in weapons disposal is inextricably
linked to the establishment of the autonomous
Bougainville government by the legal device which
makes the provision on autonomy and referendum in
the new part XIV of the national constitution
conditional upon verification and certification by
UNPOB that stage II of the agreed weapons disposal
plan has been achieved. It is therefore extremely
important for everyone to ensure the completion of the
weapons disposal plan. We are pleased to note that a
total of 1,684 guns have so far been disposed of,
including 301 high-powered factory made weapons. We
urge the people of Bougainville to strictly respect the
provisions of the Plan and put aside political and other
differences in the spirit of community building.
As in any peace process, reconciliation and the
reintegration of ex-combatants remain absolute
priorities to ensure long term and sustainable peace.
The early reintegration of former combatants and their
engagement into gainful employment should therefore
be addressed urgently. We appreciate the setting up of
the Bougainville Ex-Combatants Trust Fund account,
established under AusAID. We encourage the donor
communities to inject more funds into this programme
for its effective implementation.
The peace-building process in Bougainville
cannot be realizable without heavy investment in the
reconstruction of the infrastructure and the restoration
of civil authority. My delegation recognizes and

6

welcomes the desire of the Bougainville people to
participate actively in the rebuilding of their province.
It is therefore important that priority be given to health,
education, agriculture and basic infrastructure. No
peace dividend would be possible without progress in
these fields. We appeal to the international community
to provide assistance in this regard.
My delegation notes with satisfaction that there
has been significant progress, even though the initial
timetable has not been respected due to circumstances
not attributable to the responsibility of the parties in
the implementation of the Bougainville Peace
Agreement. We strongly believe that the Security
Council must continue to remain fully engaged in the
process and we therefore support the request of the
Government of Papua New Guinea, as well as the
decision of the Secretary-General, to extend the
mandate of the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville, which expires on 31 December 2002, for
a further 12-month period.
Mr. Kolby (Norway): First, I would also like to
thank Sir Kieran for his briefing on recent
developments in the Bougainville peace process. In
spite of recent setbacks and challenges that need to be
addressed, the overall impression is that the process
continues on the right track and that it has now reached
its final stages.
We are pleased to note that the United Nations,
through the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville (UNPOB), is maintaining its vital role in
promoting peace and stability on the island. In addition
to overseeing implementation of the weapons disposal
plan, UNPOB and the Peace Monitoring Group are
instrumental in terms of encouraging mutual trust and
confidence between the parties.
My delegation takes the view that sustained
peace-building efforts are crucial in any comprehensive
strategy aimed at achieving durable peace. The scope
of peace-building activities currently being undertaken
by different actors in Bougainville covers a variety of
initiatives, from reconciliation of former enemies to
reintegration of ex-combatants and the promotion of
development and economic recovery. However, the
successful implementation of those initiatives depends,
to a large extent, on the agreed weapons disposal plan
being fully implemented. Moreover, only through an
appropriate arrangement as to the final fate of the
weapons will there be conditions conducive to the

S/PV.4647

effective implementation of autonomy and the
provisions for a referendum in the Agreement, and for
the autonomous Bougainville Government to be
established.
As a means of promoting those goals and
safeguarding the investments already made in
Bougainville, my delegation supports the extension of
UNPOB’s mandate until the end of 2003. That will
allow the United Nations Office to oversee the
implementation of the pending components of the
Peace Agreement, and thereby to contribute to the final
sealing of the peace process.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
encourage the Government of Papua New Guinea and
its Bougainville counterparts to remain committed to
the peace process and to do their utmost to keep it on
track through its last stage. Particular emphasis should
be placed on overcoming current obstacles to effective
weapons disposal relating, inter alia, to logistics,
communications and mobilization.
Finally, all parties need to engage in long-term
planning in order to promote peaceful coexistence,
thereby making the current process more selfsustaining.
Bougainville is not a major item on the agenda of
the Security Council. It is, nevertheless, a vivid
example of the constructive role the United Nations
can play in a comprehensive peace-building strategy,
even with relatively small resources. Allow me
therefore to end by paying tribute to UNPOB for the
very good work the Office is undertaking, and to the
members of the Peace Monitoring Group for their
valuable support for United Nations efforts in
Bougainville.
Mr. Williamson (United States of America):
Following Papua New Guinea’s independence in 1975,
large segments of the population on the island of
Bougainville continued to feel separate from Port
Moresby owing to historical, cultural and ethnic
concerns. The development of the copper mine in the
1980s became a complicating factor. In 1989 fighting
broke out, and during the 1990s bitter separatist
fighting took place on the island of Bougainville that
claimed thousands of lives.
In 1998, after nearly a decade of conflict and with
nearly 10,000 dead by some accounts, the parties
admirably chose to resolve their differences through

negotiation. Since its creation, in 1998, the United
Nations Political Office in Bougainville (UNPOB) has
played a valuable role in facilitating the return of
stability to the island. The Bougainville Peace
Agreement successfully ended the fighting, preserved
the peace that began four years ago, and put the island
on track to autonomy and a referendum on
independence.
The key remaining task for UNPOB is to reduce
the risk of re-incitement of violence by collecting,
storing and disposing of weapons on the island. The
Bougainville Peace Agreement envisioned that
UNPOB would complete its work around the middle,
and not later, than the end of 2002. A year ago, when
the Security Council discussed a similar request for a
12-month extension of UNPOB’s mandate, we were
informed by UNPOB’s Director, Ambassador Noel
Sinclair, that the mission was expected to conclude
“not later than the end of 2002”. We believe goals need
to be set based on accurate projections and, once they
are set, everything possible should be done to try to
achieve them.
The Council is now being asked to endorse an
additional year beyond that target end-date. We
understand that the reasons that have been cited for the
delay include a loss of momentum in the peace process
owing to national elections in Papua New Guinea, an
incident of looting of some of the arms collected and
containerized as part of the arms disposal process and
occasional inclement weather, which has kept
UNPOB’s helicopter grounded. Frankly, we do not find
this to be a particularly compelling case for another 12month extension.
We note that progress towards greater autonomy
and a referendum cannot be made until UNPOB has
certified the completion of stage II of the arms disposal
process, namely, the containerization of all collected
arms. We applaud the good work that UNPOB has done
in facilitating the collection and storage of over 1,500
weapons so far this year. At the same time, we would
like to see a clearer and more measured indication from
the Secretariat of the end-game for weapons disposal
and the exit strategy for the UNPOB mission as a
whole. We wonder, for example, how many weapons
are there left to collect; what UNPOB’s plan is, on a
weekly basis, to achieve the collection and disposal of
all remaining weapons; and how UNPOB will draw
down its presence as the end of the mission
approaches.

7

S/PV.4647

Again, the United States supports the peace
process. We applaud the sincere efforts by the leaders
on all sides of this conflict to resolve their differences
through a peaceful process. We appreciate the efforts of
UNPOB to contribute to the successful, peaceful
completion of this process.

The second factor is the important role played by
the United Nations Political Office in Bougainville
(UNPOB) and the Peace Monitoring Group in their
efforts to facilitate the implementation of the Peace
Agreement. This role merits our appreciation and
support.

This
morning
Under-Secretary-General
Prendergast noted other considerations that may justify
a year-long extension of UNPOB, matters that warrant
our consideration and review. We note that UNPOB’s
mandate does not expire until December 31, and
suggest that the Security Council meet at a later date,
perhaps early next month, to consider this issue further.
The United States preliminary view is that a six-month
extension of UNPOB’s mandate is adequate. In the
coming days, we would hope to get answers to the
questions raised, and to better understand the other
considerations raised this morning.

In view of the role played by UNPOB at this
critical stage, and because of its active involvement in
coordinating the implementation and consolidation of
the responsibilities agreed upon — especially as the
weapons disposal plan is reaching its second stage, to
be completed on 24 December 2002 — Syria strongly
supports the request of the Papua New Guinea
Government that UNPOB’s mandate be extended for a
further 12 months, until the end of 2003.

Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, allow me to express our
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for convening this
important meeting on the situation in Bougainville,
Papua New Guinea. I would also like to express our
gratitude to Sir Kieran Prendergast, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, for his briefing this
morning on the evolution of the peace process in
Bougainville and on the role played by the United
Nations in that regard. We also welcome among us the
new Permanent Representative of Papua New Guinea,
who will later shed more light on the peace process.
Undoubtedly, over a year after the signing of the
Bougainville Peace Agreement, that territory has begun
to move slowly towards building genuine peace, as
envisioned in the Agreement of 30 August 2001, which
was based on the three pillars of autonomy, referendum
and weapons disposal. All of these tracks are
intertwined. In this respect, we must recognize the
great impact of two factors for success in the
Bougainville peace process.
The first factor is the sincere efforts made by the
Government of Papua New Guinea and its commitment
to pursue the peace process. We must also acknowledge
its achievements in completing all constitutional and
legal measures in order to give the Bougainville Peace
Agreement its legal status within the constitution of
Papua New Guinea. This is a commendable
achievement, and it should be supported.

8

The information given to us this morning on the
peace process in Bougainville, the note from the
Government of Papua New Guinea dated 26 August
2002, the ministerial statement by that country’s InterGovernment Relations Minister before the Parliament,
and the last memorandum of 20 November, which we
just received, all clearly show the progress made
towards restoring normalcy in Bougainville. This is the
prevailing situation, despite some references to
challenges, mainly by some parties such as Francis Ona
outside the peace process, on the one hand, and the
rehabilitation and development of the infrastructure,
provision of services and attainment of economic
development, on the other. In this regard, we think it is
essential that international assistance by the donor
States be continued and that the international
community continue to fulfill its obligations.
In conclusion, we call for the redoubling of peace
and rehabilitation efforts in Bougainville. We think that
UNPOB still has contributions to make in the postconflict phase, and therefore we feel that the 12-month
extension is justified and should be supported. Thus,
we must support and maintain UNPOB’s work until the
completion of its mandate.
Mr. How (Singapore): Like previous speakers, I
thank Under-Secretary-General Sir Kieran for his
briefing.
We commend the United Nations Political Office
in Bougainville (UNPOB) for the role it has played and
continues to play in Bougainville. Ambassador Sinclair
and his small team have not only helped to make
possible a significant level of stability and security in
Bougainville, but also have slowly but gradually

S/PV.4647

moved the conflict towards resolution. We also applaud
the unwavering support and assistance extended by
Papua New Guinea’s neighbours towards this end.
Since the signing of the Peace Agreement in
August 2001, the Papua New Guinea Government has
demonstrated its commitment to the Agreement in very
concrete ways. For example, it has delivered on its
undertaking to make the necessary constitutional
amendments to enshrine its agreements with the
Bougainville parties, clearing the way for subsequent
steps of the Peace Agreement to proceed. The
Government is also working closely with UNPOB and
other parties in the Peace Process Consultative
Committee (PPCC) to implement the Agreement on the
ground.
We are also heartened by the ministerial
statement delivered by Papua New Guinea’s Minister
for Inter-Government Relations, Sir Peter Barter, two
days ago. From his statement to the National
Parliament of Papua New Guinea, it is clear not only
that the Government is fully committed to the
Bougainville Peace Agreement, but that it has a good
appreciation of the obstacles in the way and of what
needs to be done to overcome them. There can be no
doubt that the Papua New Guinea Government
deserves the continued support of the international
community as it strives to implement the Agreement.
The Bougainville file has for some time now been
a source of encouragement for Council members. This
is because it reminds us that our efforts in this Council
can, and often do, produce the desired results. It is all
the more gratifying if we note the small outlay
involved. UNPOB costs around $2 million per annum,
not much more than what many other United Nations
missions spend in a day. This is a very small price to
pay to help the Government of Papua New Guinea
resolve the Bougainville conflict and to bring peace,
and with it the hope of a brighter future to some
180,000 people on the island.
This morning we heard that the implementation
of stage II of the weapons disposal plan has been
slower than expected. We should not be overly
concerned about this, as long as it remains clear to us
that all parties remain committed and that the delay
does not threaten the peace process.
It is important that we not insist on fitting the
implementation of the weapons disposal plan and the
peace process as a whole to too rigid a time frame. An

approach taking into consideration the problems on the
ground, as well as local sensitivities and practices, is
likely to serve us better. We therefore endorse the
Secretary-General’s intention to extend UNPOB’s
mandate by one year, to December 2003, to
accommodate delays encountered during stage II of the
weapons disposal plan.
Finally, it is not sufficient that peace be restored
to Bougainville. For this peace to be sustainable, an
effective administration and a viable local economy
must be in place. Relevant United Nations agencies
should therefore closely coordinate their efforts in
Bougainville with donor countries in order to achieve
peace and consolidate the peace.
Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation)(spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation attaches great
significance to the Bougainville Peace Agreement of
30 August 2001, which is a basis for the peace process
in that country. We call upon all the parties to
undertake timely and full implementation of the tasks
set forth in the Agreement to establish autonomy, to
conduct a referendum and to carry out steps for the
collection and destruction of weapons.
A most important condition for progress in the
peace process is a demonstration by the parties of
political will and the desire to achieve a speedy
solution to basic problems in the settlement of the
conflict.
We highly value the efforts of the United Nations
Political Office in Bougainville (UNPOB) and the
activities of its head, Ambassador Sinclair, as well as
the Military Observer Group, to promote the
implementation of the Bougainville Peace Agreement.
We note the effectiveness of the work of UNPOB,
which, over a short period of time and with limited
resources, has been able to achieve significant results.
The delay in the implementation of the weapons
collection and destruction plan in Bougainville is a
cause for concern. We hope that all the parties, with the
active support of the Government of Papua New
Guinea, will intensify their efforts to eliminate
weapons in the communities of Bougainville. Success
in that area will have a decisive impact on progress in
the post-conflict rehabilitation and peace-building
processes in Bougainville and can help to establish
favourable
conditions
for
the
international
community’s provision of necessary economic
assistance to tens of thousands of Bougainvilleans.

9

S/PV.4647

Russia supports the positive efforts being
undertaken to achieve a final settlement of the conflict
in Bougainville, and it is prepared to contribute to
future progress in that process.
Mr. Traoré (Guinea) (spoke in French): I should
like to join previous speakers in thanking you, Mr.
President, for having organized this public meeting on
Bougainville. I should also like to express my
delegation’s appreciation to Sir Kieran Prendergast for
his very useful briefing.
The Bougainville Peace Agreement, signed on 30
August 2001, emphasized three fundamental elements:
autonomy, the holding of a referendum and a plan to
eliminate arms in circulation. Since then, the Council
has consistently encouraged the parties to implement
those components in order to reach a final settlement of
their dispute.
My delegation notes that, beyond several
problems related to the collection of weapons and to
the demobilization of combatants, the implementation
of the Bougainville Peace Agreement is proceeding
normally. The achievements already attained have been
made possible not only by the goodwill shown by the
parties, but also by the important support provided by
the United Nations Political Office in Bougainville
(UNPOB) and by the Peace Monitoring Group.
Here, we should like to thank all the countries
and the institutions that are so involved in the
implementation of the Bougainville Peace Agreement.
Thanks to those joint efforts, we can take a positive
view of the actions undertaken to promote national
reconciliation, the restoration of State authority and the
reconstruction and economic development of the
country.
While we encourage the various actors to
redouble their efforts, my delegation would like to
stress the need to accelerate the operations to collect,
store and destroy weapons. In fact, we remain
convinced that that is one of the essential conditions
for restoring peace and fostering post-conflict recovery
with the international community’s kind support. In
order to do that, the public awareness policy should be
pursued with greater energy. Moreover, my delegation
would like to urge the parties to continue their efforts
to establish a genuine national reconciliation policy
and an autonomous government in Bougainville.

I cannot conclude without expressing my
delegation’s support for the Secretary-General’s
proposal to extend UNPOB’S mandate for another 12month period, beginning in 1 January 2003. We remain
confident that that will greatly benefit the completion
of the peace process undertaken in Papua New Guinea,
which will be another success to the credit of the
United Nations.
Mr. Corr (Ireland): First of all, I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for arranging today’s open meeting.
It is especially important to hear the views of the
countries in the region and to thank them for their
engagement and cooperation in the peace process. Like
previous speakers, I also wish to thank UnderSecretary-General Prendergast for his comprehensive
briefing on the peace process in Bougainville.
Ireland strongly supports the recommendation of
the Secretary-General and the request of the
Government of Papua New Guinea that the mandate of
the United Nations Political Office in Bougainville
(UNPOB) be extended for another 12 months. Prime
Minister Somare said earlier this month that promising
peace is no longer enough; we must help people realize
the practical potential of peace. The Prime Minister
reaffirmed that the peace process remains a national
priority. My delegation warmly welcomes that
commitment.
The meeting of the Peace Process Consultative
Committee, held in Arawa on 30 October, agreed on a
new target date of 24 December for completion of
stage II of the agreed weapons disposal plan. It is now
important that all sides make rapid progress towards
meeting that goal, given a recent lack of momentum in
the weapons disposal process, as we heard from Sir
Kieran Prendergast this morning.
In that area, of course, UNPOB has a critical role
to play, since its verification and certification roles
become the trigger for implementation of agreed
arrangements for autonomy and for the guarantee of a
referendum among Bougainvilleans on Bougainville’s
political future. There is now a good prospect that stage
III of weapons disposal — a decision on the final phase
of the weapons, which would see most, if not all, of
them destroyed — can be completed by the middle of
2003, thus allowing for elections for an autonomous
government in Bougainville.
It remains essential that the United Nations
maintain its full support and engagement with regard to

10

S/PV.4647

the process now well under way. Much progress has
already been achieved, including on the amnesty and
pardons issue. The Bougainville Constitutional
Commission has been at work consulting the people of
Bougainville, and it will soon begin to draft the
Bougainville Constitution. All of that progress must
continue.
The United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville is extremely modest in terms of resources
and personnel, as the representative of Singapore
pointed out. Under the leadership of Ambassador
Sinclair, it has done an excellent job in meeting its
goals and in working to build peace and to advance
agreed objectives, especially with regard to weapons
disposal. There will always be some moves backward
and forward in such an interlinked political and
disarmament process; what is important is to maintain
clarity of focus on the task ahead. UNPOB does that
admirably.
UNPOB’s finishing its work is something that
matters to the people of Bougainville, of Papua New
Guinea and of the region. At small financial cost but
with great gains for peace, UNPOB remains critical to
the completion of the process. We should therefore
focus, not on rigid time frames, but on benchmarks in
how it completes that work, and by that standard it is
doing very well. Today, it is also right to express
particular appreciation to the Peace Monitoring Group
countries — Australia, Fiji, New Zealand and
Vanuatu — for their crucial contribution to and work in
the process.
The year ahead will be an active one for United
Nations engagement in Bougainville. Stages II and III
of the weapons disposal process and the critical
determination that the United Nations must make in
certifying that the process is complete will be major
challenges. The pre-election period will also be a time
when sound judgement and advice will be called for. In
addition, as Ambassador Koonjul and others have
pointed out this morning, the extremely bleak
economic situation of Bougainville is a factor of which
the international community, including the United
Nations agencies, will have to take substantial account
in the year ahead. What is important now is to maintain
our full support for the peace process and to allow
UNPOB to finish its work.
Mrs. d’Achon (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to thank you, Mr. President, for

having organized this meeting, and to thank Sir Kieran
Prendergast for his very useful briefing.
It is clear from Sir Kieran’s briefing that, after the
encouraging progress in the first half of this year, the
peace process in Bougainville has recently experienced
delays and difficulties. We see three reasons for this.
First of all, delays in the weapons collection plan could
delay the peace process as a whole. Completion of
stage II was scheduled for September and that has been
extended to 24 December. Secondly, there is the
fragility of the mechanisms for compensation and
reintegration, which has led to some frustration. The
Governments of Papua New Guinea and Australia have
promised sizeable sums for the parties and this is an
element that is vital to the success of the process. We
hope that these amounts will soon be able to be used in
a balanced way for disarmament, compensation and
also development purposes.
Thirdly, there have been weapons stolen for
compensation purposes. This causes delay in the arms
collection. We share the analysis of the Secretariat that
this is not a sign that the fighting will resume, but
rather a sign of a wish to obtain funds and that wish
should not be encouraged.
The period that lies ahead will be decisive. The
deadline of 24 December for weapons collection is a
date that must be respected if we are not to see the
peace process endangered and the two other sectors at
an impasse. In this respect, Sir Kieran mentioned the
prospect of elections in the second half of 2003 and I
would like to take up a question that was raised by the
Ambassador of Mexico in this regard. In Sir Kieran’s
opinion, will the time periods be met for stage III and
what could the Political Office do so that the elections
can be held as scheduled?
There are other elements besides the peace
process. Prospects have improved somewhat with the
establishment of a weapons collections system by the
Alpha Company based on the Bougainville Agreement.
But many problems remain. As many delegations have
said, there is the refusal of Francis Ona to come back
into the peace process.
And lastly, and here again I am repeating what
other speakers have said before me, the economic
situation is still serious on the island and this could
jeopardize the prospects for lasting peace. The
mobilization of the international community remains
more necessary than ever. It is in this context that the

11

S/PV.4647

Security Council must consider the question of
mandate renewal for the Political Office.
The French delegation feels that two elements
need to be taken into account. First, the Political Office
is playing a major role in the peace process. Given the
important deadlines coming up in the first half of 2003,
it seems hard to imagine that the United Nations
Political Office in Bougainville should not be present
at that time. On the other hand, we do not want to
encourage extensive delays in the process. The
mandate was to come to an end at the end of 2002,
according to the original agreement, so we would like
to see the extension of the mandate accompanied by
important progress to make up for the delays.
Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): May
I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this public
meeting on Bougainville. I would also like to thank Sir
Kieran Prendergast for his very informative briefing,
especially on the issue of Bougainville. During the
briefing of the Council of 29 August, we welcomed the
progress achieved. Similarly, in his report on the work
of the Organization to the current General Assembly,
the Secretary-General emphasized the progress
achieved in the implementation of the Bougainville
Peace Agreement signed on 30 August 2001, as well as
the essential role played by the United Nations
Political Office in Bougainville (UNPOB) in the
destruction of collected weapons. This was an
operation in which a well-informed population
cooperated fully. Since then, there have been some
setbacks and Sir Kieran has given us some information
on the difficulties which, in the view of my delegation,
should not at all discourage the efforts under way,
given the importance of the approaching deadlines in
this operation, especially the elections in June 2003.
The decision of the former combatants to
conclude the operation by December and the agreement
to cooperate on the part of Mee’ Kamui in the
elimination of weapons are encouraging and hopeful.
At this stage, I would like to say how much my
delegation appreciates the quality and effectiveness of
the cooperation between UNPOB and the members of
the Pacific Islands Forum, who are neighbours and who
have been providing contingents for the Peace
Monitoring Group for the implementation of the truce
and the Bougainville Peace Agreement.
We see this as a significant illustration of positive
interaction between the United Nations and regional

12

organizations, something we most earnestly desire.
Success is, of course, partial, although we welcome it.
It is the result both of the determination of the parties
to settle their disputes peacefully and also of the
intervention of the international community, especially
the United Nations and the Pacific Islands Forum group
of States. I agree with the United States delegation that
we need a road map to enable us to have an overall
view of efforts that are still needed to achieve the final
objectives of the process under way.
This momentum towards peace should be
sustained and supported. This is why Cameroon will
give its full support to the extension of the mandate of
UNPOB, whose essential role is recognized by all
parties. Similarly, Cameroon agrees with the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal to extend UNPOB’s mandate by 12
months.
My delegation would also like to thank the donor
community for their valuable financial contributions,
as well as the relevant activities undertaken by nongovernmental
organizations
in
achieving
the
Bougainville process and in the many areas of
reconstruction. We would encourage them to continue
with their efforts and to strengthen their joint
participation in this lofty common endeavour for the
dawning of peace and sustainable development that
will no doubt benefit the entire region.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the support
of my delegation to UNPOB and all of its staff and
reiterate our encouragement of their tireless efforts.
Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
want first of all to thank Sir Kieran Prendergast for the
valuable information he has given us and for the data
sheet circulated. This is undoubtedly a very useful tool
to keep this Council up-to-date.
On several occasions, we have received first-hand
information from the head of the United Nations
Political Office in Bougainville (UNPOB) on the
progress in the peace process in Bougainville. In
December of last year we received good news about
the Peace Agreement that was signed in Arawa in
August 2001 and the three components of the
Agreement: autonomy, the referendum and the
weapons collection programme. On that occasion, the
members of the Security Council welcomed the signing
of that Agreement.

S/PV.4647

Adoption by parliament on 27 March in a second
round of the constitutional reforms needed for the
adoption of the peace agreement was an important step
and was highlighted as such by the Security Council. In
this regard, we must recognize the positive role that
UNPOB has played under Ambassador Noel Sinclair.
Members of the Security Council, including our own
delegation, have underscored the importance of the
prompt and effective implementation of the weapons
collection plan. Nonetheless, as has rightly been
mentioned, the weapons disposal plan has been
stagnating, and all indications are that it will be
difficult to complete that process within the new time
frame. The account given by Sir Kieran Prendergast in
his briefing would seem to bear that out, as the
impatience of former combatants and the campaign to
discredit the process seem inauspicious in that respect.
Another matter of concern — this, too, was
mentioned in earlier statements — is the economic
situation in Bougainville, as well as in Papua New
Guinea in general. With regard to the economic
situation in Bougainville, it has been said that what
little there was has been destroyed by the armed
conflict. At present, there is no medium-sized or largescale industry, but merely a subsistence economy. In
the past, Ambassador Sinclair has been emphatic in
saying that a failure to improve the economic situation
would have a negative impact on the attitude of the
population towards the Peace Agreement and would
make it more difficult to reintegrate former
combatants.
Since the signing of the Lincoln Agreement in
January 1998, the peace process in Papua New Guinea
has been making slow but steady progress. We hope
that that trend will not be reversed now. The new
Government of Sir Michael Somare is also committed
to implementing the Agreement. The international
community must continue to support this process. In
this regard, we also want to acknowledge the work that
has been done by the members of the Peace Monitoring
Group — Australia, New Zealand, Fiji and Vanuatu.
The weapons disposal plan is of considerable
importance. Some progress has been made, but we
know that a great deal remains to be done. Under the
Arawa Agreement, UNPOB must certify that the
weapons have been collected as a precondition for the
holding of the referendum in Bougainville.

Having said this, we support the extension of the
mandate of UNPOB in terms that will ensure that a
further contribution can be made to the process.
Mr. Harrison (United Kingdom): I should like,
through you, Mr. President, to thank Sir Kieran
Prendergast for his very useful and informative
introduction to our discussion.
We start from the basis that the United Nations
operation in Bougainville has been, and is, a notable
success. My delegation would like to repeat the tributes
that we have paid in the past to Ambassador Sinclair
and his team; we believe that the United Nations
Political Office in Bougainville (UNPOB) has been not
just a success but, perhaps, a model for other
operations throughout the world. The United Nations in
this case has made a real difference to the political
problems of Bougainville.
It is important not to jeopardize that success by a
precipitate end to the United Nations contribution in
Bougainville. But equally, we believe that it is very
important for us to start thinking about a clear exit
strategy that will define what is needed in the future
from the United Nations, as well as the period over
which it is needed. In this context, we are studying
carefully the aide-memoire that the delegation of Papua
New Guinea circulated yesterday, 20 November.
The peace process is clearly still at a vulnerable
stage. I think that Sir Kieran’s phrase — he said that it
was “under some strain” — sums it up well. It is clear
that the United Nations work in Bougainville is
incomplete. It is important that the dire economic
situation in Papua New Guinea and the instability
elsewhere — for example in the southern highlands —
not put at risk the progress that has been made on
Bougainville.
It is also good news that the combatants have
agreed to work towards the deadline of 24 December,
and it is important for that deadline to be respected. We
remain concerned that weapons collection remains
some way from completion, although of course 100 per
cent elimination is probably impossible. Weapons that
have circulated to the southern highlands could just as
easily return. But we are pleased that UNPOB’s focus
is now moving towards rehabilitation, and we have
been happy to switch a contribution of 25,000 pounds,
which was surplus to requirements for weapons
collection, to rehabilitation projects instead.

13

S/PV.4647

We have noted carefully the Secretary-General’s
recommendation that UNPOB’s mandate be extended,
and we support that extension. We also note the results
of the recent assessment mission. As regards the timing
of any extension, we have an open mind at the moment.
We believe that the issue needs further discussion. But
we think that a number of important issues will need to
be taken into account in considering the timing. The
first is, of course, the need for an exit strategy, to
which I alluded earlier. The second is a point raised by
Sir Kieran Prendergast about the time that UNPOB will
need in order to verify stage II and work further on that
aspect. The third is the elections that are due in June
next year but which may, indeed, be postponed. I think
that it will be important for Council members to
consider those and all other relevant issues before
coming to a decision on the exact timing.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I should now
like to make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of China.
First of all, I should like to thank UnderSecretary-General Prendergast for his briefing. Since
the deliberations of the Security Council in August this
year, the peace process in Bougainville has, with the
cooperation of the new Government of Papua New
Guinea, been steadily moving forward, and China is
gratified by that. We hope that all sides will continue to
take a positive and flexible position and advance the
process of the eventual peaceful settlement of the
Bougainville question. All sides are comprehensively
implementing the relevant provisions of the
Bougainville Peace Agreement. On the whole,
significant progress has been achieved with regard to
weapons collection, although some problems have
cropped up in this work. Whether or not that task can
continue to be carried out smoothly will have a great
impact on the peace process.
The United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville (UNPOB) has always played an important
role in weapons collection. It has also won the trust of
all sides. At the moment, the collection work has not
been completed and the peace process is at a crucial
point. In view of this, China supports full consideration
of the request made by the parties concerned. We
support the extension of the mandate of UNPOB for
one year so that the Political Office can continue to
play its proper role in the peace process. Over a long
period, the Political Office, under the leadership of
Ambassador Sinclair, has done very effective work.

14

China wishes to express its appreciation for that and
we will, as in the past, support the efforts of the Office
in this regard.
I resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Papua New Guinea, on whom I now
call.
Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): I, like previous
speakers, would like to take this opportunity to thank
you, Mr. President, for having convened this open
meeting and for giving me the opportunity to speak on
this issue of great importance to my country. I would
also like to thank Sir Kieran Prendergast for his
briefing at this meeting, as well as each and every one
of the members for their constructive and helpful
comments.
The conflict that has plagued my country for the
past 10 years has been the preoccupation of four
consecutive Governments, which have devoted much
time and energy and many resources to it. The peace
process has, of course, been given the highest priority
and attention by all previous Governments —
especially the most recent — as well as by the current
Government under the leadership of the Prime
Minister, The Right Honourable Sir Michael Somare.
It also gives me great pleasure to inform the
Council that positive progress has been made on the
three principal fronts: peace and reconciliation; arms
disposal; and constitutional reforms — this last issue
being an unprecedented achievement, as there was no
provision or precedent appropriate to Bougainville’s
post-conflict situation within the constitutional
framework of Papua New Guinea.
The Council is well aware that under the previous
Government, the former Minister for Bougainville
Affairs, Sir Moi Avei, introduced the proposed
constitutional amendments and the Organic Law in
Parliament in January and March 2002. On that
occasion, the National Parliament of Papua New
Guinea voted overwhelmingly in support of the
proposed constitutional amendments to add part XIV to
the national Constitution and to bring into effect the
new
Organic
Law
on
Peace-Building
in
Bougainville —
Autonomous
Bougainville
Government and Bougainville Referendum. No votes
were cast against the amendments, which showed the

S/PV.4647

very high priority and utmost seriousness given to the
issue by the Government and the people of Papua New
Guinea.
The votes required two-thirds absolute majority
of the 109 members of the national Parliament. The
recorded votes were 84 and 86, respectively, with no
dissenting vote.
All parties to the Bougainville Peace Agreement
as well as regional and international friends and
agencies, including the United Nations observer
mission in Bougainville, headed by Ambassador Noel
Sinclair, are working earnestly, with unity of purpose,
to consolidate and build peace on the ground. I wish to
express our gratitude to Ambassador Noel Sinclair for
the wonderful job that he has done in helping Papua
New Guinea in this process.
I wish also to place on record our gratitude for
the regional initiative from our close friends and
neighbours, especially the Governments of Australia,
New Zealand, Fiji, Vanuatu, Solomon Islands and
Tonga, in the early stages, for their continued support
and involvement in the regional Peace Monitoring
Group on the island of Bougainville.
My Government also recognizes the involvement
of many other Governments and international
organizations and agencies that have come forward in
the provision of assistance in respect to peace-building,
reconciliation and restoration, and other sectoral
development assistance to Bougainville. These include
the Governments of Japan and of the United Kingdom;
the European Union; the United Nations Development
Programme; the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization (UNESCO); and nongovernmental organizations such as churches, the Red
Cross and Médecins Sans Frontières.
Here in New York, the efforts of many, including
those of the members of the Security Council, the
Pacific Islands Forum missions and others, in close
cooperation with the Secretary-General and the United
Nations observer mission in Bougainville, are
providing the necessary catalytic role in managing the
dialogue process between all affected parties.
I should also like to thank the Secretary-General,
all States Members of the United Nations, especially
those immediate past and present members of the
Security Council, for continuing to renew the mandate
of the United Nations Political Office in Bougainville

(UNPOB), so that it can support arms collection and
disposal.
I need not repeat the excellent exposition given
here by Sir Kieran Prendergast when he presented the
Secretary-General’s report. Suffice it to say that my
Government confirms that the first and second stages
of the arms collection are progressing well and nearing
completion. Stage III of the arms-disposal process
remains to be accomplished. We all agree that this
aspect is a very important part of the peace process.
I wish also to express my Government’s sincere
gratitude for the Council’s continued support of our
request for the mandate of the United Nations Political
Office in Bougainville to be extended. We are
appearing today once again to request the same for
another, and final, 12 months.
The proposed timetable set out in the August
2002 aide- mémoire still stands, but, as can be noted by
the Council, it has slowed somewhat due to many
factors, including those mentioned this morning by Sir
Kieran. But we believe that there are definite
milestones
outlined
in
that
aide-mémoire,
supplemented by the aide-mémoire that has been
circulated this morning, to ensure a proper exit by the
parties. Therefore, the Government of Papua New
Guinea is confident and optimistic that the issue will be
resolved by the time requested, or, hopefully earlier.
This was also aptly reaffirmed by the Prime
Minister, Sir Michael Somare, during his meeting with
the Secretary- General, Mr. Kofi Annan, in New York
on 18 October 2002.
In conclusion, we believe that this peace mission
can be a success if we all work together.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Australia. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Dauth (Australia): I wish to thank you, Sir,
for holding this open-format meeting on an issue
which, obviously enough, is of deep interest to the
countries of the Pacific Islands Forum. It is only
appropriate, surely, that the countries of our region, as
contributors to the resolution of the Bougainville
conflict, should also be involved in the Security
Council’s deliberations. We also very much appreciate
the very useful and comprehensive briefing provided
by Kieran Prendergast this morning. We want to thank

15

S/PV.4647

him and his team for the efforts they are making, in
difficult circumstances, to bring this conflict to a close.
Australia strongly supports the continued
engagement of the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville (UNPOB). We are encouraged by the
progress achieved in the Bougainville settlement
efforts. Much has been achieved; nevertheless, a good
deal remains to be done before the peace process will
be complete. The involvement of the United Nations
has been, and remains, an essential element of the
overall process, and it will be important that the United
Nations remain engaged well into 2003.
But the presence of the United Nations needs to
be genuinely catalytic; it should be a spur to the parties
to re-energize and successfully conclude, for example,
the weapons-disposal process. The parties must
understand that the presence of the United Nations and
that of the Peace Monitoring Group is of a limited
duration. Every effort should be made while they are
on the ground to accelerate progress. Under no
circumstances should their presence — comforting
though it might be — become the cause of delay or of
putting back hard decisions. The Group’s presence
cannot and should not substitute for committed
implementation by the parties of peace and weaponsdisposal measures.
In this context, the recent slowdown in weapons
disposal and the removal of weapons from containers
has been, unquestionably, a setback. It risks
undermining the confidence that the parties and the
international community have in the peace process.
That said, opportunities exist, and must be taken, to reenergize weapons-disposal efforts, especially through
UNPOB and the parties urging all ex-combatants to
conclude weapons disposal and destruction as soon as
possible in 2003. Bougainvillean ex-combatants have
identified 24 December 2002 as a target date for the
conclusion of stage II of the weapons-disposal process.
We welcome that decision.
The target may be achievable, but it will require
UNPOB, in consultation with the parties, to redouble
its efforts to speed up stage II containment efforts and
help bring about the earliest possible declaration that
this stage of the weapons-disposal process is complete.
The final fate of the weapons — stage III — is to
be decided within four and a half months of the stage II
declaration. We believe that, unless current rates of
progress are lifted substantially, UNPOB will have

16

little prospect of concluding its work until late in 2003.
UNPOB
has
monitoring
and
verification
responsibilities for contained weapons throughout stage
III. It will be important for the success and integrity of
settlement efforts that this process be advanced
expeditiously. It will be difficult for the United Nations
to depart while weapons remain in containers under its
lock and key.
The declaration by UNPOB that stage II has been
completed is the trigger for the constitutional
amendments giving force to the autonomy provisions
of the Bougainville Peace Agreement. UNPOB has
recommended a Bougainville-wide consultation
process to determine the general level of security felt in
the respective districts. That is a sensible proposal. It
would be helpful, however, if the process were
undertaken concurrently with stage II containments.
It goes without saying, of course, that the views
of the Papua New Guinea Government will also be a
factor in the acceptance by all parties of the validity of
any stage II declaration. UNPOB will need to consult
closely and early with the Government of Papua New
Guinea to ensure that its definition of “substantial
compliance” is accepted by all parties, including the
Papua New Guinea Government.
I want to conclude by underlining Australia’s
support for the Bougainville peace process and for
UNPOB, including through the Peace Monitoring
Group. It is precisely because we want to see the
process brought to a successful and durable conclusion
that we have emphasized the need for a redoubling of
efforts to make progress on weapons disposal. This will
also enable the other downstream benefits of peace, not
least, of course, economic development and autonomy,
to begin to make a real and welcome difference to what
have been the blighted lives of the people of
Bougainville for far too long.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Fiji. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and
to make his statement.
Mr. Naidu (Fiji): I thank you, Mr. President, for
giving me the opportunity to speak at this meeting on
the very important issue of the Bougainville peace
process in Papua New Guinea. I make this statement on
behalf of the members of the Pacific Islands Forum that
are Members of the United Nations, including
Australia, Kiribati, the Republic of Marshall Islands,

S/PV.4647

the Federated States of Micronesia, the Republic of
Nauru, New Zealand, Palau, Papua New Guinea,
Samoa, the Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu
and my own country, Fiji.
This issue has been on the agenda of the Security
Council since 1999 but has, of course, affected one of
our neighbouring countries, Papua New Guinea, for a
much longer time. Consecutive Governments in Papua
New Guinea have given the highest priority and
greatest attention to this issue, including the current
Government of Prime Minister The Right Honourable
Sir Michael Somare.
The Security Council is well aware that our
subregion has played a significant role in supporting
Papua New Guinea through our own regional initiative
of a Peace Monitoring Group on Bougainville. We are
all determined to see the successful conclusion of the
current peace process, which shows all positive signs
of success. As the Council is well aware, through the
efforts and resources of the Governments of Australia
and New Zealand, and ably supported by the Kingdom
of Tonga and Solomon Islands — in the early stages —
and Vanuatu and my own country, Fiji, we mounted
and have continued the regional Peace Monitoring
Group efforts.
It therefore gives me pleasure to learn from the
Secretary-General and our Papua New Guinean
colleague, Ambassador Robert Aisi, that positive
progress has been made on the three principal fronts:
peace and reconciliation, arms disposal and
constitutional reforms. It is also heartening to learn that
regional and international friends and agencies,
including the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville (UNPOV), headed by Ambassador Noel
Sinclair, are working diligently to consolidate peace.
We recognize the involvement of other
Governments and international non-governmental
organizations, organizations and agencies in providing
assistance to peace-building, reconciliation, restoration
and other sectoral development assistance to
Bougainville. They include the Governments of Japan
and the United Kingdom, the European Union, the
United Nations Development Programme, churches,
non-governmental organizations, the Red Cross and
Doctors Without Frontiers. Here in New York, the
efforts of many, including the members of the Security
Council, the Secretary-General and UNPOV, are

providing the necessary catalytic role in managing the
dialogue process among all affected parties.
Although the proposed timetable set out in the
Papua New Guinea Government’s August 2002 aidememoire has slowed somewhat, we very much hope
that stage II of the weapons disposal can be completed
as now planned, by 24 December. There is also a good
prospect that stage III of the weapons disposal can be
completed by the middle of 2003, thus paving the way
for elections for an autonomous Bougainville
government.
It must be emphasised, however, that meeting
deadlines for weapons disposal will not happen
automatically. It will require energy and the firm
commitment of all the parties and the continued active
engagement of the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville in facilitating the peace process.
While we as a subregion remain committed to
supporting the Peace Monitoring Group until the peace
process is firmly established, it is in the interest of all
of us to move forward as quickly as possible and to see
the process become increasingly autonomous as it
draws to a successful conclusion. Against that
background, the Pacific Islands Forum Group supports
the extension of the UNPOB mandate for whatever
period is required.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
New Zealand. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): Mr. President,
allow me to join the others who have expressed
appreciation to you for holding this open meeting of
the Council, and also to Sir Kieran Prendergast for the
very comprehensive and, in our view, very accurate
reflection of the situation on the ground in
Bougainville.
My delegation is, of course, associated with the
statement made by the delegation of Fiji. This is, as has
been noted, a process in which we and other members
of the region have now been involved for a number of
years. As our colleague from Papua New Guinea has
said, the process has slowed a little due to a number of
factors, but we nevertheless remain very encouraged by
the progress which has been made. More remains to be
done, but things are certainly heading very much in the
right direction. This reflects a great deal of input from

17

S/PV.4647

the Government of Papua New Guinea, assisted by
others within the region over the years.
In our own assessment, we see the peace process
now entering its final stages. We think that there is, in
fact, a reasonable prospect of a general completion of
stage II of weapons disposal by 24 December this year.
We also think that there is a good prospect that stage
III can be completed by the middle of next year, thus
paving the way for elections for an autonomous
Bougainville government.
We very much agree with the view that has been
expressed — unanimously expressed, I think — that
the Peace Monitoring Group has a vital role to play
until the peace process is firmly bedded in. We
appreciated the expressions of support from members
of the Council for an extension of the mandate of the
Peace Monitoring Group for a further 12 months. We
note this is also the period being sought by Papua New
Guinea.
We believe
this
12-month
period,
recommended by the Secretary-General and requested
by Papua New Guinea, has gained wide support within
the Council. It is, in fact, the correct and appropriate
period for an extension, and we would ask the Council
to proceed accordingly on that basis.
Thank you again, Sir, for convening this meeting.
It is a very useful opportunity for those of us from the
region to participate in what is for us a crucial debate
on a hugely important issue, not only for Papua New
Guinea, but also for the rest of us from the region.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give
the floor to Mr. Prendergast, to respond to comments
and questions raised.
Mr. Prendergast: There have been a lot of
questions and I will try to answer as many of them as I
can. First, let me say we are very grateful for the many
expressions of appreciation for the work of Noel
Sinclair and his team. I know they work in very
difficult conditions. It has been quite disruptive for
them. For example I had to ask Noel Sinclair to cancel
his participation in the meeting we had last month in
Mont Pellerin, Switzerland, of representatives and
special representatives of the Secretary-General,
because of the timetable. We may have to ask him to
cancel his Christmas leave for the same reason, and I
know he and his team work with enormous dedication.
The first question was from the Ambassador of
Mexico about the impact of the delay in certification of

18

containment of weapons, the completion of stage II. If
you would like to look at the aide memoire circulated
by the Ambassador of New Guinea yesterday, you will
find at the top of page 3, confirmation that the
operation of the provisions on autonomy, in the Papua
New Guinea constitution, and the guarantee of a
referendum among Bouganvilleans on Bougainville’s
political future, which are in part XIV of that
constitution, depend on verification and certification by
the United Nations Political Office in Bougainville
(UNPOD) that stage II of the agreed weapons disposal
plan has been achieved. Obviously the practical
implication is that weapons disposal must be completed
before the regional autonomous government can be
elected. Delay in completing the weapons disposal plan
will inevitably mean delay in holding the elections.
The Ambassador of Mexico’s second question
was about the 30 June 2003 target. I think for reasons
already explained, it is going to be difficult to meet that
deadline, but we very much hope the delay will not be
long. The Ambassador had a third question about the
consequences of withdrawal of the Peace Monitoring
Group. Our view would be that Papua New Guinea has
a clear and irreplaceable role in weapons disposal and
it would be very difficult, not impossible, but very
difficult to complete weapons disposal without them.
The Peace Monitoring Group is less centrally involved,
less relevant to other aspects of the exercise, such as
elections and the drafting of the constitution.
The second group of questions involve whether it
is right or necessary to extend UNPOB for 12 months,
when the Council was told by Ambassador Sinclair a
while ago that the exercise would be completed by the
end of 2002. Unfortunately, I think we know from
much of the business of this Council that international
affairs do not unroll in a tidy, predictable and
mechanical way. As Robert Burns said “The best laid
schemes o’ Mice an’ Men gang aft agley”. I do not
think anyone can argue that Bougainville was unique or
even unusual in this. The Council has been quite
understanding, in other conflicts, of the fact that
timetables slip. I think it would be particularly
unfortunate if the Council were not understanding in
the case of a small operation in a country which is far
from the centre of world affairs, whereas it is
understanding in the case of countries which are more
centrally situated, particularly since, as the
Ambassador of Singapore mentioned, the cost of the
operation for a whole year is very little more than the

S/PV.4647

cost of the operation of larger missions for one day. If
my memory serves me right, for example, United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) costs about $1.63
million per day. We have certainly had delays in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and not only there.
We agree very much that there needs to be an exit
strategy, there need to be benchmarks and the parties
need to be kept to their obligations, but I think we need
to recognize at the same time that progress in these
matters is not linear. I think our preoccupation should
be with the benchmarks and with pressing the parties to
keep to those benchmarks, rather than trying to set
more or less arbitrary timetables.
We would argue that the exit strategy should be
linked to the election of an autonomous government, as
indicated in the Bougainville Peace Agreement. There
are concrete plans which have been made by
Bougainvilleans themselves to complete weapons
disposal by 24 December 2002. I described the two
meetings that were held to that effect in my statement.
The Mission has concrete plans for carrying out
certification and verification of stage II once it has
been completed, and we would be happy to provide
details of that.
If I may talk you through the arguments as to
why, in our opinion, it will be necessary to have a 12month extension to complete the process, rather than
six months, I think the first point is that if the parties to
the Bougainville Peace Agreement complete stage II by
24 December 2002, certification of the completion of
that part of the weapons disposal plan could not begin
until the Alfa Company of Francis Ona reconciles with
its neighbours and contains its weapons as well. That
means all of Bougainville could only be covered by
stage II of the weapons disposal plan by March 2003.
Certification of stage II of the weapons disposal
plan would require UNPOB to consult all Bougainville
communities regarding their views and perceptions of
the Peace Process in general and of implementation of
the weapons disposal plan in particular. The objective
of those consultations will be to establish whether, at
the grassroots level, people feel safe and secure and
conditions are conducive to holding the elections for
the Bougainville autonomous government. We estimate
it could take up to three months to finish this exercise,
assuming the weather would allow the use of

helicopters. We are in an environment where there is
very little infrastructure, particularly transport
infrastructure and therefore we are heavily dependent
on use of the helicopter to get around Bougainville.
On that timetable, by say May or June 2003, the
certification should be submitted to the Papua New
Guinea Government and then preparations could begin
for holding the elections for an autonomous
Bougainville government.
I think we would argue — and I have done so
already — that the withdrawal of UNPOB should be
tied to the election of a Bougainville autonomous
government. As we see it today, that seems likely to
take place only in the second half of 2003. Past United
Nations experience in other areas shows that the
mission should stay for a little while after the election,
as a confidence-building measure, prior to its
disengagement. If we take all of that as a whole, we
would conclude that, with good luck and some
determination and effort, the peace process ought to
become irreversible by the end of next year, which
would trigger the withdrawal of UNPOB.
I do not want to give the Council too many
British maxims, but there is another one about not
spoiling the ship for a ha’p’orth of tar. We have come a
long way, and I think it is worthwhile seeing this
process through to the end. In the time that I have been
working in the Secretariat, one has seen instances
where the Council has not stayed the course; and we
are having to live with the consequences of that. I am
thinking, for example, of the Central African Republic,
where there is a very wide perception that
peacekeepers were put in reluctantly and withdrawn
prematurely — meaning therefore that we more or less
guaranteed the failure of the post-conflict period. I
think it would be a great pity to do that in
Bougainville, when we are talking about an operation
that costs about $2 million for a whole year.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Mr.
Prendergast for the clarifications and answers he has
provided.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m.

19
