A /76/PV.78

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-sixth session

78

th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 8 June 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shahid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Maldives)

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 36
Protracted conflicts in the GUAM area and their
implications for international peace, security and
development
Report of the Secretary-General (A/76/828)
Draft resolution (A/76/L.62)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia to introduce draft resolution
A/76/L.62.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): It is my honour to introduce
draft resolution A/76/L.62, entitled “Status of internally
displaced persons and refugees from Abkhazia,
Georgia, and the Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia,
Georgia”, sponsored by Albania, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Costa Rica, Colombia, Croatia, the Czech
Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mexico, Micronesia, Monaco, Montenegro, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway,
Papua New Guinea, Poland, Portugal, the Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Trinidad and Tobago, Tonga,
Türkiye, Tuvalu, Ukraine, the United Kingdom, the
United States of America and Vanuatu.

The draft resolution before the General Assembly
addresses the humanitarian plight of hundreds of
thousands of internally displaced persons (IDPs) and
refugees of different ethnic backgrounds expelled from
Georgia’s Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions as a result
of multiple waves of ethnic cleansing, starting in 1993
and culminating with the full-scale aggression launched
against Georgia in 2008.
The Assembly’s consideration of this issue under
agenda item 36, entitled “Protracted conflicts in the
GUAM area and their implications for international
peace, security and development”, is particularly
pertinent. I daresay the aggression against Georgia in
2008, in blatant violation of the Charter of the United
Nations and what our Organization stands for — the
principles of the non-use or threat of use of force, the
inviolability of internationally recognized borders and
the sovereign equality of the Member States — went
largely unnoticed. After all, the war lasted only five
days. As result of the lessons not learned in 2008, the
same playbook has been used against Ukraine, first in
2014 with regard to Crimea and Donbas and now in the
outright war we are witnessing there.
Returning to Georgia, needless to say we were
most grateful to our partners who mediated the
ceasefire agreement of 12 August 2008, which stopped
the bloodshed. However, the war was not stopped. It
soon evolved into its next phase — the occupation and
creeping annexation of the occupied territories.
That is very clearly acknowledged in the decision
of 27 January 2016 of Pre-Trial Chamber I of the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-37527 (E)

*2237527*

A/76/PV.78

International Criminal Court and the 21 January
2021 ruling of the European Court of Human Rights,
with the latter having legally established Russia’s
responsibility — as the authority exercising effective
control over the regions — for violating the right of
internally displaced persons and refugees to return
to their homes and concluding that, pursuant to its
obligations under the European Convention on Human
Rights, Russia has an obligation to enable displaced
persons to return to their homes.
People living in the occupied territories endure
continuous violations of their basic human rights,
isolation and discrimination, including violations of the
right to life, as well as deprivation of liberty, arbitrary
detention, infringements of the right to property,
violations of the right to health, restrictions on education
in their native language and the continuing practice of
demolishing houses belonging to internally displaced
persons. Those facts have been systematically reflected
in the annual reports of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights.
Moreover, since 2008 none of the international
monitoring mechanisms, including United Nations
special procedures mandate holders, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and officials of
the Council of Europe, have been allowed to enter the
occupied Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions to conduct
their respective assessments and monitoring. Even the
European Union Monitoring Mission established under
the ceasefire agreement of 12 August has been denied
the opportunity to fulfil its mandate in the occupied
territories over which Russia exercises effective control.
Needless to say, conflict settlement is a complex
issue, and unfortunately takes quite some time. As a
small country, Georgia relies on multilateralism — and
on everyone here, collectively — and hopes that we shall
reach a settlement of the conflict through meaningful
political dialogue and negotiations at some time,
hopefully sooner rather than later.
However, in this Hall we all agree that the rights of
people, including those of IDPs and refugees, should be
exercised and protected at all times, irrespective of the
underlying conflict and its solution. Therefore, until
that solution comes about, the least we can do as the
United Nations is stand united and resolute in sending
a strong message of support and solidarity to the people
affected and to call on those in charge to bring about
the much-awaited solution through negotiations. And
2/28

08/06/2022

that is exactly what the draft resolution before the
Assembly does.
First, based on the Guiding Principles on Internal
Displacement and echoing the African Union’s 2009
Kampala Convention on internal displacement, the
draft resolution once again reaffirms the right of all
internally displaced persons and refugees from Georgia,
irrespective of their ethnicity, to return to their places
of origin in safety and dignity, as well as their right to
their property.
Secondly, the draft resolution recognizes the
importance of the Geneva International Discussions as
the only tool for settling the conflict and calls on the
participants to produce results. Therefore, in supporting
draft resolution A/76/L.62, we are not only telling those
400,000 people that they matter and are not forgotten
or left behind but also putting moral pressure on the
participants in the Geneva International Discussions to
fulfil their obligations before the people affected and
the world community.
We have many resolutions in the United Nations
that address the suffering of people who have found
themselves refugees and displaced persons in different
parts of the world, whether in the Middle East or Africa,
Asia or Latin America, or my own region, Europe. I
strongly believe that the moment has come for all of
us not to pick sides but to take a principled stand for
the sake of the very principles enshrined in the United
Nations Charter.
The moment has come to go beyond the narrow
regional scope and break with old paradigms, because
there cannot be a hierarchy in solidarity, given that there
is no hierarchy in suffering. I therefore urge members
to vote in favour of draft resolution A/76/L.62, which
will be a vote for the principles of the United Nations
Charter and multilateralism.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the European Union, in its capacity
as observer.
Mr. Skoog (European Union): I have the honour
of speaking on behalf of the European Union (EU)
and its member States. The candidate countries North
Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania; the country of
the Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; the European Free
Trade Association country Liechtenstein, member of
the European Economic Area; as well as the Republic
22-37527

08/06/2022

A/76/PV.78

of Moldova, Andorra and San Marino, align themselves
with this statement.

the implementation measures of 8 September 2008 by
maintaining a military presence on Georgian soil.

We support draft resolution A/76/L.62. The EU
reaffirms its firm support for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Georgia within its internationally
recognized borders. The EU remains committed to
supporting peacebuilding and conflict resolution in
Georgia, including through its co-chairmanship of the
Geneva International Discussions and the European
Union Monitoring Mission.

Moreover, the illegal so-called parliamentary
elections held in Abkhazia, Georgia, on 12 March
and the illegal so-called presidential elections held
in the Georgian region of South Ossetia on 10 April
constitute further violations of Georgia’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity.

We express our concern about the human rights
violations in the Georgian breakaway regions of
Abkhazia and South Ossetia and the persisting
challenges faced by the conflict-affected populations.
The EU calls for full, safe and unhindered humanitarian
access to be ensured to support those populations.
The EU underlines the importance of the right of
refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs) to
choose a durable solution, including a voluntary, safe
and dignified return, as well as to exercise their property
rights. The EU regrets that to date no progress has been
achieved on those issues and recalls that addressing the
issues of refugees and IDPs is a core task of the Geneva
International Discussions.
We welcome the efforts of the Georgian
Government to find durable housing solutions for IDPs
and to promote their socioeconomic integration. We
encourage the Government to reinforce the inclusion
and prioritization of IDPs in its national development
plan and to make further efforts to improve their living
conditions and livelihoods.
Mr. Paulauskas (Lithuania): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Baltic and the Nordic States,
namely, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Iceland, Latvia,
Norway, Sweden and my own country, Lithuania.
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Luxembourg, the
Republic of Moldova, Montenegro, the Netherlands,
North Macedonia, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and
Ukraine align themselves with this statement.
We take this opportunity to reaffirm our
unwavering support for the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Georgia within its
internationally recognized borders. Unfortunately,
Russia’s 14-year occupation of 20 per cent of Georgia’s
territory continues. It is deplorable that Russia
continues to violate the commitments made in the EUmediated ceasefire agreement of 12 August 2008 and

We remain deeply concerned about the continuing
deterioration of the human rights situation in Abkhazia,
Georgia, and the Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia,
Georgia, which are under Russia’s occupation. The
ongoing borderization process, the kidnappings,
arbitrary detentions and arrests — some of them with
a lethal outcome — the prolonged and unprecedented
restrictions on the freedom of movement, and the lack
of access to health care and education in the people’s
native language are unacceptable.
Hundreds of thousands of internally displaced
persons continue to be deprived of their right to a safe,
dignified and voluntary return to their places of origin
and their property rights. Even more worrisome is the
fact that, in the past several years, no international
human rights monitoring mechanism has been granted
unrestricted access to the regions of Abkhazia, Georgia,
and the Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia, Georgia. We
therefore call for immediate access to those areas to
be granted to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and other international
and regional human rights mechanisms.
As we are talking about internally displaced persons,
I feel obliged to mention another brutal war that Russia
is waging — against Ukraine. That despicable military
aggression has resulted in displacement unseen in
Europe since the Second World War, with an estimated
7.1 million internally displaced persons.
Last year’s landmark ruling by the European
Court of Human Rights in the Georgia v. Russia (II)
case confirmed that, in exercising effective control
over the illegally occupied Georgian territory, Russia
is responsible for the grave human rights violations
committed there, including the killing of civilians,
torture and inhuman and degrading treatment. We
are witnessing Russia commit those same atrocities in
Ukraine. The perpetrators of those violations must be
held accountable.

22-375273/28

A/76/PV.78

In that regard, we welcome the application of
10 March by the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court to issue arrest warrants for suspects
bearing individual criminal responsibility for war
crimes and crimes against humanity committed during
Russia’s war against Georgia in 2008.
The Secretary-General’s comprehensive report
(A/76/828) on the implementation of resolution 75/285,
entitled “Status of internally displaced persons and
refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia, and the Tskhinvali
region/South Ossetia, Georgia”, highlights that no
major changes were observed during the reporting
period with regard to internally displaced persons and
refugees exercising their right to return.
Draft resolution A/76/L.62 commits us all to
continue working for the protection and assistance of
those who have been forcibly displaced from Abkhazia,
Georgia, and the Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia,
Georgia, and ensuring that they are able to exercise
their fundamental right to a safe and dignified return.
We welcome the adoption of Human Rights Council
resolution 49/33, on cooperation with Georgia, which
demonstrates the commitment of the international
community to addressing the violations of human rights
and the humanitarian issues faced by persons forcefully
displaced from Abkhazia, Georgia, and the Tskhinvali
region/South Ossetia, Georgia.

08/06/2022

A/76/L.62, and we call on all Member States to do
the same.
Mr. Arbeiter (Canada): I have the honour to
deliver the following remarks on behalf of Australia,
New Zealand and my own country, Canada (CANZ),
concerning draft resolution A/76/L.62, on the status
of internally displaced persons and refugees from
Abkhazia, Georgia, and the Tskhinvali region/South
Ossetia, Georgia.
CANZ remains concerned about the forced
demographic changes resulting from the conflicts in
Georgia and the humanitarian situation caused by the
armed conflict in 2008, which resulted in the forced
displacement of civilians. We welcome the General
Assembly’s recognition of the right of return of all
internally displaced persons and refugees and their
descendants, regardless of their ethnicity, to their homes
throughout Georgia. We again reiterate our support for
the respect for and protection of human rights, including
the rights of forcibly displaced persons, and for enabling
their safe, voluntary, dignified and unhindered return
to their homes, in accordance with international law.

We reiterate our support for the process of the
Geneva International Discussions. At the same time,
we regret the fact that there is a constant lack of
engagement from the Russian side and participants
from Tskhinvali and Sukhumi on the topic of refugees
and displaced persons.

More broadly, CANZ is concerned about the fact
that the European Union-mediated ceasefire agreement
that was concluded between Georgia and Russia in 2008
remains largely unfulfilled. The process of so-called
borderization, that is, the erection of razor-wire fences
and other artificial obstacles along the administrative
boundary line, as well as the denial of access for
international human rights monitors to the Abkhazia
and South Ossetia regions, is seriously worsening the
humanitarian situation on the ground. Those acts prolong
the conflict, threaten peace and stability, interfere
with the enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms and negatively impact the health and safety
of people across Georgia, destabilizing the region as
a whole. Russia’s illegal and unjustifiable invasion
of Ukraine, which has forcibly displaced millions of
Ukrainians from their homes, is another stark example
of why the international community must condemn
Russia’s repeated aggressions against its neighbours
and support the rights of all forcibly displaced persons.
CANZ condemns any plans in South Ossetia to hold a
referendum on joining the Russian Federation.

In conclusion, given the lack of progress on the
ground, we call for the continuous engagement of the
United Nations. As we did for its iterations in previous
years, we shall vote in favour of draft resolution

CANZ calls on all the parties to facilitate
immediate access for international humanitarian
organizations to the populations in need and to fully
implement the obligations and commitments under

In that context, we commend the continued efforts
of the Georgian Government, in close cooperation
with international organizations, to provide internally
displaced persons with alternative durable solutions
in terms of housing, to improve their socioeconomic
conditions and to assist the affected population as much
as possible by providing free access to health care,
education and other social benefits for all residents of
Abkhazia, Georgia, and the Tskhinvali region/South
Ossetia, Georgia.

4/28

22-37527

08/06/2022

the ceasefire agreement. Last but not least, CANZ
unequivocally reaffirms its support for Georgia’s
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
within its internationally recognized borders. Let me
also add a few words in my national capacity. Many
mistakenly refer to this as a frozen conflict — but it
is not. It is certainly not frozen for the Georgians who
long to return, or those who suffer and continue to
require humanitarian support, or those who want peace.
As we heard earlier from our friend the Ambassador of
Georgia, a vote in favour of draft resolution A/76/L.62
is a vote both for multilateralism and the Charter of the
United Nations and for those Georgians whose needs
continue to be unmet.
Mr. Osuga (Japan): First and foremost, I would
like to reiterate Japan’s unwavering support to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the GUAM
countries. We must oppose any unilateral attempt to
change the status quo by force anywhere in the world,
and respond to any such attempt in a united and resolute
manner. In the GUAM region, the very foundation of
the international order, forged through centuries of
human effort, suffering and sacrifice, is being seriously
challenged. The rule of law and the rules-based
international order, grounded in the shared principles
and universal values articulated in the Charter of the
United Nations, is at stake. No Member State can afford
to be a bystander. The United Nations remains crucial to
maintaining the rules-based international order, and the
Security Council should fulfil its responsibilities under
the Charter against threats to international peace and
security. I would like to focus the rest of my statement
on the dire threat to human security caused by forced
displacement in some parts of the GUAM region.
In Ukraine, many evacuees and internally
displaced persons continue to be deprived of freedom
from fear and from want, as well as freedom to live in
dignity. To address the humanitarian crisis in Ukraine
and in its neighbours, including Moldova, that have
generously accepted a great number of refugees, Japan
has contributed $200 million for activities led by the
United Nations and other humanitarian organizations.
People in Georgia have also experienced long-term
forced displacement. Japan has become a sponsor of
draft resolution A/76/L.62, on the status of internally
displaced persons and refugees from Georgia, which
we expect to see adopted shortly. Japan is committed to
supporting the GUAM countries in tackling the various
challenges caused by the ongoing and protracted

A/76/PV.78

conflicts, including by providing assistance for
internally displaced persons and refugees.
Mr. Massari (Italy): Italy supports draft resolution
A/76/L.62 and aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. I would like to
add some remarks in my national capacity.
We regret that so far no progress has been achieved
on the issue of internally displaced persons (IDPs) in
Georgia, and we recognize the right of IDPs and refugees
to a safe and dignified return. Italy is deeply concerned
about the human rights violations in the breakaway
Georgian regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
While commending the Georgian Government for its
efforts to continue exploring sustainable and feasible
solutions for IDPs and promoting their integration, we
also call for unhindered humanitarian access in order to
give those populations the support they need.
In the current situation, in which Russia’s
unprovoked and unjustified aggression against Ukraine
has reawakened instability in Europe and beyond,
it is crucial to foster our multilateral approach to the
protracted crises on our continent, leverage all the tools
at our disposal for preventing further conflicts and
hold accountable anyone who has blatantly violated
the principles embodied in the Charter of the United
Nations, the international legal order and the equal
right to exist of any country or people. In that regard,
I would like to reaffirm Italy’s strong commitment to
ensuring that any international disputes are resolved by
legal and peaceful means, upholding the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of States and the inviolability
of frontiers.
Regarding the long-running tensions in the
Caucasus, I would like to reaffirm in the same spirit
Italy’s unwavering commitment to Georgia’s territorial
integrity and to call for intensifying the dialogue
with the breakaway regions in order to relaunch the
Geneva International Discussions, while strongly
supporting the work and aims of the European Union
Monitoring Mission.
Mr. Lu (United States of America): The United
States is pleased to sponsor and support draft resolution
A/76/L.62. More than a decade ago, Russia’s aggression
upended the lives and livelihoods of millions of
Georgian civilians. Many of them remain unable to
return to their pre-conflict lives and homes. Ordinary
citizens’ lives were upended as a direct consequence of
a brutal and unjustified war of choice by Russia, and

22-375275/28

A/76/PV.78

while their suffering continues, Russia’s aggression has
expanded into Ukraine.
The United States fully supports Georgia’s
sovereignty, independence, and territorial integrity
within its internationally recognized borders, just as we
support the territorial integrity of all States Members
of our Organization. Russia’s military presence in
the Georgian regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia
violates Georgia’s territorial integrity and undermines
its sovereignty, threatening not just Georgia but also
the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and our collective security. We call on Russia
to cease its recognition of the so-called independence
of the Georgian regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia,
which are integral parts of Georgia’s territory. We also
call on Russia to fulfil its obligation under the ceasefire
agreement of 2008 to withdraw its forces to pre-conflict
positions and allow and facilitate unhindered access for
humanitarian organizations.
Furthermore, Russia and the de facto authorities
in Abkhazia and South Ossetia need to take immediate
steps to respect human rights, cease construction of
barriers along the administrative boundary lines and
create security conditions that are conducive to the
voluntary, safe, dignified and unhindered return and
reintegration of internally displaced persons (IDPs)
and refugees.
Across the globe, the United States supports the
human rights, dignity and humanitarian needs of
IDPs and refugees. We are alarmed by the increasing
number of ongoing, urgent and, in many cases,
completely avoidable conflict-driven crises that involve
human rights violations and abuses and limits on
humanitarian access.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s Action Agenda
on Internal Displacement. Given the fact that forced
displacement and humanitarian needs have reached
unprecedented levels year after year, there is no time to
waste. We encourage the United Nations to strengthen
its vision for improving protection and assistance
for IDPs and create incentives for development and
peacebuilding actors and affected States to increase
their efforts to meet the needs of IDPs and refugees.
We must all do our part and promote durable solutions.
The United States is focused on the plight of
the IDPs and refugees displaced from the Georgian
territories of Abkhazia and South Ossetia and all others
whose lives and homes have been destroyed by Russia’s
6/28

08/06/2022

unnecessary war of choice in Georgia. And now we
must also fear for the lives and livelihoods of the people
forced to flee Russia’s unnecessary war of choice in
Ukraine. We urge the General Assembly to adopt draft
resolution A/76/L.62, on Georgian IDPs and refugees,
and to continue to protect the principles enshrined in
the Charter.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We must stop walking in circles. The same
group of States, in various configurations — including
the European Union; the Baltic and the Nordic States;
Canada, Australia and New Zealand, and so on — is
basically repeating the same statements. The Russian
Federation will of course vote against draft resolution
A/76/L.62, which was introduced by the representative
of Georgia. Another submission of Georgia’s draft
resolution this year is aimed only at undermining
normalization in the region and exerting pressure on
the sovereign States of Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
Tbilisi is no longer able to mask its real intentions
by feigning concern about refugees and internally
displaced persons.
We would like to stress that the Georgian
authorities’ exploitation for many years of the issue of
refugees significantly harms efforts to resolve current
humanitarian problems in the region. That practice
does not promote progress within the framework of the
Geneva International Discussions; rather, it provokes
tensions among the representatives of the communities
living in Georgia, Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
We once again call on Georgia and its partners to
once and for all stop the reckless accusations against
Tskhinvali and Sukhumi in the international arena
and to demonstrate in practice their commitment to
constructively resolving humanitarian issues based on
the principles of peaceful coexistence.
The delegation of the Russian Federation requests
that draft resolution A/76/L.62 be put to the vote. We
call on delegations who oppose the politicization of the
work of the General Assembly, especially the issue of
refugees, not to support it.
Mr. Roberts (United Kingdom): Our statement this
year will be similar to our most recent one on this issue
because, year after year, it continues to be true — 13
years since Russia’s military invasion of Georgia, the
United Kingdom remains deeply concerned about
the continued illegal Russian presence in parts of the
country. We fully support Georgia’s sovereignty and
22-37527

08/06/2022

territorial integrity within its internationally recognized
borders and underline the need for a peaceful resolution
of the conflict based on full respect for the Charter
of the United Nations, the Helsinki Final Act and
international law.
Georgia has been under continuous hybrid attack
from Russia since the 2008 war, which saw 20 per
cent of Georgian territory effectively annexed. There
are thousands of Russian troops and border guards
stationed in the breakaway regions of South Ossetia
and Abkhazia, some as close as 35 minutes from
the Georgian capital, Tbilisi. And the human rights
situation in those breakaway regions is of serious and
growing concern.
We welcome Georgia’s ongoing compliance with
the European Union-mediated ceasefire agreement of
12 August 2008. We call on the Russian Federation to
immediately fulfil its clear obligation under the ceasefire
agreement to withdraw its forces to pre-conflict
positions and its commitments to allow unfettered
access for the delivery of humanitarian assistance and
not impede international security arrangements from
being implemented on the ground.
We also call on the Russian Federation to reverse
its recognition of the so-called independence of
Georgia’s Abkhazia and South Ossetia regions and end
all practices aimed at the creeping annexation of those
territories into the Russian Federation. We welcome the
initiatives by the Government of Georgia to promote
reconciliation among the populations separated by the
administrative boundary lines, and we urge Russia not
to obstruct those valuable peacebuilding and people-topeople contacts.
The United Kingdom, in solidarity with the
Georgian people and all internally displaced people
worldwide, has been a long-standing supporter of the
annual iteration of draft resolution A/76/L.62, which the
General Assembly will soon put to the vote. As others
have said, the draft resolution is even more pertinent
this year following Russia’s illegal and unjustified
invasion of Ukraine.
The draft resolution highlights the inalienable right
of the forcefully displaced population to a safe and
dignified return to their homes, acknowledges their
property rights, reaffirms the unacceptability of forced
demographic changes and creates a vital mechanism
for the Secretary-General to report developments on
this issue. Those are all matters vital to our universally

A/76/PV.78

shared interest
and peace.

in

human

rights,

reconciliation

We therefore urge all Member States to vote in
favour of draft resolution A/76/L.62, which aims to
protect the most vulnerable in society and to underline
the unacceptability of using internally displaced
persons as political pawns in conflicts.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): We are indeed walking
in circles — the same circles perhaps that the Russian
representative mentioned — but they are circles of
blood and impunity, and that impunity is still with us
because some people, including at least some of the
people in the General Assembly, continue to be filled
with apathy about what is going on in our region, and
are thereby prolonging the impunity and bloodshed.
Today’s agenda item is entitled “Protracted conflicts
in the GUAM area and their implications for international
peace, security and development”. The Organization
for Democracy and Economic Development (GUAM)
consists of four member States — Georgia, Ukraine,
Azerbaijan and the Republic of Moldova. In fact,
it is specifically the GUAM member countries that
continue to be the most affected in Europe by conflicts
that violate their sovereignty and territorial integrity,
constrain their freedom and democracy and hamper
their development and the livelihoods of their people.
In August 2008, Russia launched a full-scale military
aggression and occupation of the regions of Abkhazia
and Tskhinvali/South Ossetia, in violation of Georgia’s
territorial integrity. After 14 years of its aggression
against, and occupation of, the Georgian territories,
the Russian Federation still refuses to implement the
European Union-mediated ceasefire agreement of
12 August 2008 and the implementation measures of
8 September 2008, in particular by withdrawing its
military and security forces and armaments from both
regions and allowing the establishment of international
security mechanisms on the ground. Those who
promote saving face and making deals with Russia in
the context of the war it is currently waging against
Ukraine should remember that. Moreover, the occupier
continues its illegal military presence and activities on
Georgian soil and is strengthening its control over parts
of Georgia’s territory.
Draft resolution A/76/L.62, which will be put
to the vote today, addresses the issue of protracted
displacement, whereby hundreds of thousands of men,
women and children from the Abkhazia and Tskhinvali

22-375277/28

A/76/PV.78

regions of Georgia have remained forcibly displaced
as a result of the conflict and several waves of ethnic
cleansing since the early 1990s. The draft resolution
commits us all to continuing to work to provide
protection and assistance to those who have been
forcibly displaced.
Ukraine therefore joined as a main co-sponsor of
draft resolution A/76/L.62 and will vote in favour of
it. The draft resolution provides an opportunity for the
States Members of the United Nations to reconfirm
their commitment to the fundamental right to the safe
and dignified return of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) and refugees and to express their solidarity with
forcibly displaced persons around the world.
Russia did not stop in Georgia. In 2014, Russia
continued to use its military aggression toolbox and
the most barbaric and inhumane methods of warfare
in Ukraine. Its invasion in 2014 was followed by eight
long years of war and the eventual full-scale invasion
of Ukraine on 24 February, aimed at destroying the
Ukrainian State, seizing Ukrainian territory by force
and establishing occupational control. That new wave
of Russian aggression is an unjustified and unprovoked
act of war, an attack on the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine and a brutal violation of the
Charter of the United Nations and the basic norms and
principles of international law.
Depopulation by forcible transfer of local residents
is an essential part of the nefarious plans of the
Russian strategists. Up to 5 million people have been
documented across Europe as individual refugees from
Ukraine, mostly women and children. Almost 12 million
people have become IDPs. It is alarming that more
than 1 million Ukrainian citizens have been forcibly
transferred to different regions of Russia, including
more than 234,000 children, several thousand of whom
are orphans and have been deprived of parental care.
For decades, Russia has persisted in its attempts
to undermine the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Georgia, Ukraine and other GUAM member States,
increasing regional insecurity and human suffering.
The aggressor must and will be stopped in order to
bring peace, security and prosperity back to the region.
And I would like to say to the Russian representative
that the walking in circles must indeed be stopped.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the Observer State of the Holy See.
8/28

08/06/2022

Monsignor Murphy: (Holy See): The delegation of
the Holy See welcomes this opportunity to address the
topic of protracted conflicts in the GUAM area.
Protracted or frozen conflicts not only obstruct
relations among States, peoples, ethnic and religious
groups and individuals; they also inhibit integral human
development and are at continual risk of reigniting
widespread violence. When persistent disputes remain
in a state of negative peace, it is all too easy for the
international community to move on to seemingly more
pressing issues. That is done, however, at great peril to
the people on the ground, the parties to the conflicts
and the work of the international community to put an
end to the scourge of war.
The Holy See continues to insist that peace is not
merely the absence of war; rather, it is an enterprise of
justice that is never attained once and for all but must
be built up ceaselessly. With that in mind, the Holy See
supports all efforts aimed at supporting dialogue and
respect for international law as a means of resolving
those conflicts.
As a founding participating State of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the
Holy See would like to highlight the key role that the
organization should play in facilitating the end of such
protracted conflicts. The Holy See fully supports the
efforts undertaken in the Transnistrian settlement
process, as well as the work of the Minsk Group to find
a peaceful solution to the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict.
My delegation commends the early warning and
early action of the OSCE High Commissioner on
National Minorities, whose monitoring and promotion
of the rights of ethnic, linguistic and religious
minorities — in line with OSCE commitments — helps
to sustain peace and respond to tensions that could
arise in the OSCE area.
The hostilities in Ukraine vividly illustrate the
danger of underestimating or diverting attention
away from unresolved conflicts or situations of
escalating tension. The war in Ukraine is undermining
international peace and security, with alarming
implications for food security and the global economy.
In that regard, the Holy See reiterates its call for an
immediate ceasefire, the continued establishment of,
and respect for, humanitarian corridors, and a sincere
and decisive focus on negotiations, in good faith, for the
peaceful resolution of the conflict.
22-37527

08/06/2022

The intense resumption of violence in
Nagorno-Karabakh two years ago also reinforced
the need for greater diplomatic efforts. It remains my
delegation’s hope that the ongoing negotiations will
lead to a genuine peace, founded on a mutual respect
and encounter. In that regard, the Holy See welcomes
the joint convening of commissions on delimitation and
border security, which intend to lay the groundwork for
the further renewal of economic, social and cultural
ties. As part of those efforts, my delegation encourages
the parties to ensure that any final agreement protects
religious sites and permits worshippers to access them
on either side of the border.
In conclusion, I wish to recall Pope Francis’s 2016
visit to Armenia, Georgia and Azerbaijan in support
of all efforts on the road to peace and to share steps on
the path of reconciliation, which generates hope. May
the road to peace and the path towards reconciliation
become a tangible reality across the GUAM area.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/76/L.62.
Before giving the floor for explanations of vote
before the voting, I would like to remind delegations
that explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Poveda Brito (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reaffirms its strong
determination to preserve, promote and defend the
Charter of the United Nations, as well as its unwavering
commitment to the peaceful settlement of disputes,
and supports all diplomatic efforts aimed at achieving
that end. In that regard, we take this opportunity to
express our concern about the growing tendency to
attempt to exploit the General Assembly in order
to attack its members, and even more egregiously to
use it as a platform for adopting resolutions that lack
consensus, which, far from contributing to fostering
an environment conducive to dialogue and negotiation,
deepens tensions and divisions and has the potential to
further complicate regional situations and dynamics.
In adhering to the tenets of its Bolivarian diplomacy
of peace, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela therefore
calls on the sponsors of draft resolution A/76/L.62 to
refrain from politicized approaches and instead promote

A/76/PV.78

both confidence-building measures and a constructive
approach to the issue, including within the framework
of the Geneva International Discussions on security
and stability in the South Caucasus, using dialogue,
negotiation and cooperation in order to find solutions
to common challenges in the region, including in the
humanitarian context.
The President: We have heard the only speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/76/L.62, entitled “Status of internally
displaced persons and refugees from Abkhazia,
Georgia, and the Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia,
Georgia”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I would like to
announce that since the submission of draft resolution
A/76/L.62, and in addition to the delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have also become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Colombia, Guatemala,
Japan, Liberia, Mexico and Trinidad and Tobago.
The President: The Assembly will now proceed
to take a decision on draft resolution A/76/L.62. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium,
Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Kiribati, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Maldives, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Myanmar,
Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia,
Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,

22-375279/28

A/76/PV.78

San Marino, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain, Suriname,
Sweden, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Türkiye, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Zambia
Against:
Belarus, Burundi, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Sudan,
Syrian Arab Republic, Viet Nam, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Congo, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan,
Lebanon,
Libya,
Madagascar,
Malaysia, Mauritania, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Nepal, Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Switzerland,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan, Yemen
Draft resolution A/76/L.62 was adopted by 95 votes
to 12, with 56 abstentions (resolution 76/267).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 36?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 124 (continued)
Strengthening of the United Nations system
The President: The General Assembly will
continue its debate held pursuant to resolution 76/262,
of 26 April 2022, on the situation in which a veto was
cast by two permanent members at the 9048th meeting
of the Security Council, on 26 May 2022, under the
agenda item entitled “Non-proliferation — Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea”.
Mr. Kvalheim (Norway): Norway welcomes
the opportunity for the General Assembly to discuss
this deeply troubling issue related to international
peace and security today. Since the beginning of this
year, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
10/28

08/06/2022

performed a record number of ballistic-missile tests,
including the launch of an intercontinental ballistic
missile. Furthermore, we are deeply concerned
about the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
disturbing rhetoric on nuclear weapons and the
reported development of its nuclear programme.
Norway strongly condemns the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s series of ballistic-missile launches.
Its actions constitute a threat to international security
and are in clear violation of a number of Security
Council resolutions.
We therefore deeply regret the vetoes cast by the
Russian Federation and China on draft resolution
S/2022/431, proposed by the United States on 26 May
in the Security Council (see S/PV.9048), blocking an
otherwise consensus text and preventing the Council
from fulfilling its mandate for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Those developments
demand a unified response from the Council. It is
now more necessary than ever for the Council to
uphold its responsibilities and fulfil the commitment
already established in 2017 under resolution 2397
(2017), in which the Council unanimously expressed its
determination to take further significant measures in the
event of more nuclear tests by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea or launches of a ballistic-missile
system capable of reaching intercontinental ranges.
Norway is worried about the humanitarian
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
especially in the wake of the recent reports of the
spread of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) throughout
the country. In that respect, we remain concerned about
the decision of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to continue to keep its borders closed, which
impedes the international community’s continued
willingness to offer assistance to the vulnerable civilian
population. We urge the Government of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to cooperate with the
international community in order to enable the delivery
of humanitarian supplies, including COVID-19related assistance.
It is deeply troubling to see the Government
continuing to channel its resources into the development
of weapons of mass destruction instead of using them
to provide much-needed housing, food and vaccines
to its own people. The proposed Council resolution
would have broadened the humanitarian exemption
mechanisms considerably, which would have been a
timely update, given the critical humanitarian needs in
22-37527

08/06/2022

the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. That is why
Norway, as an elected member of the Council, voted in
favour of the draft resolution. We urge the Government
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to comply
fully with its international obligations, reverse its
course, return to dialogue and rejoin the international
non-proliferation regime, including the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards.
Mr. Manalo (Philippines), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
We regret the use of the veto that has brought us
here today. It prevented the Council from fulfilling its
mandate and taking necessary action on this very serious
and escalating security and humanitarian situation.
That lack of consensus on an issue of non-proliferation
is deeply troubling, especially ahead of the tenth
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, to be held in
August. The NPT is the cornerstone of our common
efforts towards nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation
and peaceful uses. The United Nations cannot remain
silent on threats to international peace and security,
especially issues of this magnitude involving the
development of weapons of mass destruction and the
imminent threat of proliferation, which ultimately
endangers all of us.
Mr. Blanco Conde (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): We appreciate the timely convening of today’s
meeting, in accordance with the mandate established
in resolution 76/262 requiring a debate on the reasons
for the casting of a veto by one or more permanent
members of the Security Council. As a sponsor of that
resolution, the Dominican Republic was pleased to
see Member States’ willing and active participation
during this morning’s debate (see A/76/PV.77), which
speaks to the importance we attach to this issue. This
is a practice that we believe will ensure that the use of
the veto will not go unnoticed and will in turn ensure
accountability and give a voice to the States Members
of the Organization on the topics under discussion.
In that regard, we are concerned about the frequency
with which the veto has been used in recent years,
not just when there are threats to international peace
and security, but also in the context of human rights
violations and even during dire humanitarian crises.
We want to emphasize that the veto is not a right but
rather an enormous privilege that is discriminatory in

A/76/PV.78

nature, creates a hierarchy among the members of the
Council and, what is more, has impaired the Council’s
ability to take action on and respond to a number of
grave situations.
With regard to the agenda item on nuclear
non-proliferation during the consideration of which the
veto was used most recently, we categorically condemn
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s continued
launches of ballistic missiles, including intercontinental
missiles, which significantly undermine the stability
of the Korean peninsula and adjacent areas, including
the Sea of Japan. The Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s development and improvement of its
nuclear and ballistic-missile programme is a matter of
grave concern, an undeniable threat to international
peace and security, particularly in the region, and
a flagrant violation of Council resolutions and the
non-proliferation and disarmament regime.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and
the international community must urgently make more
meaningful efforts to fully implement the relevant
resolutions of the Council and resume negotiations on the
complete, irreversible and verifiable denuclearization of
the Korean peninsula. That course of action, including
a return to the negotiating table, would help ease the
tensions. In conclusion, we call for a political solution
to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s nuclear
issue and for the Council to consider it in a united and
decisive manner.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan): At the outset, I would like
to express my sincere appreciation to Liechtenstein for
spearheading the efforts that culminated in the adoption
of resolution 76/262. As States Members of the United
Nations, we have resolved unanimously to strengthen
the General Assembly’s response to issues brought to
the Security Council when the latter fails to act due to
a member’s use of the veto.
The mechanism under resolution 76/262 is an
opportunity for the whole membership to debate
situations that may challenge the collective security
system under the Charter of the United Nations, as well
as establish a form of dialogue with the Council on
those matters. Such challenges are too important. They
demand that we all have a say on how to overcome them
and enhance cooperation between the relevant United
Nations bodies in addressing the underlying issues.
And while all Member States are under an obligation
to accept and implement the Council’s decisions, it is

22-3752711/28

A/76/PV.78

incumbent on the Council itself to carry out its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
The stagnation within the Council in performing its
functions has exacerbated tensions in areas of conflict
and led to escalations in related situations. It is in that
context that the General Assembly must play a role in
working to restore international peace and security
and respect for the rule of international law. That is
our shared responsibility. For that reason, Jordan calls
for dialogue and the peaceful settlement of disputes
regarding the Korean peninsula and for refraining from
the use or threat of force, including the use or threat of
use of weapons of mass destruction.
Today the international community urgently needs
to advance nuclear disarmament in order to pave
the way for a world free of nuclear weapons. Jordan
therefore reiterates its emphasis on the importance of
the upcoming tenth Review Conference of the Parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT), given the NPT’s crucial role in international
security. Achieving the universality of the NPT
remains the strategic goal of our collective efforts on
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. We believe
that today’s debate can have a positive impact on the
prospects for the success of the Review Conference.
In conclusion, it is our shared responsibility to
take resolute action for peace and security, and Jordan
will continue to work with all partners and friends to
achieve that goal.
Mr. Kulhánek (Czech Republic): The Czech
Republic aligns itself with the statement delivered this
morning by the observer of the European Union (see
A/76/PV.77), and I would like to add the following
remarks in my national capacity.
The Czech Republic is gravely concerned about
the reports of ongoing nuclear activities in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The Security
Council resolutions make it crystal clear that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea must not
conduct nuclear tests and must immediately abandon
all nuclear weapons and existing nuclear programmes
in a complete, verifiable and irreversible manner and
cease all related activities. However, over the past three
years, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
significantly accelerated, expanded and improved its
programme for the development of intercontinental
ballistic missiles. The Czech Republic deplores the fact
12/28

08/06/2022

that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
abandoned its self-declared moratorium and continues
to develop its ballistic-missile capabilities. Those
alarming developments, together with the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s nuclear capabilities,
present the most worrying destabilizing factor in
the region and a serious threat to international peace
and security.
Since the beginning of this year, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea has conducted an
unprecedented number of missile tests, launching new
types of ballistic missiles, including intercontinental
ballistic missiles, a submarine-launched ballistic
missile and possibly even a hypersonic glide vehicle.
Those activities demonstrate the strong intentions
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
expand its ballistic-missile capabilities. The Czech
Republic strongly condemns those illegal actions by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, which are
in flagrant violation of numerous Security Council
resolutions. We urge the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to abandon its nuclear-weapon and ballisticmissile delivery-systems programmes in a complete,
verifiable and irreversible manner and comply fully
with all its international obligations and commitments.
We call on it to resume a dialogue with the relevant
parties and to stand ready to engage meaningfully in
any future diplomatic process aimed at securing peace
and security on the Korean peninsula.
It is regrettable that owing to the use of the veto
by Russia and China, the Council has not been able
to respond effectively to the latest provocations of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We call on all
members of the Council to take urgent action on the
matter. At the same time, we urge all Member States
to counter the evasion of sanctions that is enabling the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to continue
on its dangerous and threatening military path at the
expense of its own people, especially in the light of the
current outbreak of the coronavirus disease pandemic in
the country. Contrary to the regime’s frequent claims,
no one has been at war with the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea for many decades. However, the sad
fact is that the regime is at war with humankind and its
own citizens, to whom it is denying their fundamental
rights. Until the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s regime acknowledges that, we will support the
continuation of sanctions, and we call on all Member
22-37527

08/06/2022

A/76/PV.78

States to implement them in accordance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

answerable for their leadership or their absence. As the
United Nations, we can and must do better.

Ms. Kabua (Marshall Islands): The Republic
of the Marshall Islands is gravely concerned about
any growing threat involving nuclear weapons in our
wider Asia-Pacific region, particularly with regard to
North Korea. It is our deep regret that today’s General
Assembly meeting has been triggered by the recent veto
used on Security Council draft resolution S/2022/431 by
two of the Council’s permanent members, the Russian
Federation and the People’s Republic of China. Their
vetoes have halted the strengthened United Nations
sanctions proposed to further implement paragraph 28
of Security Council resolution 2397 (2017) of December
2017, in which the Council expressed its determination
to take further significant measures. That resolution
was adopted unanimously and with no abstentions. It
now appears that the Council can no longer make good
on its own promises.

Mr. Arbeiter (Canada): I appreciate the opportunity
to address the General Assembly today. Diplomacy and
dialogue represent the only path towards peace and
prosperity for the people of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and the safety and security of the
region. We reiterate our call on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to re-engage with the international
community, but as long as it refuses to respond to
diplomatic overtures and continues its development of
weapons of mass destruction, we must and will act.

The Marshall Islands speaks about nuclear-weapon
tests and exposure with unique authority. We continue
to deal with the horrific consequences of the 67 nuclear
tests that were conducted on our territory between 1946
and 1958. We use our voice not on the basis of politics,
but of our own humanity and experience. For decades,
we have reminded the world that no other people should
ever face the consequences of nuclear exposure again.
And today we must sadly remind the world of that yet
again, which is truly unacceptable. We are alarmed
about the increasingly real possibility of another
nuclear test by North Korea in our region, which would
be the seventh such detonation since 2006.
As a Member State, we view the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons as binding,
without discrimination. Every member of this body is
and should be concerned about humanitarian crises and
global pandemics in North Korea and anywhere else,
and should respond accordingly. But a humanitarian
crisis is simply no excuse for the Council to imply
that a scaled-up nuclear threat is somehow acceptable.
To be clear, such a threat is beyond unacceptable, to
us and everyone else. The Marshall Islands is not a
permanent member of the Council, but we urge the
nations that are to use their veto wisely, please. Such
a status is inherently accompanied by a wider global
responsibility that goes far beyond immediate national
self-interest or strategic rivalries. North Korea remains
answerable to our region and to the world for its actions.
But the Security Council and its members also remain

In this year alone, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has conducted more than 30 ballisticmissile tests, all of which are explicitly prohibited
by resolutions adopted unanimously by the Security
Council. Moreover, those tests demonstrate the
determination of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to advance and diversify its nuclear capabilities.
That is a clear threat to international peace and security
and requires international condemnation and collective
action. It is in nobody’s interests to see another
State in possession of nuclear weapons. The nuclear
non-proliferation and disarmament regime, with the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
as its cornerstone, must be upheld and employed to the
full with a view to ensuring the complete and verifiable
elimination of all of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s programmes for weapons of mass destruction.
Like many others who have spoken here today,
Canada condemns the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s repeated ballistic-missile tests. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea has reneged on its own
commitment to halting long-range missile testing,
has taken no concrete steps to fulfil its commitment
to promoting peace on the Korean peninsula and has
continued to show flagrant disregard for the resolutions
of the Council over many, many years.
(spoke in French)
The Security Council has nevertheless failed to take
unanimous action. Given the gravity of the situation,
I want to emphasize Canada’s disappointment at the
Council’s inability to respond effectively by adopting
a resolution and upholding its previous decision to
take further measures if North Korea proceeded to
conduct further intercontinental ballistic-missile tests.
We should emphasize that the sanctions are designed
to target the country’s programme of weapons of

22-3752713/28

A/76/PV.78

mass destruction. They do not create obstacles to the
provision of humanitarian assistance to the people of
North Korea, as some may have argued. None of the
measures imposed by the relevant Council resolutions
are designed to harm the civilian population. On the
contrary, they all stipulate that humanitarian activities
are permitted and that exemptions can be granted
if necessary. We would also like to emphasize that
if it had been adopted, the Council’s draft resolution
S/2022/431, which was vetoed by two members, would
have further simplified the current procedure for
humanitarian exemptions through its requirement that
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1718 (2006) should issue a list of welldefined categories of articles that would be exempt
from the sanctions regime on humanitarian grounds.
We welcome the Council’s efforts to enable
humanitarian exemptions and the delivery of goods
for humanitarian assistance. However, we remain
concerned about the inability of humanitarian
personnel to deliver aid since 2020. We call on North
Korea to accept the international community’s offers
of aid to assist in its response to the coronavirus
disease pandemic and help it avert what appears to be
imminent famine on its territory. Canada and the entire
international community stand ready to support North
Korea. As I said at the beginning of my statement,
diplomacy is the only way forward. We urge North
Korea to end its destabilizing behaviour, live up to its
international obligations, take concrete steps to reduce
tensions in the region and to consider the humanitarian
costs of its actions. In the absence of a viable path
forward, we urge the members of the Security Council
to address this issue and call on all Member States to
implement the resolutions of the Council in full.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting in accordance with resolution
76/262, which stipulates that a formal meeting of the
General Assembly shall be held within 10 working
days of the casting of a veto by one or more permanent
members of the Security Council. This important
resolution is being activated for the first time in today’s
historic meeting.
The State of Kuwait was among the countries that
supported the resolution in the General Assembly
because we believe it will strengthen the Assembly’s
role and its relationship with the Council. It will
also emphasize two principles that Kuwait considers
14/28

08/06/2022

fundamental, transparency and accountability. The use
of the veto by some of the five permanent members has
in many cases helped to undermine the decision-making
process in the Security Council and in certain cases has
prevented the Council from meeting its responsibilities.
The Council’s failure to take measures necessary for
maintaining international peace and security has been
a source of frustration for many peoples and within the
international community generally. We believe that
the right of the veto, an exceptional privilege that has
been enjoyed by only five countries since the United
Nations was established in 1945, is first and foremost
a responsibility.
We followed the Council’s meeting held on 26 May
under the agenda item of non-proliferation concerning
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (see
S/PV.9048) and reviewed the special report (A/76/853)
submitted by the President of the Security Council to the
General Assembly regarding the use of the veto during
the meeting. That veto resulted in a divided Council
and a lack of consensus on the issue of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea for the first time in 15
years. We would like to address the following points in
that regard.
The situation on the Korean peninsula is one of the
most long-standing and dangerous issues on the agenda
of the United Nations. We have all followed with great
concern the heightened tensions in this vital region
and the accompanying threat of military escalation
following the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
launch of intercontinental ballistic missiles, including
on 24 May, as well as its launch of other ballistic
missiles in the past few days, which Kuwait condemns
as a violation of Council resolutions and a threat to
regional and international peace and security. We stress
the importance of finding a peaceful solution to this
crisis, in accordance with the treaties and agreements
concluded between the parties concerned and pursuant
to the relevant Council resolutions. We call on all parties
to engage in dialogue and negotiations in order to reach
a peaceful solution conducive to establishing stability,
peace and security on the Korean peninsula. We stress
the need to adhere to the Charter of the United Nations
and its purposes and principles, particularly goodneighbourliness, the resolution of disputes by peaceful
means and refraining from the use or threat of use of
force against other countries.
The State of Kuwait reiterates its principled and
firm stance on issues of non-proliferation, whereby we
22-37527

08/06/2022

condemn the use of nuclear weapons and other weapons
of mass destruction anywhere, anytime and by anyone
as a grave violation of international law. We also
stress the importance of preserving the international
non-proliferation regime, while reiterating our belief
that global security, safety and stability can be achieved
only through the full and complete elimination of
nuclear weapons.
In conclusion, we hope that the Council will be able
to restore its unity regarding issues of non-proliferation,
including where the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea is concerned, and shoulder its responsibilities for
maintaining international peace and security.
Ms. Schwalger (New Zealand): Aotearoa New
Zealand welcomes the General Assembly’s convening
of this important debate on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, whose escalatory actions and
continued breaches of Security Council resolutions we
strongly condemn. We call on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to refrain from further ballisticmissile testing and engage in meaningful dialogue
with key parties towards complete, verifiable and
irreversible denuclearization.
Aotearoa New Zealand remains steadfast in
its opposition to the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s unlawful nuclear and ballistic-missile
programmes. They constitute a serious threat to
international peace and security with potentially
catastrophic consequences. The indications that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is preparing
for a nuclear test are deeply troubling. Any such test
would be a flagrant violation of the international
norm against nuclear testing. As a party to both the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and the
Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, New
Zealand is strongly opposed to all nuclear tests. We
urge the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to return to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and to implement its nuclear
safeguards obligations under the International Atomic
Energy Agency. The situation on the Korean peninsula
provides a stark reminder of the ongoing importance
of our nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation work
and of why we must strive for an ambitious outcome at
the NPT Review Conference in August.
New Zealand is committed to implementing
Security Council resolutions. We encourage all
Member States to ensure that sanctions that have been

A/76/PV.78

put in place to deter the ballistic weapons and nuclear
programme of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea be fully implemented in their jurisdictions. We
are deeply disappointed that the Security Council was
unable to adopt a renewed sanctions draft resolution
the week before last (see S/PV.9048). That outcome has
real world consequences. The proposed draft resolution
(S/2022/431) was sound and enjoyed the support of 13
members of the Council — a clear majority.
The Council’s inability to adopt such a draft
resolution is a direct result of the actions of two
permanent members. The use of the veto, for the first
time on this issue since 2006, has once again prevented
the Council from fulfilling its responsibility and once
again undermined its credibility. New Zealand, along
with a group of small States, opposed the veto from its
inception. We remain strong in our conviction that there
is no place for that undemocratic and anachronistic
device at the United Nations, especially when it is used
in the pursuit of national interest rather than in the
interest of collective peace and security.
We call on Russia and China to work with the rest
of the Security Council, refrain from blocking Security
Council draft resolutions and encourage the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea back to the negotiating
table. Only through dialogue can we hope to realize a
peaceful outcome.
We also urge the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to prioritize its response to the dire humanitarian
situation, currently compounded by the coronavirus
disease, and facilitate the access of international
humanitarian organizations for the delivery of essential
humanitarian goods, such as food and medicines.
Aotearoa New Zealand supports an independent
assessment of humanitarian needs on the ground as
soon as possible.
We welcome today’s opportunity for the General
Assembly to voice its concerns about this important
issue. It represents a test case for the newly adopted
veto initiative. New Zealand is a strong proponent of
that initiative and hopes it will encourage Council
members to work harder to produce outcomes for the
collective good.
New Zealand agrees with the point made earlier
today by the representative of Liechtenstein that, when
the Security Council is unable to act, the General
Assembly can play a constructive role in finding
potential ways forward, with the aim of improving the

22-3752715/28

A/76/PV.78

effectiveness of the United Nations as a whole. It can
do so by taking its own decisions on the question before
it, if it chooses. Resolution 76/262 is not prescriptive in
that regard. We are interested in hearing the collective
view on what this might look like during this debate.
Ms. Leendertse (Germany): Let me start by recalling
the General Assembly’s unanimous decision of 26 April
to hold meetings whenever a veto is cast in the Security
Council (resolution 76/262). That is a great success for
the General Assembly in terms of strengthening its role
within the United Nations system, making vetoes more
transparent and — hopefully — in terms of contributing
to a more responsible use of the veto.
While we still have a long way to go in the
intergovernmental negotiations to make the Security
Council reflect the realities of the twenty-first century,
Germany welcomes the new mechanism as a muchneeded step in bringing transparency and accountability
to the work of the Security Council.
Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations
states that the Security Council bears the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security. It also states that, in discharging those
duties, the Security Council should act in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
We therefore expect the Security Council to act when
there is a clear and persistent breach of peace and
security. If two Council members refuse to act on that
responsibility, they do so in opposition to the purposes
and principles of the United Nations.
Unfortunately, that is what happened. Over many
months, we have witnessed an unprecedented series
of ballistic missile tests by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea using increasingly versatile systems
across all ranges, including intercontinental ballistic
missiles — the latest of which were launched this past
weekend. Those tests undermine international peace
and security as well as the global non-proliferation
regime. They also pose a danger and an unpredictable
risk to international civil aviation and maritime
navigation in the region.
Together with the evidence of ongoing nuclear
activities, those reckless actions show that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is further
advancing and diversifying its nuclear capabilities — all
of which are flagrant breaches of the obligations of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea under many
relevant Security Council resolutions. The situation
16/28

08/06/2022

could not be clearer. The Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea has a legal obligation to comply with relevant
Security Council resolutions, and it is the Security
Council’s responsibility to make sure that its decisions
are adhered to. Its credibility depends on that. Our
security depends on that.
I deeply regret that the Security Council failed
to adopt draft resolution S/2022/431, aimed at
condemning the series of recent ballistic missile
launches by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and strengthening measures against it — despite the
support of 13 Security Council members. I deeply regret
that Russia and China are shielding the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea from international scrutiny,
and thereby allowing and condoning its illegal, reckless
and dangerous actions.
Let me be clear: in resolution 2397 (2017)
the Security Council unanimously expressed its
determination to take further significant measures and
made a formal decision that it would take action to
further restrict the export to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea of petroleum in the event of an
intercontinental ballistic missile test. By casting their
veto, Russia and China violated that decision.
That is all the more shocking since the permanent
members of the Security Council have a special
responsibility to uphold the non-proliferation regime,
which the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
continues to flout. Member States expect better from
the Council and its members. They expect the Security
Council to condemn the behaviour of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and reaffirm its obligation
to abandon its weapons of mass destruction and ballistic
missile programmes. We expect a united stance and
further significant measures by the Security Council.
I therefore urge the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to come clean and finally comply with
Council decisions, abandon its unlawful weapons of
mass destruction and ballistic missile programmes
in a complete, verifiable and irreversible manner and
engage in meaningful negotiations about this.
I also urge Russia and China to reverse course and
live up to their responsibility to maintain international
peace and security. We need a strong and united
response from the Security Council to prevent further
reckless action by the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea.
22-37527

08/06/2022

Mr. Aidid (Malaysia): Malaysia welcomes the
convening of this plenary meeting — the first time the
General Assembly is holding deliberations pursuant to
resolution 76/262.
My delegation views this meeting as an integral part
of the overall reform process of the United Nations. It
will contribute to the strengthening of the relationship
between the General Assembly and the Security
Council on peace and security issues, as the Council
acts on behalf of the larger membership. It will also
improve accountability on the use of the veto pending
its actual abolition.
Malaysia unequivocally reaffirms its belief that the
illicit development and procurement of weapons of mass
destruction and related technologies and capabilities,
by any State, is unacceptable and cannot be tolerated
by the international community.
Malaysia remains gravely concerned about the
ongoing developments on the Korean peninsula,
particularly in relation to the nuclear and ballistic
missile programmes of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. Such programmes increase tension
and instability and impede efforts towards the peaceful
resolution of the long-standing conflict on the peninsula.
We condemn the recent spike in the number of ballistic
missile tests undertaken by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, including those of intercontinental
ballistic missiles.
We strongly urge the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to refrain from any further provocative and
illegal acts, abide by its obligations under relevant
Security Council resolutions and its international
commitments, abandon all its nuclear weapons
and immediately cease its nuclear and ballistic
missile programmes.
We are also gravely concerned about the subsequent
missile launches by the Republic of Korea and the
United States early this week.
Malaysia believes that all efforts concerning
the Korean peninsula should be predicated on
the reaffirmation of shared commitments to the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
remain convinced that the interests of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea would be best served by
its immediate return to the negotiating table. In that
regard, Malaysia underlines the importance of selfrestraint by all the parties concerned and the need

A/76/PV.78

for the resumption of dialogue towards the complete,
verifiable and irreversible denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula. Efforts should also be intensified to
ameliorate the humanitarian situation confronting the
people of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
through the provision of aid to those in need.
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates the need for
prompt and effective action by the Security Council
on the issue. At the same time, the Council must
remain sensitive to genuine humanitarian concerns
in discharging its duties in the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Malaysia reiterates its continued commitment to
implementing the relevant Security Council resolutions
on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, and we
stand ready to continue to render our full cooperation to
the Council, including through the Panel of Experts of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1718 (2006). Malaysia firmly believes that
ultimately, current challenges can only be overcome
through peaceful political settlement.
Mr. Massari (Italy): Italy fully aligns itself with
the statement delivered on behalf of the European
Union (see A/76/PV.77) and would like to add further
remarks in its national capacity.
Today’s plenary meeting is the first implementation
of the procedure established by resolution 76/262. This
new mechanism contributes to the strengthening of the
United Nations system and effective multilateralism by
promptly allowing the General Assembly, in the light of
the veto cast in the Security Council, to have a debate
on a key security issue, such as non-proliferation related
to the weapons of mass destruction programme of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Italy remains deeply concerned by the continued
testing of intercontinental ballistic missiles, ballistic
and other missiles by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, including the recent launches
conducted on 5 June, which are flagrant violations
of its obligations under numerous Security Council
resolutions. Those activities constitute a threat to both
regional and international security and the multilateral
non-proliferation architecture that Italy has vowed
to uphold.
Italy strongly urges the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to comply in full with all obligations
arising from the relevant Security Council resolutions;

22-3752717/28

A/76/PV.78

abandon its weapons of mass destruction and ballistic
missile programmes in a complete, verifiable and
irreversible manner; return at an early date to, and
fully comply with, the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons and International Atomic Energy
Agency safeguards; and ratify the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
Italy urges all Member States to join us in
condemning unequivocally the behaviour of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and in
reaffirming that country’s obligation to abandon its
weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missile
programmes. In that regard, we are greatly disappointed
that — because of opposition by two of its permanent
members — the Security Council failed to react
swiftly to the threats posed by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and act in accordance with its own
previous deliberations. Let us once again reiterate that
the actions of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea demand a united and decisive response by the
international community, including further significant
measures to be taken by the Security Council.
Ms. Joyini (South Africa): We know that today
marks the first time that the General Assembly has been
called upon in accordance with resolution 76/262 to
consider a matter on which a permanent member of the
Security Council evoked the provisions of Article 27,
paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations. This
meeting is being held because the Security Council was
unable to act on a matter pertaining to the maintenance
of international peace and security. The inability of
the Council to act when it should is a symptom of the
greater weakness in the institution, which is in dire
need of reform. It is for that reason that South Africa
has consistently called for the urgent reform of the
Security Council to ensure that it is representative of
all Member States.
South Africa has consistently reaffirmed the
centrality of the General Assembly and its role and
authority as the most inclusive and democratic organ
of the United Nations. The authority of the General
Assembly is clearly articulated in Articles 10, 15 and
24 of the Charter, which determines that the Security
Council should carry out its duties on behalf of the 193
States Members of the United Nations. The requirement
for the Council to also submit an annual report — as well
as special reports, when necessary — to the General
Assembly is further testament to the General Assembly’s
centrality. We therefore appreciate the convening of this
18/28

08/06/2022

meeting today to exercise the authority of the General
Assembly accordingly.
South Africa is deeply concerned by the continued
development of the nuclear weapons and missile
programme of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, in contravention of numerous Security Council
resolutions on the matter. We are particularly concerned
by the recent launches of ballistic and intercontinental
ballistic missiles, which take advantage of increased
global tensions and test the resolve and ability of
the Security Council to act. My delegation believes
that it is regrettable that the Council was not able to
establish a unified response to the continued violations
of Security Council resolutions by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea.
South Africa has always believed that the Council
should do all it can to encourage the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to pursue a path towards
the complete denuclearization of the Korean peninsula,
rejoin the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and fulfil its safeguards obligations to the
International Atomic Energy Agency.
Indeed, that is the intention of one of the most
comprehensive sanctions regimes currently imposed
by the Security Council, and it is essential that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and all Member
States comply with those restrictions in order to give
effect to the broader objective. We therefore urge all
Member States to continue to fully implement existing
Security Council resolutions on this and other matters.
We must, however, always bear in mind that the
implementation of sanctions should be imposed in
support of broader peace processes and with a view to
encouraging political dialogue. Their implementation
should therefore be balanced by a provision of
exemptions for humanitarian purposes. The people of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea should not
suffer needlessly as a result of actions taken by their
Government that do not comport with the efforts of the
international community to prevent the development of
nuclear weapons that threaten global peace and security.
South Africa calls for a return to negotiations in
order to create a solution that addresses the issue of
the Korean peninsula in a holistic manner. Ultimately,
it is only through dialogue that seemingly intractable
disputes such as these can be resolved. It is therefore
important for the Council to support and remain
committed to all efforts for dialogue on the peninsula.
22-37527

08/06/2022

Ms. Lõuk (Estonia): Estonia aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the European Union (see
A/76/PV.77).
We welcome today’s historic debate of the General
Assembly pursuant to its unanimous recent adoption of
resolution 76/262, of which Estonia was honoured to be
a sponsor. Estonia deeply regrets that two permanent
members cast a veto during the Security Council meeting
on 26 May (S/PV.9048) held under the agenda item on
non-proliferation and the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea. The Charter of the United Nations has given
the Security Council an unprecedented responsibility
and power to maintain international peace and security.
That responsibility and power grant the authority to
act on behalf of the whole membership of the United
Nations, taking into account the interests of the United
Nations as a whole. They also entail ensuring prompt
and effective action in response to serious violations of
international law. Estonia considers that the Russian and
Chinese vetoes were not cast in a responsible manner
and have allowed a very serious situation on the Korean
peninsula to escalate even further. We have taken note
of the two permanent members’ explanations but find
them unconvincing for the following reasons.
This year alone the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea has already launched 18 rounds of ballisticmissile tests, including six intercontinental ballisticmissile launches. The regime has demonstrated its
commitment to developing its nuclear programme
through rhetoric as well as action. We fully condemn
those activities, which are in clear violation of the
Security Council’s unanimously adopted resolutions
and pose a serious threat to North Korea’s neighbours,
the region and international peace and security. It is the
Council’s duty to address such threats in a robust and
decisive manner and to send a message of condemnation
on behalf of the United Nations community.
Furthermore, when the Security Council fails to uphold
its own resolutions, it risks undermining the rule of law
and weakening the international non-proliferation and
disarmament regime.
Security Council draft resolution S/2022/431,
put forward by the United States, was a necessary,
appropriate and measured response to the threat
and violations at hand. The text contained important
elements aimed at further containing the nuclear-related
activities of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
including measures to counter its malicious cyber
activities, which play an increasingly crucial role in

A/76/PV.78

financing its weapons programme. The text would also
have further facilitated the delivery of humanitarian
aid. In order to justify the veto, it has been argued that
additional sanctions would only worsen the plight of
the population of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. That is a clear example of manipulation of the
facts and the truth. Instead of providing its population
with food, medicine and basic services, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea spends its resources on
its weapons programme. Easing sanctions will not
make the lives of ordinary North Koreans better. The
dire humanitarian situation that they have to endure
rests squarely in the hands of the ruling regime of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and its policies.
Lastly, we are worried about the message the veto
sends to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea as
well as to other potential proliferators. In fact, we have
already seen a reaction from the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. On 5 June, nine days after the veto
was cast and the Council’s action was blocked, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea test-fired eight
ballistic missiles. Through the veto, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea received a signal from the two
permanent members of the Council that its dangerous
provocations can proceed without consequences.
The threat posed by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s development of weapons of mass
destruction affects us all. We therefore call on all
Member States to implement the Security Council
resolutions fully and strictly. We urge China and
Russia to work with the rest of the Security Council in a
responsible manner to address the growing threat posed
by the nuclear and missile activities of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. We call on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to cease its provocations,
respond positively and constructively to the offers
of dialogue from the United States and take concrete
steps towards the complete, verifiable and irreversible
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
Mr. Malovrh (Slovenia): Slovenia aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the European Union
(see A/76/PV.77), and I would like to add the following
remarks in my national capacity.
Slovenia supported the recently adopted standing
mandate for a General Assembly debate when a veto
is cast in the Security Council (resolution 76/262). We
see it as an important step towards more accountability
between the main organs of the United Nations in

22-3752719/28

A/76/PV.78

accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. We
hope it will not need to be used very often, as we need
a functioning Security Council. However, when a veto
is used, it is the responsibility of the General Assembly
to address the situation. We therefore welcome today’s
debate and hope it will strengthen multilateralism
and ensure greater accountability for decisions taken
in the Security Council, while not hindering in any
way its work and important role within the United
Nations system.
The latest series of provocations by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea are a cause for increasing
concern and have led to the further deterioration of the
security situation on the Korean peninsula. Slovenia is
seriously concerned about the indications of ongoing
nuclear activities in various locations in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. The unprecedented number
of its ballistic-missile launches in the past five months
constitute an escalatory threat to regional and global
stability and a blatant violation of multiple resolutions of
the Security Council. Slovenia calls on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to cease its nuclear and
ballistic-missile programmes without further delay
and to resume dialogue with the United States and the
Republic of Korea to enable steps towards complete,
verifiable and irreversible denuclearization. We also
call on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to return to and fully implement the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons as a non-nuclearweapon State, as well as to the system of International
Atomic Energy Agency safeguards inspections.
Slovenia has always been a strong supporter
of dialogue, but we also believe that sanctions are
an important instrument at the Security Council’s
disposal. The aim of Council-mandated sanctions is to
help ensure and maintain or restore international peace
and security. The United Nations sanctions on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the proposed
Security Council draft resolution (S/2022/431), which
was not adopted because of the use of the veto, include a
system of comprehensive humanitarian exemptions that
can facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance to
people in need in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, where the worsening humanitarian situation is
worrying. Unfortunately, the regime keeps its borders
closed and continues to limit humanitarian access. It
has also refused offers of coronavirus disease vaccines.
In conclusion, it is essential that the international
community remain steadfast in protecting peace,
20/28

08/06/2022

stability and international law. We call on all Member
States to fully implement all Security Council
resolutions and remain resolute in preventing any
further deterioration of the security and humanitarian
situations on the Korean peninsula. We call on
Council members to seek unity, act decisively and take
appropriate steps to reverse any additional risks that
the behaviour of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea poses to the global non-proliferation regime.
Mr. Šimonović (Croatia): Croatia aligns itself
with the statement made by the European Union (see
A/76/PV.77), and I would like to add some remarks in
my national capacity.
In protecting international peace and security,
it is the task of the Security Council to take timely
and decisive action to prevent serious violations of
international law. However, increasingly often, a
divided Security Council is unable to perform that role.
When the Security Council is unable to carry out its
responsibilities in maintaining international peace and
security, the General Assembly must step in. Croatia
therefore strongly supported the adoption of resolution
72/262, the so-called veto resolution. Today we are
witnessing its mechanism in play for the first time, and I
think we can be quite pleased. The debate we are having
is a good opportunity for the permanent members of the
Council to explain their veto and for everyone else to
assess whether they think it was justified or not. All
of us can learn something from such a transparent and
inclusive dialogue. But if dialogue does not lead to
progress, the General Assembly also has a mandate to
take action and preserve peace and security when the
Security Council fails to do so.
Exactly two weeks ago, on 25 May, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea launched three missiles,
including one intercontinental ballistic missile. Its
series of missile launches since September 2021, the
most recent just a few days ago, and the intent of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to escalate such
action, threaten international and regional peace and
security. The country’s return to nuclear testing is also
a flagrant violation of its obligations under numerous
Security Council resolutions, which the Council
unanimously affirmed in resolution 2397 (2017). Indeed,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is the only
country in the world that has continued to conduct
full-scale nuclear-explosive testing in the twenty-first
century. Its nuclear and missile development poses a
grave threat to international security and undermines
22-37527

08/06/2022

the global non-proliferation regime. We therefore
condemn its ballistic-missile launches in the strongest
possible terms. We demand that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea immediately abandon its nuclear
weapons, weapons of mass destruction, ballisticmissile programmes and existing nuclear programmes
in a complete, verifiable and irreversible manner.
We also firmly believe that the Security Council
must take bolder steps to counter Pyongyang’s pursuit
of proliferation. It is regrettable that the Security
Council failed to act on 26 May (S/PV.9048), in
direct contravention of its unanimously adopted
resolution 2397 (2017). We urge the Council to honour
its commitments.
Finally, we urge all Member States to fully
implement Security Council resolutions, which are the
building blocks of international peace and security. We
also urge Council members, especially permanent ones,
to prioritize long-term global peace and security over
short-term national interests.
Ms. Ershadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): As
one of our region’s signatories to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Islamic
Republic of Iran has been and continues to be a staunch
supporter of the total elimination of nuclear weapons.
In 1974 Iran proposed the idea of establishing a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East and has
worked hard since then to realize that noble initiative.
Furthermore, as a major victim of the most systematic
use of chemical weapons in contemporary history,
Iran has demonstrated its full commitment to the
total elimination of all weapons of mass destruction,
including nuclear weapons.
The Security Council has not taken a balanced
approach to the North Korea nuclear issue, as it has
focused solely on the concerns of Western countries.
The Council has imposed the toughest and most
comprehensive sanctions on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea without duly considering the
detrimental implications of its decisions for political,
humanitarian and international security issues.
The imposition of sanctions on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea has not only failed to
serve international peace and security but has also
exacerbated and complicated the security arrangements
on the Korean peninsula. Moreover, such measures
have stymied the delivery of life-saving humanitarian

A/76/PV.78

supplies where they are needed most, wreaking havoc
on vulnerable populations.
It is deeply regrettable that the Security Council’s
authority and powers have been repeatedly abused by
certain States that in their pursuit of their illegitimate
political objectives, particularly in relation to developing
countries, regard sanctions as the preferred tool for
exerting maximum pressure on targeted countries. As
a country that has been negatively affected by illegal
unilateral coercive measures, Iran is well aware of
the devastating humanitarian consequences of such
sanctions for ordinary people. We specifically want
to highlight the destructive impact of sanctions on
the effective and timely procurement of medical
equipment and supplies, particularly during the current
coronavirus disease pandemic. Furthermore, sanctions
have detrimental effects on basic human rights, among
other things, including the right to life, health and
food. We believe that any imposition of new sanctions
on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea by the
Security Council will not help resolve the situation
on the Korean peninsula. On the contrary, it will have
harmful repercussions for the people and escalate
tensions in the region. We encourage settlement of
these issues through dialogue, and to that end we stand
ready to engage in any initiative that can fairly lead to
a peaceful resolution of the ongoing situation on the
Korean peninsula.
Mr. Pildegovičs (Latvia): Latvia aligns itself with
the statement made on behalf of the European Union
(see A/76/PV.77).
This meeting marks the first time that the General
Assembly is exercising its mandate to hold a debate
when a veto is cast in the Security Council. We welcome
the mechanism as a necessary step for strengthening
multilateralism, transparency and accountability. For
those reasons, Latvia was among the main sponsors of
resolution 76/262, which granted the General Assembly
this important mandate.
The irresponsible behaviour and disrespect of the
Security Council by the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea threatens peace and security not only on the
Korean peninsula but in the wider region and globally.
We condemn the numerous missile launches conducted
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea since
the beginning of this year, which further aggravate
the situation and blatantly breach its international
obligations. We are also deeply concerned about the

22-3752721/28

A/76/PV.78

credible reports regarding an imminent nuclear test
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. As we
prepare for the tenth Review Conference of the Parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
this August, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
remains one of the global non-proliferation regime’s
most urgent challenges.
We reject attempts to paint the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea as a victim and blame the international
sanctions for the escalation. Such allegations are
irresponsible. It is the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s regime that has breached international norms
by pursuing illegal weapons of mass destruction and
ballistic-missile programmes. It is the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s regime that acts against the
needs of its own people by keeping its borders closed to
humanitarian assistance and diverting its scarce funds
to military programmes instead of accommodating the
basic humanitarian needs of its citizens.
We share others’ concerns regarding the use of
the veto by Russia and China, which blocked the
Council’s ability to act effectively in response to the
recent intercontinental ballistic-missile launches by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. They cast that
veto despite the fact that in its resolution 2397 (2017) the
Council had previously expressed a clear commitment
to responding to further intercontinental ballisticmissile launches by the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea. Such behaviour by two permanent members
does not contribute to the Council’s credibility or help
to solve the dire security crisis that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea has caused. Taking
into account the fact that the international security
environment has fundamentally changed because of
Russia’s full-scale military aggression against Ukraine,
that veto on a non-proliferation matter should also be
seen in the broader context of Russia’s irresponsible
behaviour, including its nuclear sabre-rattling.
Let me finish by reiterating Latvia’s call to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to change its
destructive course, refrain from further escalatory
measures such as ballistic-missile and nuclear tests and
respond to the calls to engage in a meaningful dialogue.
We also urge the Security Council to uphold its previous
commitments and take concrete steps to address the
security challenges posed by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
22/28

08/06/2022

Ms. Stanciu (Romania): While Romania aligns
itself with the statement delivered by the European
Union (see A/76/PV.77), I would like to make some
additional remarks in my national capacity.
The number and pace of provocations by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea since September
2021, including its launches of intercontinental and
other ballistic missiles, in clear violation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, are unprecedented.
Moreover, the reports that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea is preparing to conduct its seventh
nuclear test are deeply concerning. This course of
action represents a real threat to international peace
and security and seeks to undermine the global
non-proliferation regime.
At such times there is a strong need for a resolute
and united response on the part of the international
community, as well as for effective multilateralism.
And yet due to the use of the veto by China and Russia,
the Security Council failed to adopt a draft resolution
(S/2022/431) that would have strengthened sanctions on
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. That sends a
troubling message about the Council’s resolve to uphold
its own resolutions and undermines the goal of the
complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula. Romania therefore welcomes
the use for the first time of the procedure established
by resolution 76/262, which allows for General
Assembly debates when the use of the power of the
veto has prevented the Security Council from fulfilling
its primary responsibility to maintain peace and
security. We urge the Council to return to the united
stance demonstrated on this dossier since its adoption
of resolution 1718 (2006) and to take the appropriate
measures that would pressure the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea regime to reverse its dangerous and
reckless course of action.
In the meantime, we call on all States to abide
by their obligations under the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including the full and effective
implementation of all sanctions. Let me underline that
despite what some delegations may argue, sanctions are
not responsible for the dire humanitarian situation in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, but rather
Pyongyang’s spending of resources on a programme
of weapons of mass destruction to the neglect of its
own people.
22-37527

08/06/2022

Romania continues to support all efforts to achieve
sustainable peace on the Korean peninsula, including
through diplomatic engagement, and calls on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to accept the
repeated offers of dialogue and diplomacy that have
been put forward by the relevant parties. We urge the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to return to
negotiations, take concrete steps towards abandoning
all nuclear weapons, ballistic missiles and related
programmes in a complete, verifiable and irreversible
manner and immediately cease all related activities,
in accordance with all the relevant Security Council
resolutions. We reiterate our steadfast commitment
to the objective of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s return without delay to full compliance
with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and International Atomic Energy Agency
safeguards, as well as its international obligations
based on Security Council resolutions. We also call
on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to sign
and ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty,
and in the meantime to fully observe a moratorium on
nuclear test explosions or any other nuclear explosion.
Mr. Rodríguez Cuadros (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
Peru considers this meeting of the General Assembly
extraordinarily important, since it marks the first
application of resolution 76/262, which empowers the
President to convene a meeting of the Assembly when
one or more of the permanent members of the Security
Council exercises the right of veto. It is a milestone
in the history of the United Nations. The reasoning
behind the decision is based on the powers that the
General Assembly has regarding the maintenance
of international peace and security, as well as on the
legal fact that the mandate for the members of the
Council to maintain international peace and security
is conferred on them by all the Member States. The
practice that we are initiating today is a step forward
in the democratization of the decisions taken by the
Security Council and one that encourages transparency,
responsibility and accountability in its functioning.
Today’s hearing of the explanations and grounds of
the Chinese and Russian delegations regarding their
exercise of the veto (see A/76/PV.77) is unprecedented.
We have taken careful note of their statements, which
form part of the accountability mechanism that we are
inaugurating today.
We are aware that the Charter of the United
Nations establishes a system of collective security that

A/76/PV.78

involves the veto. That is a reality. But the principle
of transformative realism should result in a veto that
is used in strict accordance and coherence with the
mandate that the Charter grants the Council, as well as
in accordance with its purpose and design. According
to a systematic interpretation of the Charter, the veto
cannot be used in situations in which its exercise
might have a negative impact on the maintenance of
international peace and security.
At the same time, however, we cannot forget that
the institution of the veto is a pressure mechanism
that encourages negotiation and the establishment of
mutually agreed decisions on the part of the members
of the Council. In the teleological interpretation of the
Charter, the use of the veto is a last resort that all the
permanent members must strive to avoid. Moreover,
their behaviour should reflect an awareness that
consensus or unanimity necessarily entails negotiation
and the search for a way to reconcile their interests.
In Peru’s view, the diplomatic action that is the most
representative of the spirit of the Charter and of
responsible action by the permanent members is
this — negotiations, the reconciliation of positions and
negotiations. And if necessary, that should be followed
by further negotiations and reconciliations of position,
and more negotiations. Because it is effective and leads
to peace, that rational conduct on the part of permanent
members has been successfully and consistently
implemented since 2006 with respect to the nuclear
and ballistic-missile development programmes of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. All of the
resolutions on this sensitive and urgent issue were
adopted by the Council with the consensus of the
permanent members. Unfortunately, on this occasion
that practice has been brought to a halt. My Government
is not pointing fingers but simply noting facts.
In accordance with its vision of global governance
based on respect for international law, Peru has
consistently and systematically condemned the ballisticmissile tests, especially intercontinental ballisticmissile tests, carried out by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. They violate Security Council
resolutions, they are inconsistent with the maintenance
of peace and security in the region and they are also in
violation of the nuclear non-proliferation regime. Peru
has also unequivocally condemned the missile launches
carried out on 25 May.
In the context of the instability and the serious
events that are currently posing a very dangerous threat

22-3752723/28

A/76/PV.78

to peace, Peru has consistently prioritized negotiation,
diplomacy and the quest for peaceful solutions to global
crises and conflicts, and will continue to do so. Far from
fuelling tension and fostering conflicts, the Charter
obliges us to create the conditions for negotiation
and the peaceful resolution of such conflicts. That
necessarily implies the full application of the legitimate
sanctions that the Charter authorizes the Security
Council to mandate in extreme cases. That is the case
with the sanctions outlined in resolution 2397 (2017).
Those sanctions and the obligations that resolution 2397
(2017) imposes on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea must be respected, without exception.
The international community also believes that
legitimate sanctions must stop short of inflicting
suffering or punishment on ordinary people. In that
context, the Government of Peru urges the parties
concerned to resume negotiations in order to arrive at
a peaceful solution and be able to effect the complete,
verifiable and irreversible denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula by mutual agreement.
Mr. Lippwe (Federated States of Micronesia):
When the General Assembly adopted resolution
76/262, just over a month ago, I doubt that anyone
in this room anticipated that we would be back so
soon for the Assembly to exercise its newly acquired
mandate. But while it may be a success story for the
Assembly, it should be very clear that it is no substitute
for the Security Council’s exercise of its awesome
responsibility to take action on matters relating to
international peace and security.
The Federated States of Micronesia is gravely
concerned about the nuclear and missile developments
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We
strongly condemned the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s decision to launch an intercontinental
ballistic missile on 24 March, undermining the global
non-proliferation regime. It also undermines the Hague
Code of Conduct, poses a clear threat to international
peace and security and represents a hazard to
everyone throughout the Asia-Pacific region and the
world beyond.
We are deeply concerned about the utter disregard
demonstrated by the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea for various Security Council resolutions.
Paragraph 28 of Council resolution 2397 (2017),
unanimously adopted in December 2017, states that if
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea “conducts
24/28

08/06/2022

[…] a launch of a ballistic missile system capable of
reaching intercontinental ranges”, the Security Council,
through a new resolution, will take action to further
restrict the export of petroleum to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. It is regrettable that the
proposed Security Council draft resolution (S/2022/431)
to address this violation was vetoed, in complete
disregard of the Council’s own, earlier resolution (see
S/PV.9048). That has emboldened the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to exploit the Security
Council’s division. Just days ago, it pushed towards
further provocation. The prospects for reducing the
possibility of a war on the Korean peninsula are further
diminished, and those with the veto power bear a heavy
responsibility vis-à-vis the Assembly and the world for
their decisions.
As a Pacific island State that understands the threat
and devastating effects of nuclear weapons, Micronesia
strongly urges all Member States to continue to fully
implement the relevant existing Security Council
resolutions and calls on the Council, especially its
permanent members, to take serious, genuine and
united measures against the flagrant actions of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom deeply regrets China and Russia’s use of
the veto on 26 May (see S/PV.9048) to block Security
Council draft resolution S/2022/431, on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, a draft resolution that
enjoyed the support of every other Council member.
Blocking the Council’s response to repeated breaches
of Security Council resolutions sends a dangerous
signal to States seeking to undermine international
peace and security, and that is why we are here today in
the General Assembly.
On 5 June, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea launched eight ballistic missiles. That is the
highest number in a single day and the sixteenth set
of tests in 2022. The Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea has tested six intercontinental ballistic missiles
this year. It has publicly stated its intention to break
its nuclear testing moratorium. We know it is making
preparations to conduct a nuclear test this year.
All the existing United Nations sanctions against
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea were agreed
unanimously. The threat that its weapons present to
international peace and security has only increased.
It was right for the Council to take further action. We
22-37527

08/06/2022

should continue to press for the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to return to its commitments
under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and the International Atomic Energy Agency
safeguards. We again call on China and Russia to work
together with other Council members towards that
goal and for all Member States to fully implement the
existing United Nations sanctions.
The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned
about the dire humanitarian situation in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, which is the result of the
Government’s diversion of resources into its weapons
programmes. After two years of border lockdowns
due to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic,
and with Pyongyang reporting its first fever cases, the
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
is deteriorating. We call on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to provide access for United Nations
humanitarian workers to deliver urgently required aid.
United Nations sanctions are not targeted at the North
Korean people, and we fully support the delivery of
humanitarian support to the most vulnerable. The
vetoed draft resolution would have made it easier to
provide humanitarian support, including in response to
the COVID-19 situation.
I feel obliged to respond to remarks made by the
Chinese and Russian representatives about AUKUS
(see A/76/PV.77). The trilateral cooperation between
Australia, the United States of America and the
United Kingdom will be fully consistent with the three
parties’ respective non-proliferation obligations and
pursued in a manner that preserves the integrity of the
non-proliferation regime.
Finally, let me again call on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to cease its provocations,
engage meaningfully in dialogue and take concrete
steps towards denuclearization. This must be done in
a complete, verifiable and irreversible manner. In the
long term, denuclearization is the only way to create a
more stable and prosperous future for the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and its people.
Ms. Seid (Palau): Our small country of Palau in the
far western Pacific is incredibly proud to be the first
nation in the world to have adopted a Constitution that
bans nuclear weapons. As a Pacific island nation, we had
and continue to have a particular interest in realizing
a nuclear-weapon-free world, given that our region
experienced the catastrophic and ongoing humanitarian

A/76/PV.78

consequences of more than 300 nuclear test explosions
conducted over the course of five decades. Our bold
action inspired and propelled further anti-nuclear
movements throughout the Pacific, including in Fiji,
New Zealand and other South Pacific neighbours,
through the South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty,
otherwise known as the Rarotonga Treaty.
Given our proximity to North Korea, we are gravely
concerned about the nuclear and missile development
that is currently happening. War is rarely, if ever, just.
But there is a particularly grave injustice in robbing not
only the current generation of peace and prosperity but
multiple generations that have not yet even been born,
as we have seen in the birth defects of children born to
women with radiation exposure in the Marshall Islands.
Babies with severe deformities, such as internal organs
outside their bodies, have been born to parents at
substantial risk for cancer and other serious illnesses
as a result of exposure. Moreover, the environmental
costs of nuclear fallout are also well documented. Many
Pacific islands remain radioactive and uninhabitable to
this day. Those islands were once home to people with
ancestral ties, spirits and stories, and teemed with both
terrestrial and marine life. Today they remain skeletons.
If a nuclear war were to break out in the Pacific, it would
expose our tuna and migratory fish stocks to the rest of
the world. Let me remind the Assembly that the Pacific
supplies 60 per cent of the global tuna trade. So while
this might be thought of as a regional kerfuffle by some
Member States, I would like to highlight the fact that
a nuclear programme activation in our region might
eventually end up in the fish on their grandchildren’s
plates, regardless of where they are in the world.
We listened carefully to the statements made this
morning, which homed in on claims of self-defence, bias
and self-righteousness and were rife with geopolitical
agendas. However, they do not conceal the escalating
reality, which is the fact that North Korea has launched
60 or more ballistic missiles since 2019. This year it
has launched the most ballistic missiles ever in a single
year, despite the fact that we are only in June, and last
weekend, emboldened by China and Russia’s veto in
the Security Council (see S/PV.9048), it launched the
most ballistic missiles it ever has in a single event.
Furthermore, North Korea is the only country that has
carried out nuclear tests in the twenty-first century.
The International Atomic Energy Agency has reported
observations that North Korea is preparing its seventh
potential nuclear test site, and it has a track record of

22-3752725/28

A/76/PV.78

08/06/2022

exporting its weapons and technologies to third parties,
in an overt violation of the global non-proliferation
regime, including the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons.

represents disregard for the calls of the international
community and a violation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions, and runs counter to the efforts of
all parties to achieve a peaceful solution.

In that light, Palau condemns North Korea’s
intercontinental and other ballistic-missile launches,
which are in violation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. We call on all Council members to act
responsibly and join the rest of the United Nations
community in working to reduce the increasing threat
that North Korea poses to world peace. We are dismayed
that the Security Council failed to act according to its
own decision in its unanimously adopted resolution
2397 (2017), which states that the Council will take
further measures in the event of an intercontinental
ballistic-missile launch by North Korea. We urge the
Council to honour its commitment. We further urge all
Member States to continue to fully implement existing
Security Council resolutions.

We urge the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to halt its ballistic-missile tests, comply with the
relevant Security Council resolutions and refrain from
actions that may obstruct possible dialogue. Thailand
hopes that all the parties will use peaceful means and
continue to work to realize peace and stability on
the Korean peninsula and bring about its complete,
verifiable, irreversible and peaceful denuclearization.

On a softer note, we also urge North Korea to
accept the invitation of many Member States to engage
in dialogue and diplomacy, including by accepting
humanitarian assistance for the coronavirus disease
outbreak and food shortages that are plaguing their
country today.
Palau considers the global non-proliferation regime
a key safeguard in protecting our common humanity.
It is an essential aspect of our broader struggle to end
violence, promote harmony and friendship among
the peoples of the world, achieve justice and respect
for human rights and ensure a clean, safe and healthy
environment for all of us, our children and our future
generations. We call on everyone to stand up to guard it.
Mrs. Hanlumyuang (Thailand): The issue under
discussion is the ballistic-missile tests undertaken
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. On
4 February, Thailand joined other Association of
Southeast Asian Nations member States in expressing
grave concern about the continued ballistic-missile
tests conducted by the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea earlier this year, which have the potential
to escalate tensions and threaten regional peace and
stability. Unfortunately, the concerns of the international
community seem not to have been taken into account.
Thailand is therefore concerned about and disappointed
by the latest ballistic-missile tests conducted by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, including an
intercontinental ballistic-missile test last month. That
26/28

Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic):
This meeting is being held at a very sensitive time,
when the international community is witnessing
decisive changes, with complex tensions in the area
of international security as well as increasing tensions
at the regional level. That demands that we all step up
our work and coordinate our endeavours to support
international efforts aimed at ensuring the total and
complete elimination of nuclear weapons. That will
enable us to reach our ultimate goal of a world free
of weapons of mass destruction and ensure a safe and
secure future for current and subsequent generations.
That is important because those dangerous weapons
have devastating and lethal effects on both people and
the environment.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
continuing nuclear tests and launches of ballistic
missiles, including intercontinental ballistic missiles,
are irrefutable proof that serious efforts to achieve
the entry into force of the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty are more desperately needed than
ever, since that would strengthen its binding nature as
well as the effectiveness of both the disarmament and
non-proliferation regimes.
The delegation of Iraq emphasizes that nuclear tests
and repeated missile launches constitute a grave threat
to international and regional peace and security. We
therefore appeal to the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to comply with all the relevant Security Council
resolutions and to refrain from any more provocative
actions designed to increase tensions on the Korean
peninsula and all over the world. We also urge the
international community to continue its diplomatic
efforts, which have been effective in many situations
and can promote efforts to support peace and stability
on the Korean peninsula.
22-37527

08/06/2022

Mr. Ruiz Díaz (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome this historic meeting on the use of the
veto by permanent members of the Security Council.
I would like to reaffirm how important it is that the
Security Council find ways to overcome its internal
differences. Paraguay has historically been in favour
of reforming the Security Council and specifically by
gradually eliminating the veto. A broad majority of
Member States have asked the Security Council to do
so in specific instances, especially when its permanent
members’ exercise of their privilege results in the
Council’s failure to fulfil its primary responsibility
of maintaining international peace and security,
thereby threatening multilateralism and the validity of
the Organization.
As part of the first densely populated zone free
of nuclear weapons, Paraguay has always reaffirmed
its unbreakable commitment to strengthening the
disarmament and non-proliferation regime and
advocated for transparent, irreversible and verifiable
nuclear disarmament that is also legally binding on all
States. The Government of Paraguay condemns in the
strongest terms the recent actions by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea designed to increase
tensions on the Korean peninsula and threaten the
territorial integrity of a Member State, in violation
of Security Council resolutions and international law.
Today it is more urgent than ever that the Security
Council demonstrate its capacity to act to avoid
further undermining its credibility and its very
reason for existence. It cannot continue to disregard
noncompliance with its own decisions.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate for this meeting. We shall hear the
remaining speakers on Friday morning on 10 June in this
Hall after the item already scheduled for consideration.
Before giving the floor to speakers in the exercise
of the right of reply, I would like to remind members
that statements in the exercise of the right of reply are
limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention and
five minutes for the second, and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Wu Jianjian (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China is exercising its right of reply to respond to the
statements by the United States of America, Australia,
Japan and Germany, which made presumptuous
comments and accusations about China’s voting position
in the Security Council that China categorically rejects.

A/76/PV.78

In the Security Council meeting under discussion (see
S/PV.9048) and in this morning’s General Assembly
meeting (see A/76/PV.77), China expounded its position
on the Korean peninsula issue comprehensively. We
should point out that China takes an extremely cautious
and responsible approach to every vote in the Council.
Our vote against draft resolution S/2022/431, submitted
by the United States, was entirely reasonable, justified
and within China’s rights as a permanent member of the
Security Council. The fundamental aim of our vote is to
maintain peace and stability on the peninsula, achieve
its denuclearization and resolve the issue through
dialogue and consultation.
The Security Council has primary responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security and
plays a constructive role in resolving regional hotspot
issues. The Council has so far adopted 10 sanctions
resolutions against the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, establishing an extremely tough, complex
sanctions system. Continuing to increase the sanctions
will only make the likelihood of a political solution
even more remote. The key to effective work for the
Security Council lies not in making pronouncements
condemning the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea or adopting a new sanctions draft resolution
against the country, but rather in helping to maintain
stability and prevent chaos on the peninsula, alleviating
the difficulties that the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea is facing on the humanitarian and livelihoods
fronts and creating conditions for a political solution to
the problems there.
Adopting a resolution with no principle and plunging
the country concerned into even deeper disaster would
be an irresponsible dereliction of duty on the part of
the Security Council. Rather than blaming China, the
countries concerned should reflect on what they have
done. They should abandon their double standards on
nuclear non-proliferation and cease their efforts to
create bloc confrontation in the Asia-Pacific region and
shift the blame to others on the peninsula issue. As a
permanent member of the Council, China will continue
to earnestly carry out the responsibilities entrusted to
it by the United Nations, participate responsibly in the
work of the Security Council, actively maintain the unity
of its members, strictly implement Council resolutions
concerning the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and firmly support the Council in playing its due role in
the political settlement of the peninsula issue.

22-3752727/28

A/76/PV.78

Mr. Kim In Chol (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea): My delegation is taking the floor to respond to
statements made by some countries today. This morning
(see A/76/PV.77) my Permanent Representative clarified
the root causes of the escalating tensions on the Korean
peninsula and beyond, as well as the inherent right of a
sovereign State to self-defence. The explanations given
by China and the Russian Federation resonated well in
that regard through their deep analysis of the situation
on the Korean peninsula.
However, some countries are still making desperate
attempts to distort the nature of the security environment
on the peninsula and are unilaterally seeking to shift
the blame to the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. Against that troubling background, I would like
to reiterate my country’s principled position. No other
country on the planet has been constantly threatened
with war as has the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, and the result has been that our people long for
peace more intensely than any country in the world.
Were it not for the decades-long hostile policy and
nuclear threats of the United States of America, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea would not
have opted to bolster its national defence capabilities
while bracing for ordeals and sacrifices. Even after the
holding of the Democratic People’s Republic of KoreaUnited States summit in Singapore, the United States
has carried out a huge number of joint military exercises
directed against the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, exercises that it had committed to suspending.
Worse still, the United States has conducted a wide
variety of tests of strategic weapons and has deployed
advanced aggressive means on the Korean peninsula
and beyond in a way that poses a serious threat to my
State. The fact that we have so far maintained peace
on the Korean peninsula even amid the threat of war
by the United States is due solely to the fact that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has increased

28/28

08/06/2022

its national defence capabilities in its exercise of its
legitimate right to self-defence.
The Security Council’s adoption in the past of a
number of resolutions and other documents has failed
to help address the issue of the Korean peninsula and
indeed has ended up triggering a vicious cycle of
escalating tensions. The Council has failed to find an
approach to resolving the issue of the Korean peninsula
that aligns with the principles of objectivity, impartiality
and equilibrium. It is the hostile policy and double
standards of the United States that are disrupting peace
and security on the Korean peninsula and undermining
the international non-proliferation regime. If the
Security Council is genuinely interested in ensuring
peace and security on the Korean peninsula, it will first
be vital to focus on doing away with the vicious, hostile
policies and double standards of the United States
rather than calling into question our legitimate exercise
of our right to self-defence.
Only when the Security Council becomes cognizant
of the immense responsibility entrusted to it by Member
States and abides by the principles of sovereign equality
and impartiality will it truly be able to contribute to
ensuring lasting peace and security on the Korean
peninsula and beyond. Our efforts to build up our
national defence capabilities are part of our national
defence plan to bring the long-term military threats
from the United States under control and prevent any
potential outbreaks of war on the Korean peninsula. We
will never retreat from bolstering our national defence
capabilities as long as the United States persists in its
hostile policies and double standards.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 124.
The meeting rose at 5.50 p.m.

22-37527
