178

General Anemhly-Thirty-third Session

1. Urges ali States to respect the right of the people of Belize to self-determination, independence and
territorial integrity, and to render ali practica! assistance necessary for the secure and early exercise of
that right;
8. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Dec1aration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to remain seized of the question
and to assist the people of Belize in the exercise of
their inalienable rights.
81 st plenary meeting
13 December 1978
33/37.

Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories transmitted under Article 73 e
of the Charter of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963, in which it requested the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples to study the information transmitted to the Secretary-General under
Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations and
to take such information fully into account in examining the situation with regard to the implementation of
the Declaration,
Recalling also its resolution 32/33 of 28 November 1977, in which it requested the Special Committee
to continue to discharge the functions entrusted to it
under resolution 1970 (XVIII),
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee dealing with the transmittal of information under Article 73 e of the Charter38 and the
action taken by the Committee in respect of that information,
H aving also examined the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the item, 39
Deploring that sorne Member States having responsibilities for the administration of Non-Self-Governing
Territories have ceased to transmit information under
Article 73 e of the Charter,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter
of the United Nations;
2. Reaffirms that, in the absence of a decision by
the General Assembly itself that a Non-Self-Governing
Territory has attained a full measure of self-government in terms of Chapter XI of the Charter, the administering Power concerned should continue to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter with
respect to that Territory;
3. Requests the administering Powers concerned to
transmit, or continue to transmit, to the Secretary38 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/33/23/Rev.l ), vol. IV, chap.
XXXIII.
39 A/33/341 and Add.1.

General the information prescribed in Article 73 e of
the Charter, as well as the fullest possible information
on political and constitutional developments in the Territories concerned, within a maximum period of six
months following the expiration of the administrative
year in those Territories;
4. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
discharge the functions entrusted to it under General
Assembly resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance with
established procedures, and to report thereon to the
Assembly at its thirty-fourth session.
81st plenary meeting
13 December 1978
33/38.

Question of Southern Rhodesia
A

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Southern Rhodesia (Zimbabwe),
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,40
Having heard the statements of the representative
of the administering Power, 41
Having heard the statements of the representatives
of the Patriotic Front who participated in an observer
capacity in the consideration of the item, 42
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the
programme of action for the full implementation of
the Declaration, as well as all other resolutions relating
to the question of Southern Rhodesia adopted by the
General Assembly, the Security Council and the Special
Committee,
Taking into account the Maputo Dec\aration in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia and the
Programme of Action for the Liberation of Zimbabwe
and Namibia, 4 :3 adopted by the International Conference in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia, held at Maputo from 16 to 21 May 1977, as
well as the Lagos Declaration for Action against
Apartheid, 44 adopted by the World Conference for
Action against Apartheid,
Recalling Security Council resolution 423 (1978) of
14 March 1978 condemning the Salisbury agreement
of 3 March 1978,
4 0 Ofjicial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/33/23/Rev.1 ), vol. I, chaps. JI
and IV-VI, and vol. 11, chap. VII.
41 Jbid., Thirty-third Session, Fourth Committee, 10th meeting, paras. 11-29, and 22nd meeting, paras. 15-21; and ibid ..
Fourth Committee, Sessional Fascicle, corrigendum.
4 2 Jbid., 12th meeting, paras. 3-10 and 13-24, and 23rd
meeting, paras. 24-27. For the full text, see A/C.4/33/L.3
and L.4.
43 A/32/109/Rev.l-S/12344/Rev.l,
annex V. For the
printed text, see Official Records of the Security Council,
Thirty-second Year, Supplement for Ju/y, August and September 1977.
4 4 Report of the World Conference for Action against Apartheid, Lagos, 22-26 August 1977 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.77.XIV.2 and corrigendum), sect. X.

VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Bearing in mind that the Government of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as
the administering Power, has the primary responsibility far putting an end to the critica! situation in Southern Rhodesia (Zimbabwe) which, as repeatedly affirmed by the Security Council, constitutes a threat to
international peace and security,
Reaffirming that any attempts to negotiate the future
of Zimbabwe with the illegal régime on the basis of
independence befare majority rule would be in contravention of the inalienable rights of the people of the
Territory and contrary to the provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations and of resolution 1514 (XV),
Condemning the deliberate sabotage by the illegal
racist minority régime of the numerous, intensive efforts being made to secure a negotiated settlement of
Zimbabwe on the basis of majority rule,
Condemning ali attempts and manreuvres by the
illegal régime aimed at the retention of power by a
racist minority and at preventing the achievement of
independence by Zimbabwe,
Commending the Patriotic Front far its political maturity and its co-operation in the efforts to secure a
negotiated settlement in Zimbabwe,
Bearing in mind the resolution on Zimbabwe 45
adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its
fifteenth ordinary session, held at Khartoum from 18
to 22 July 1978,
Bearing in mind also the relevant provisions of the
Declaration of the Conference of Ministers far Foreign
Affairs of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Belgrade
from 25 to 30 July 1978, 46
Stressing the grave responsibility of the international
community to take ali possible measures in support of
the people of Zimbabwe in their liberation struggle
under the leadership of the Patriotic Front and in
putting an end to the hardship and suffering of Zimbabweans in that regard,
Indignant at the arbitrary imprisonment and detention of political leaders and others, the summary execution of freedom fighters and the continued denial
of fundamental human rights, including in particular
the wanton beating, torture, massacre and mass murder
of Zimbabweans, arbitrary criminal measures of collective punishment and measures designed to create
an apartheid State in Zimbabwe,
Commending the firm determination of the people
of Zimbabwe, under the leadership of the Patriotic
Front, to achieve freedom and independence, and convinced that their unity and solidarity are fundamental
to the rapid attainment of that objective,
Recalling Security Council resolutions 403 ( 1977)
of 14 January 1977 and 411 (1977) of 30 June 1977,
strongly condemning the acts of aggression against
Botswana, Mozambique and Zambia by the illegal régime in Southern Rhodesia,
Indignan! and deeply concerned at the continuing
acts of aggression referred to above against neighbouring independent African States, in particular the recent
45 A/33/235

and Corr.l, annex II, resolution AHG/Res.89

(XV).
46 See A/33/206, annex l.

179

acts of aggression against Zambia which have resulted
in loss of human Iives and destruction of property,
I. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Zimbabwe to self-determination, freedom and independence and the legitimacy of their struggle to secure
by all meaos at their disposal the enjoyment of that
right as set farth in the Charter of the United Nations
and in confarmity with the objectives of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Reaffirms the principie that there should be no
independence befare majority rule in Zimbabwe and
that any settlement relating to the future of the Territory must be worked out with the full participation
of the Patriotic Front and in accordance with the true
aspirations of the people of Zimbabwe;
3. Condemns the continued war of repression and
the intensified oppressive measures against the people
of Zimbabwe by the illegal racist minority régime;
4. Strongly condemns the illegal racist minority
régime far its repeated acts of aggression against Botswana, Mozambique and Zambia;
5. Strongly condemns the illegal racist minority régime far its recent acts of aggression against Zambia
and its savage rnassacre of Zirnbabwean refugees;
6. Strongly condemns South Africa and certain
Western and other countries far the direct and indirect
support they are continuing to give to the illegal racist
rninority régirne in contravention of the provisions of
ali the relevant resolutions and decisions of the United
Nations;
7. Calls upon the Governrnent of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, in the
discharge of its primary responsibility as the administering Power, to take all effective measures to enable the
people of Zimbabwe to accede to independence in accordance with their deep aspirations and not under
any circumstances to ac~rd to the illegal régime any
of the powers or attributes of sovereignty;
8. Firmly supports the people of Zimbabwe in their
legitimate struggle to exercise their inalienable right to
self-determination and independence by ali means at
their disposal;
9. Reaffirms the relevant provisions of the Maputo
Declaration in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and
Namibia and the Programme of Action for the Liberation of Zimbabwe and N arnibia, in particular the provisions calling far assistance to those front-line States
which are victims of repeated acts of aggression by the
racist minority régime; 47
10. Condemns and rejects the so-called interna!
settlernent reached at Salisbury on 3 March 1978, and
strongly denounces all other manoeuvres of the illegal
racist rninority régirne aimed at the retention of power
by a racist minority;
11. Declares that so-called interna! settlement null
and void, in confarmity with Security Council resolution 423 (1978);
12. Declares as illegal any interna} settlement under the auspices of the illegal régime and calls upon
47 A/32/109/Rev.l-S/12344/Rev.l, annex V, paras. 19, 21
and 39. Por the printed text, see Ofjicial Records of the Security Council, Thirty-second Year, Supp/ement for Ju/y, August
and September 1977.

180

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

ali States not to accord any recognition to such settlement;
13. Demands:
(a) The termination forthwith of all repressive
measures perpetrated by the illegal racist minority régime against the people of Zimbabwe, in particular the
killings and executions of freedom fighters by that régime, the brutality committed in the "operational area",
the arbitrary closure of African areas, the eviction,
transfer and resettlement of Africans and the creation
of concentration camps;
(b) The unconditional and immediate release of
all political prisoners and detainees, the removal of all
restrictions on individuals as well as all other restrictions on political activity, the establishment of full
democratic freedom and equality of political rights and
the restoration to the population of fundamental human rights;
(e) The cessation of the influx of foreign immigrants into the Territory and the immediate withdrawal
of all mercenaries therefrom;
(d) The immediate cessation of all acts of aggression and any preparations therefor against neighbouring
States;
14. Calls upon all States to take all necessary and
effective measures to prevent the advertisement for,
and recruitment, training and transit of, mercenaries
for Southern Rhodesia;
15. Strongly condemns those States which allow or
encourage in their territory the recruitment, training
and transit of mercenaries for Southern Rhodesia;
16. Requests all States to give immediate and substantial material assistance to the Governments of
Botswana, Mozambique and Zambia to enable those
Governments to strengthen their defence capability in
arder to safeguard effectively their sovereignty and
territorial integrity;
17. Requests all States, directly and through their
action in the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system of which they
are members, as well as the non-governmental organizations concerned and the various programmes within
the United Nations system, to extend, in consultation
and co-operation with the Organization of African
Unity, to the people of Zimbabwe and the Patriotic
Front all the moral, material, political and humanitarian assistance necessary in their struggle for the restoration of their inalienable rights;
18. Invites all Governments, the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations
system, the United Nations bodies concerned, nongovernmental organizations having a special interest
in the field of decolonization and the Secretary-General
to take steps, as appropriate, to give widespread and
continuous publicity through all the media at their
disposal to information on the situation in Zimbabwe
and on the relevant decisions and actions of the United
Nations, with particular reference to the application
of sanctions against the illegal régime;
19. Requests the Government of the United Kingdom to continue to co-operate with the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in the

discharge of the mandate entrusted to the latter by the
General Assembly and to report thereon to the Special
Committee and to the Assembly at its thirty-fourth
session;
20. Requests the Special Committee to keep the
situation in the Territory under review as a matter
of priority and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session.
81 st plenary meeting
13 December 1978

B
The General Assembly,
Having adopted resolution A above on the question
of Southern Rhodesia (Zimbabwe),
Strongly deploring the increasing collaboration, in
violation of Article 2, paragraph 5, and Article 25 of
the Charter of the United Nations and of the relevant
decisions of the United Nations, which certain States,
particularly South Africa, maintain with the illegal
racist minority régime, thereby seriously impeding the
effective application of sanctions and other measures
taken thus far against the illegal régime,
Deeply disturbed at widespread violations of United
Nations sanctions, including the operation of Southern
Rhodesian aircraft for international passenger and
cargo traffic, as well as the continued functioning of
information and airline offices of the illegal régime
outside Southern Rhodesia resulting in an influx of
foreign tourists into the Territory,
Noting with regret and concern the decision of the
Govemment of the United States of America to allow
the entry into the United States of Ian Smith and sorne
members of the illegal régime in Southem Rhodesia,
Considering that the serious developments in the
area call in particular for urgent, concerted international action with a view to imposing total isolation
on the illegal régime,
Deeply concerned that the measures approved by
the Security Council have so far failed to bring an end
to the illegal régime and convinced that sanctions cannot put an end to that régime unless they are comprehensive, mandatory and strictly supervised and unless
measures are taken against States which violate them,
Bearing in mind the resolution on Zimbabwe 48
adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its
fifteenth ordinary session, held at Khartoum from 18 to
22 July 1978,
Reaffirming the relevant provisions of the Maputo
Declaration in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe
and Namibia and the Programme of Action for the
Liberation of Zimbabwe and Namibia, adopted by the
International Conference in Support of the Peoples of
Zimbabwe and Namibia, held at Maputo from 16 to
21 May 1977, in particular those provisions relating to
sanctions against the illegal régime, 49
Conscious of the urgent and special economic needs
of Mozambique and Zambia arising from their imple4 8 A/33/235

and Corr.1, annex 11, resolution AHG/Res.89

(XV).

annex V, paras. 16, 17
and 46-49. For the printed text, see Offecial Records of the
Security Council, Thirty-second Year, Supplement for Ju/y,
August and September 1977.
49 A/32/109/Rev.l-S/12344/Rev.1,

VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Cornmittee

mentation of the relevant decisions of the Security
Council,
l. Strongly condemns those Governments, particularly the Government of South Africa, which, in violation of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations
and in open contravention of their specific obligations
under Article 2, paragraph 5, and Article 25 of the
Charter of the United Nations, continue to collaborate
with the illegal racist minority régime, and urges those
Governments to cease forthwith all such collaboration;
2. Condemns those Governments which violate the
mandatory sanctions adopted by the Security Council,
as well as certain Governments which continue to fail
to enforce the sanctions, in contravention of the obligations assumed by them under Article 2, paragraph 5,
and Article 25 of the Charter;
3. Deplores the decision of the Government of the
United States of America to allow the entry into the
United States of Ian Smith and sorne members of the
illegal régime in Southern Rhodesia, in flagrant violation of the decisions of the United Nations, in particular Security Council resolution 253 (1968) of 29 May
1968, and of the obligations under Article 25 of the
Charter;
4. Strongly condemns the Government of South
Africa for its continued support of the illegal racist
minority régime in Southern Rhodesia in flagrant contravention of the resolutions of the Security Council
on sanctions against that régime;
5. Calls upan all Governments which thus far have
not done so:
(a) To take stringent enforcement measures to
ensure strict compliance by all individuals, associations
and bodies corporate under their jurisdiction with the
sanctions imposed by the Security Council and to
prohibit any form of collaboration by them with the
illegal régime;
( b) To take effective measures to prevent or discourage the emigration to Southern Rhodesia (Zimbabwe) of any individuals or groups of individuals
under their jurisdiction;
(e) To discontinue any action which might confer
a semblance of legitimacy on the illegal régime, inter
afia by forbidding the operation and activities of "Air
Rhodesia", the "Rhodesia National Tourist Board" and
the "Rhodesian Information Office", or any other activities which contravene the aims and purposes of the
sanctions;
(d) To invalidate passports and other documents
for travel to the Territory;
(e) To take ali effective measures against international companies and agencies which supply petroleum
and petroleum products to the illegal régime in Southern Rhodesia;
6. Strongly condemns the supply of petroleum and
petroleum products to Southern Rhodesia by oil companies of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and other countries which, by that
deliberate act, are circumventing United Nations sanctions and strengthening the illegal régime of Ian Smith;
7. Requests ali States, directly or within the framework of the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system of which they
are members, and through the various programmes

181

within the United Nations system, to extend to the
Governments of Botswana, Mozambique and Zambia
ali forms of financia!, technical and material assistance
in arder to enable those Governments to overcome economic difficulties in connexion with their application
of economic sanctions imposed against the illegal régime and the severe economic loss and destruction of
property brought about by the acts of aggression committed by the régime, and requests the Security Council to undertake a periodic review of the question of
economic assistance to the three Governments;
8. Deplores the complicity of successive Governments of the United Kingdom in the violation of United
Nations sanctions by British oil companies, as exposed
in the Bingham report 50 on the supply of petroleum
and petroleum products to the illegal régime of Ian
Smith;
9. Deems it imperative that the scope of sanctions
against the illegal régime be widened to include all the
measures envisaged under Article 41 of the Charter
and reiterates its request that the Security Council
consider taking the necessary measures in that regard
as a matter of urgency;
1O. Requests the Security Council to impose,
among other things, a mandatory embargo on the
supply of petroleum and petroleum products to South
Africa in view of the fact that petroleum and petroleum
products are transported from South Africa to Southern Rhodesia;
l l. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to follow the implementation
of the present resolution and invites the Security Council Committee established in pursuance of resolution
253 ( 1968) concerning the question of Southern Rhodesia to continue to co-operate in the related work
of the Special Committee.
81 st plenary meeting
13 December 1978
33/39.

Question of East Timor

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the inalienable right of all peoples to
self-determination and independence in accordance
with the principies of the Charter of the United Nations and of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained
in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Recalling its resolutions 3485 (XXX) of 12 December 1975, 31/53 of 1 December 1976 and 32/34 of
28 November 1977 and Security Council resolutions
384 (1975) of 22 December 1975 and 389 (1976) of
22 April 1976,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
relating to the Territory, 61
50 T. H. Bingham and S. M. Gray, Report on the Supply of
Petroleum and Petroleum Products to Rhodesia (London, Her
Majesty's Stationery Office for the Foreign and Commonwealth
Office, 1978).
61 Ofjicial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/33/23/Rev.1), vol. II, chap. X.
