234

General Auembly-Fortieth Session

the special problems of refugee and displaced women and
children resulting from their vulnerable position, which in
many cases ex poses them to a variety of difficult situations
affecting their physical and legal protection as well as their
psychological and material well-being,
Noting with satisfaction ami encouraging the continuing
and increasing co-operation between the Office of the High
Commissioner and other bodies of the United Nations
system, as well as intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations,
Desirous of ensuring the speedy implementation of the
recommendations and pledges made at the Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa,
held at Geneva from 9 to 11 July 1984, 131
l. Commemis the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and his staff for the dedicated and efficient
manner in which they discharge their responsibilities;
2. Strongly reaffirms the fundamental nature of the
High Commissioner's function to provide international
protection and the need for Governments to continue to
co-operate fully with his Office in order to facilitate the
effective exercise ofthis function, in particular by acceding
to and implementing the relevant international and
regional refugee instruments and by scrupulously observing the principies of asylum and non-refoulement;
3. Comiemns ali violations of the rights and safety of
refugees and asylum-seekers, in particular those perpetrated by military or armed attacks against refugee camps
and settlements and other forms of brutality and by the
failure to rescue asylum-seekers in distress at sea;
4. Welcomes the fact that arrangements introduced by
the High Commissioner have increased significantly the
rescue of asylum-seekers in distress at sea and that preventive measures have resulted in a decline in the number of
refugee boats attacked by pirates;
5. Urges ali States, in co-operation with the Office of
the High Commissioner and other competent international bodies, to take ali measures necessary to ensure the
safety of refugees and asylum-seekers;
6. A/so urges ali States to support the High Commissioner in bis efforts to achieve durable solutions to the
problem of refugees and displaced persons of concern to
his Office, primarily through voluntary repatriation or
return, including assistance to returnees, as appropriate,
or, wherever appropriate, through integration into
countries of asylum or resettlement in third countries;
7. Emiorses the conclusions on voluntary repatriation
adopted by the Executive Committee ofthe Programme of
the High Commissioner at its thirty-sixth session 129 and
urges States to extend their full co-operation to the High
Commissioner to that effect;
8. Expresses its warm apprecíation for the work done
by the High Commissioner to put into practice the concept
of development-oriented assistance to refugees and returnees, as initiated at the Second International Conference on
Assistance to Refugees in Africa, and urges him to continue that process, wherever appropriate, in co-operation
with the World Bank, the United Nations Development
Programme and other organizations, and, further, urges
Governments to support these efforts;
9. Commemis the High Commissioner's programmes
for refugee and displaced women, especially those undertaken to secure their protection and to help them to
become self-sufficient through educational, vocational and
income-generating projects;
131 See N39/402 and Add. l and 2.

l O. Expresses deep appreciatíon for the valuable material and humanitarian response of receiving countries. in
particular those developing countries that, despite limited
resources, continue to admit, on a permanent or temporary basis, large numbers of refugees and asylum-seekers,
and, reaffirming the principie of international solidarity
and burden-sharing, urges the international community to
assist receiving countries in order to enable them to cope
with the additional burden created by the presence of
those refugees and asylum-seekers;
11. Commends ali States that facilitate the attainment
of durable solutions and contribute generously to the High
Commissioner's programmes;
12. Expresses deep apprecíation for the valuable cooperation between the Office of the High Commissioner
and intergovernmental and non-governmental agencies;
13. Ca/Is upon ali States to promote durable solutions
and to contribute generously to the High Commissioner's
humanitarian programmes in order to assist refugees,
returnees and displaced persons of concern to the High
Commissioner in a spirit of international solidarity and
burden-sharing.
116th plenary meeting
13 December 1985

40/119. Expression of appreciation to the United
Nadons High Commissioner for Refugees
The General Assembly,
Noting wíth deep regret that the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees will shortly be relinquishing
his duties,
Recognizing the significant progress achieved under his
guidance in promoting humanitarian solutions to the
problems of refugees and displaced persons in various
parts of the world,
Considering his unrelenting efforts to alleviate human
suffering through the special humanitarian tasks entrusted
to him in addition to the original functions of his Office,
l. Expresses its sincere appreciation ami thanks to Mr.
Poul Hartling for the effective and dedicated manner in
which he has performed his functions as United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees;
2. Extends its good wishes to him for success in his
future undertakings.
116th plenary meeting
13 December 1985

40/120. Preparadon of a draft convention apiut
illicit traffic in narcotic drup and psychotropic substances
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 33/168 of 20 December 1978,
35/195 of 15 December 1980, 36/132 of 14 December
1981, 36/168 of 16 December 1981, 37/168 of 17 December 1982, 37/198 of 18 December 1982, 38/93 and 38/122
of 16 December 1983, 39/141 and 39/143 of 14 December
1984 and other relevant provisions,
Recalling a/so the Declaration on the Control of Drug
Trafficking and Drug Abuse of 14 December 1984, 132 in
which it is stated, ínter afia, that the eradication oftrafficking in narcotic drugs is the co\lective responsibility of ali
States and that States shall utilize the legal instruments
against the illicit production of and demand for, abuse of
132 Rcsolution 39/142. anncx.
