S/PV.9291

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9291st meeting

Thursday, 23 March 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Fernandes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mozambique)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Betoe Ndojombouet
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Shino
Mr. Camilleri
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-08430 (E)
*2308430*

S/PV.9291

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Türkiye to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Geir
Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria; and Mr. Tareq Talahma, Acting Director of the
Operations and Advocacy Division of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Pedersen.
Mr. Pedersen: I have just returned to Geneva
from Amman, where I briefed and engaged with
senior officials of Egypt, France, Germany, Jordan,
Norway, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Türkiye, the United
Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom, the United States,
the European Union and the League of Arab States,
focusing on the way forward in the aftermath of last
month’s tragic earthquakes.
I had already benefited from in-depth discussions
with Egyptian Minister for Foreign Affairs Shoukry
Selim and League of Arab States Secretary General
Aboul Gheit in Cairo, Saudi Foreign Minister Prince
Faisal Bin Farhan in Riyadh, and Jordanian Foreign
Minister Safadi in Amman. I welcome the attention of the
region on the crisis in Syria following the earthquakes.
Meanwhile, Deputy Special Envoy Rochdi visited
Latakia, Jableh and Damascus in Syria in recent days.
She met Syrian Minister for Foreign Affairs Mekdad
and other senior Government officials in Damascus and
on the ground in areas affected by the earthquakes.
Our messages have been the same with all those
with whom we have engaged: let me share them with
you today.
2/20

23/03/2023

First, it is absolutely vital to continue to provide
resources to support the emergency response to the
earthquakes, while also of course continuing to support
the broader humanitarian response — both in Syria
and in the neighbouring countries — to the immense
suffering arising from the conflict. I welcome the
pledges made for the Syrian earthquake response at the
recent international donor conference held in Brussels
and urge early disbursement of pledges. I continue
to coordinate closely with my senior United Nations
colleagues, and I welcome the recent engagements in
Damascus of United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees Filippo Grandi and Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator Martin Griffiths. Today my colleague
from the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, Tareq Talahma, will brief the Council more in
detail on the humanitarian situation.
Secondly, we need a sustained calm on the ground,
especially in areas affected by the earthquakes. The
week after the earthquakes, signs of such calm emerged,
with a relative lull in violence in most quarters. For
brief moments, the unimaginable became real: parties
on each side of the front line largely refraining from
hostilities. Since then, we have seen a creeping rise in
incidents: regular exchanges of shelling and rocket fire
across front lines in the north-west and north-east; some
cross-line raids by listed terrorist group Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham; United States claims of rocket attacks on its
troops in Deir ez-Zor; an incident in Afrin in which
some armed opposition fighters fired on civilians;
further security incidents in the south-west; Da’esh
attacks; and further airstrikes attributed to Israel,
including on the Aleppo international airport, which
resulted in material damage and an airport closure that
affected humanitarian operations.
My concern is not just about the harm that such
violence does to civilians. We have seen in the past that
small incidents can bring about a broader escalation,
and that must be avoided at all costs. I have therefore
been working with key stakeholders on achieving a
sustained calm, especially starting in the areas affected
by the earthquake in north-west Syria. It is a matter
that I have raised widely, including in Damascus and
with Iran, Türkiye, the Russian Federation, the United
States and all the other members of the ceasefire task
force that meets in Geneva. I appreciate the positive
responses of key task force members to the appeal
and hope that they can exert their influence to tamp
23-08430

23/03/2023

The situation in the Middle East

down the violence. Sustained calm will be an essential
ingredient in donor confidence for support to genuine
rehabilitation in areas affected by the earthquakes.
Thirdly, in the same way that we have seen moves
from the various sides in the humanitarian arena, that
logic can and must be applied to address post-earthquake
rehabilitation and the broader political challenges. We
have seen two long-closed crossing points reopened,
and new openings on sanctions, showing that sides
with differing views can make constructive moves. I
sense from all the discussions I have had that there is an
opportunity to make progress with additional moves on
all sides beyond the immediate emergency. In the effort to
advance the discussion, we must engage with the Syrian
parties on how they can create an enabling environment
for earthquake rehabilitation, and with outside actors
on how they can provide enhanced resources and
remove any hindrances, including those arising from
sanctions. For example, the security situation, civilian
protection, housing, land and property issues and civil
documentation, as well as livelihoods, basic services
and energy infrastructure, are all vital issues related
to earthquake rehabilitation. They and other issues,
such as conscription and detention, are also of vital
importance to Syrian civilians in general, including
refugees and internally displaced persons. There are
also other issues that have featured in discussions to
date. They can all be the subject of constructive work.
I believe that verifiable steps implemented
mutually and reciprocally by all sides are doable and
that they can enable us to move forward incrementally
into post-earthquake rehabilitation and in the process
to make progress on political confidence-building on
issues related to resolution 2254 (2015). I should note
that I will continue to prioritize the file on the detained,
abducted and missing, including engaging with their
families. Earlier this month, I met representatives of
the Truth and Justice Charter, who relayed to me how
the earthquake had further compounded their angst in
not knowing the fate or whereabouts of their loved ones
or if they might have been affected by the earthquakes.
Meanwhile, my Deputy continued to press the issue with
interlocutors during her recent visit to Damascus. I also
want to take this opportunity to reiterate the SecretaryGeneral’s call on the General Assembly to consider
establishing a new international body to clarify the fate
and whereabouts of missing persons.
Fourthly, we must all understand that a degree
of cooperation across divides is essential if we are to

S/PV.9291

find a way forward. None of the parties — the Syrian
Government, the Syrian opposition, the Western
players, the Arab players, the Astana players or the other
parties concerned — can move the process forward
alone. Individual approaches cannot make the kind of
qualitative difference that a coordinated approach can.
But if all are prepared to put practical points on the
table and to coordinate and work together, I believe
more firmly than ever that it is possible and essential
to move forward, step for step and step by step. In
that spirit, I look forward to further engagement with
the Government of Syria and the Syrian Negotiations
Commission in the period ahead as well as in the region
and beyond. The good offices of the United Nations
will need strong support from all outside actors in
the next phase. I also believe there is a distinct and
important role in this for key regional players and look
forward to continuing to closely coordinate with them
and all concerned. As part of an inclusive approach, I
will continue to engage with a wide range of Syrians
through the Civil Society Support Room and the
Syrian Women’s Advisory Board, which convened in
The Hague two weeks ago. Their insights continue to
inform our approach.
I am concerned about the fact that the Constitutional
Committee has not met for 10 months, sending a
troubling message that Syrians’ ability to search for a
comprehensive solution is being held hostage to issues
unrelated to their country. The Committee must resume
its work in Geneva in a spirit of compromise and
substance and at pace. The situation today is at such
an unprecedented level that it calls for leadership, bold
ideas and a cooperative spirit. A political solution is
the only way forward for Syria. We may not be able
to reach that in one step, but I believe we can progress
towards it gradually. The status quo is unacceptable.
The renewed diplomatic attention on Syria, including
in the region, and the shared suffering of all Syrians in
the aftermath of the earthquakes create new obligations
and opportunities. If all parties engage, I believe they
can move forward.
Last week we passed the awful milestone of 12
years since the start of the conflict. A Syrian-owned,
Syrian-led and United Nations-facilitated political
process supported by the international community
is more essential than ever. A political solution must
restore Syria’s sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity and meet the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people. We must move down

23-084303/20

S/PV.9291

The situation in the Middle East

that path, even if only in stages. I am ready to use
my good offices, develop proposals and convene the
necessary players in an effort to help facilitate the way
forward, which is consistent with my mandate under
resolution 2254 (2015).
The President: I thank Mr. Pedersen for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Talahma.
Mr. Talahma: The earthquakes of 6 February and
their aftermath have been a stark reminder of the speed
with which tragedy can strike, altering lives in a matter
of seconds. As teams continue to clear the rubble, the
death toll has continued to climb, with more than 56,000
deaths currently recorded. Thousands of survivors
continue to seek treatment for physical injuries as well
as trauma. The physical destruction is staggering. In
Syria, the World Bank estimates the total losses at
$5.2 billion, with the actual total likely much higher.
The damage to housing accounts for approximately half
of the estimated destruction, leaving millions of people
in temporary living situations, unable or unwilling to
return to their homes. The recent rain and floods have
only compounded the hardship facing many families,
forcing many in camp sites to relocate yet again to
safer locations.
The immediate humanitarian crisis was staggering
in terms of not only the speed of the destruction, but also
the scale of the needs. The disaster strained existing
delivery infrastructure and affected humanitarian
organizations already on the ground. Unfortunately,
that included the death and injury of aid workers,
among them United Nations staff.
Despite those challenges, within hours of the
earthquakes, the United Nations released $15 million
from its emergency fund, increasing that amount to
$40 million within days. Working with partners, we
provided 2.2 million people with emergency food,
ready-to-eat rations and cash transfers. We carried
out more than 1.1 million medical consultations, and
we provided water and sanitation services to almost
380,000 people. We continue to conduct daily missions
in earthquake-affected areas, delivering assistance,
assessing the structural integrity of buildings and
identifying protection requirements. Blanket approvals
for staff movements and assessments have already
assisted those efforts.
The expanded cross-border modality has also
proved essential in north-west Syria. More than 900
4/20

23/03/2023

trucks, with aid from seven United Nations agencies,
have now reached north-west Syria from Türkiye via
the three available border crossings at Bab Al-Hawa,
Bab Al-Salam and Al-Rai.
Much more needs to be done in the weeks ahead.
Collective shelters must be decongested and consolidated.
Adequate housing must be supported. Safe, voluntary
and dignified returns must be facilitated. Family
reunification, community awareness interventions and
other protection services must be extended in order to
address serious concerns, particularly regarding women
and girls. Public health emergencies, in particular the
ongoing cholera outbreak, must be monitored. Health
and surgical services must be strengthened.
The generosity of donors is vital to those efforts.
Their support, both financial and in-kind assistance,
has been a lifeline for the affected communities. We
welcome the European Union and international donor
conference that took place in Brussels earlier this week.
The approximately €7 billion pledged towards response
efforts in both Syria and Türkiye will be essential to
supporting the relief efforts in the months ahead.
We cannot lose sight of the reality that this immense
tragedy struck millions of people in Syria already
suffering the poverty, displacement and deprivation of
12 years of conflict, as Mr. Pedersen just said. Some
15.3 million people across Syria, many of whom were
affected by the earthquake, have few resources beyond
humanitarian assistance and protection support to meet
their most basic needs.
Women and girls have paid the highest price.
Targeted violence against health-care personnel
and infrastructure has impeded vital sexual and
reproductive health care, taking a far-reaching toll on
the health and well-being of women and girls.
The pressures show no sign of easing. Food prices
have almost doubled in the past 12 months. Adequate
water supplies are becoming less certain in many areas.
Sufficient livelihoods remain elusive for too many
people in Syria.
Those deepening needs will require the continued
resolve of the international community. Not surprisingly,
the 2023 humanitarian response plan for Syria is the
largest worldwide. Yet, at present, it is only 6 per cent
funded. The generosity demonstrated in recent weeks
must be extended to, and not come at the expense of, the
ongoing humanitarian response across Syria to ensure
23-08430

23/03/2023

The situation in the Middle East

that life-saving and early-recovery assistance reaches
all those in need. Further action is required to create
a more enabling environment, in which humanitarian
assistance can reach communities in a safe, predictable
and timely fashion.
In late February, a United Nations inter-agency
team delivered emergency supplies during a cross-line
mission to Ras Al-Ayn town in Al-Hasakah governorate.
The mission was a welcome step. We hope to see similar
progress with regard to cross-line deliveries in northwest Syria soon.
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths has just
concluded his second mission to the region since
the 6 February earthquakes. The visit provided an
opportunity to resume important discussions with
Government officials and humanitarian partners about
issues related to preserving humanitarian space. It also
allowed for further exchanges about the efficiency and
transparency of humanitarian programming in Syria.
The earthquakes brought about a disaster on top of
a catastrophe for millions of people in northern Syria.
We have responded to that devastation, mobilizing all
available resources to deploy additional staff, raise new
funds and advocate for more direct access. We will
continue to do that to support all people in need across
Syria, wherever they are located. The needs are great,
but our resolve also remains steadfast.
The President: I thank Mr. Talahma for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I am delivering
this statement on behalf of Switzerland and Brazil, as
co-penholders of the Syria humanitarian file.
Let me first thank Mr. Pedersen and Mr. Talahma
for their updates. Their briefings make it clear that our
work in Syria is far from over, and that the Security
Council needs to continue to follow the situation there
very closely.
Last week, Syria entered the thirteenth consecutive
year of conflict, with one of the world’s most serious
and complex humanitarian crises, exacerbated by a
natural disaster of major proportions. The February
earthquakes struck areas heavily affected by the conflict,
in which millions live in camps, informal settlements
or unsafe buildings in precarious conditions. In northwest Syria, 4.1 million Syrians, including 2.9 million

S/PV.9291

internally displaced persons, were already dependent
on humanitarian assistance. It is appalling that the
conflict remains acute in areas in which emergency
post-disaster humanitarian operations are taking place.
There is a multidimensional humanitarian crisis,
compounded by food insecurity, water, electricity and
fuel shortages, a lack of proper shelter and sanitation,
and a heightened risk of outbreaks of new diseases,
while many health facilities were damaged. Some
15.3 million people were already in need of assistance
before the earthquake. Some 8.8 million people in Syria
have been affected — and 500,000 displaced — by
this natural disaster. An increased number of children
are out of school. Many of the learning facilities that
were operational have been damaged, destroyed or
are now being used to provide families affected by
the earthquakes with temporary shelter. In this dire
situation, we need to ensure that the humanitarian
needs of all affected people living in all parts of Syria
are met.
As we recognize the recent constructive steps
taken to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian aid in
Syria, we reiterate that all modalities of aid, including
cross-border and cross-line, need to be made available
to humanitarian actors operating in the country.
Assistance planned before 6 February should continue,
while additional needs triggered by the earthquake
have to be met.
It is encouraging that two additional crossings have
been opened for the United Nations, that the flow of aid
deliveries across the border has grown and that more
than 937 trucks crossed Bab Al-Hawa, Bab Al-Salam
and Al-Rai after the earthquakes. Unfortunately, no
cross-line convoy has taken place so far. We recall
that all aid modalities should be used to reach the
most vulnerable.
Disruption of humanitarian operations due to
damaged infrastructure or security concerns can
have drastic humanitarian consequences for those
who have been affected by the earthquake, but
also to the wider vulnerable population in need of
humanitarian assistance. It is crucial that aid flows
without obstructions. Humanitarian workers need
unhindered access to people in need of assistance.
Switzerland and Brazil reiterate the calls on all parties
to facilitate timely, unimpeded and sustainable access
for humanitarian relief and personnel and to open all
routes to get to all people in every way possible. We

23-084305/20

S/PV.9291

The situation in the Middle East

recall that all parties must abide by their obligations
under international humanitarian law.
Humanitarian operations also need resources. We
welcome the pledges made on Monday at the international
donor conference in Brussels and the financial support
received from the Syrian earthquake flash appeal. We
further encourage the donor community to continue to
contribute to the humanitarian response plan for 2023.
We are grateful for the efforts undertaken by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and
all United Nations agencies, as well as non-governmental
organizations, to scale up humanitarian operations
under the even more challenging conditions following
the earthquakes. The Security Council must also do
its part, which includes putting differences aside and
working constructively towards improving the living
conditions in Syria.
There can be no lasting peace in Syria without a
meaningful political process. After so much suffering
and trauma, the Syrian people, especially children
who have never experienced peace, need a chance for
a better future.
I would now like to speak in my national capacity
on the political situation in Syria. I will make six points.
First, we are pleased to report that the Brazilian
humanitarian donations arrived in Syria, including
seven tons of nutritional dehydrated food and 90
water purifiers with the capacity to produce more than
500,000 litres daily, serving more than 25,000 people.
Secondly, Brazil remains convinced that a military
solution is illusory and deleterious for the future of
Syria. Only a Syrian-owned and Syrian-led political
process, facilitated by the United Nations, with due
respect for the preservation of Syria’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity, will bring lasting peace.
Thirdly, a comprehensive ceasefire is urgent. We
condemn all terrorist activities and attacks by foreign
forces, which not only continue to harm civilians and
damage civilian infrastructure, but also seriously
undermine the prospect of a credible political process.
Fourthly, resolution 2254 (2015) establishes a road
map for a political solution to the conflict. We thank
the Special Envoy for his unwavering commitment to
its implementation and for his continued engagement
with a wide range of stakeholders in order to try to find
a way out of the current impasse.
6/20

23/03/2023

Fifthly, we hope that the Small Body of the Syrian
Constitutional Committee can resume its work as soon
as possible, which involves not only a decision on the
venue for the meetings but also and above all a renewed
commitment to moving the process forward.
Sixthly and lastly, with regard to missing persons,
grieving families must have the answers they seek in
relation to the whereabouts of their missing relatives.
Political will from all parties is necessary in order to
address this serious and urgent issue.
In conclusion, we expect that recent signs of
cooperation between the Syrian Government and the
United Nations, as well as with regional actors, can
contribute to a positive dynamic on this file. Brazil
agrees with the assessment of the Special Envoy that
the challenges faced in responding to the catastrophic
earthquake are a stark reminder that the status quo is
unsustainable and indefensible, and that the earthquake
could be nonetheless a turning point. The coordinated
action undertaken in its aftermath demonstrates that
collaboration is possible. If the same logic is applied
to the goal of advancing the political process, we
could move towards a comprehensive resolution of
the conflict.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Mr. Talahma for
their helpful but sobering briefings.
The war in Syria has entered its thirteenth year.
The toll of this war is unimaginable. Hundreds of
thousands of people have been killed and many more
injured. Towns, villages and neighbourhoods have been
levelled. There are more than 155,000 people unjustly
detained and missing, and more than 13 million people
internally displaced or living as refugees. A generation
of children in Syria has known nothing but war
and deprivations.
In these years of war, the Al-Assad regime has
never seriously sought peace. Rather, it has committed
atrocities, some of which have risen to the level of war
crimes and crimes against humanity, and hid behind
its patrons, Russia and Iran. The Al-Assad regime’s
refusal to participate in meetings of the Constitutional
Committee over the last eight months, after nine rounds
of meetings where the regime attended but acted in bad
faith, is a clear demonstration of Al-Assad’s belief that
he can fight or starve the Syrian people into submission.
23-08430

23/03/2023

The situation in the Middle East

Special Envoy Pedersen has diligently sought to
find any means to advance the stalled political process
through his broad engagement with all parties in his
step-for-step initiative. The United States supports that
effort. As we have said previously, our full participation
would require the Syrian regime to reciprocate in good
faith. And yet, the Al-Assad regime appears content to
stall, perhaps seeking better offers and concessions from
the international community, while proposing nothing
to build confidence or demonstrate that Damascus is
willing to work towards peace and stability. Al-Assad
must re-engage constructively in the United Nationsfacilitated Syrian-led political process, consistent with
resolution 2254 (2015). That is the only viable path to
finding a lasting political solution to the conflict.
We caution those States that are engaging with
Al-Assad to seek verifiably constructive outcomes for
Syrians and the broader region. In any engagement, real
steps to ensure sustained, predictable and independent
humanitarian access in order to bring an end to the
regime’s atrocities and otherwise improve the situation
for the people in Syria should be front and centre. The
Al-Assad regime needs to take irreversible steps to
alleviate suffering. Al-Assad is still the brutal dictator
whose regime repeatedly used chemical weapons
against the Syrian people, as the most recent report of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
further demonstrated. His regime has conducted attacks
on civilians, schools and hospitals, and has detained,
tortured or murdered hundreds of thousands of people.
Al-Assad is also flooding the region with captagon,
spreading addiction and criminality.
The tragedy of the earthquake has not transformed
Al-Assad into a statesman worthy of embrace. Only
genuine, comprehensive and irreversible reform will
do that. In the meantime, we will focus our efforts on
improving the situation on the ground for the millions
of people in Syria. The humanitarian crisis in Syria
was desperate before the earthquake, with more than
15 million people in need of assistance. The United
States has been the largest donor of humanitarian
assistance for Syria, providing nearly $16 billion over
the 12 years of the war. The earthquake massively
exacerbated the humanitarian crisis in north-western
Syria, creating enormous additional needs for shelter,
medical supplies, food and fuel. The United States
has announced $235 million in earthquake relief for
Syria and Türkiye, including an additional $50 million
announced this week at the donor conference that

S/PV.9291

was generously hosted by Sweden and the European
Union. We urge all States to help with earthquake
recovery and, when possible, to work directly with the
United Nations and other humanitarian organizations
to ensure that assistance gets to those in need. The
seventh Brussels Conference on Supporting the Future
of Syria and the Region, to be held this summer, will be
an important moment to show our solidarity with the
Syrian people and the countries that so generously host
Syrian refugees.
The United States reiterates its support for the
distribution of humanitarian aid through all modalities.
The continued flow of United Nations cross-border aid
through Bab Al-Hawa, Bab Al-Salam and Al-Rai is
essential to saving lives. We applaud the United Nations
for taking full advantage of the increased access it
has been temporarily afforded for its humanitarian
operations in response to the earthquake. We urge all
parties to do everything possible to ensure sustained,
predictable humanitarian access to the populations
in need in Syria, and we urge against any attempt to
exploit the tragedy of the earthquake for political gain.
We also strongly urge all parties to facilitate cross-line
aid to the north-west and to all Syrian communities
in need.
We categorically reject assertions that United
States sanctions are the cause of the humanitarian
crisis in Syria. Al-Assad’s 12 years of war, abetted by
his regime’s mismanagement and corruption, are the
obvious cause of the crisis. We also reject assertions that
our sanctions, which target Al-Assad and his cronies,
who have committed atrocities and abuses, hinder
humanitarian assistance. Our sanctions have carve-outs
that support the flow of humanitarian assistance through
the United Nations and international non-governmental
organizations. And since the earthquake, we have
worked not only with humanitarian organizations to
ensure that they can continue their work but also with
foreign Governments to ensure that we can address the
needs of the Syrian people. Since 6 February, we have
seen countless relief and medical supplies arriving in
both regime and non-regime areas, via land, air and
sea, from all over the world. We continue to stand
ready to assist those providing legitimate humanitarian
aid if they perceive any sanctions-related hindrance to
delivering assistance.
Women have been uniquely harmed by the conflict,
in particular those women whose family members have
been arbitrarily detained by the regime. While we are

23-084307/20

S/PV.9291

The situation in the Middle East

focused on helping to address basic needs following
the devastating earthquakes, at the same time we
have not forgotten the tens of thousands of people
who have been unjustly detained and/or missing since
long before the earthquakes struck. Family members
have a right to know the fates of their loved ones.
The United States supports the establishment of a
humanitarian mechanism to catalogue and report the
whereabouts of the detained and the fate of those who
are missing. We look forward to working with others
to help establish such a mechanism. Nearly one year
ago, Al-Assad announced a broad amnesty. We took
note of that effort at the time, hopeful for real progress.
While that reportedly resulted in the release of some
500 people, which was a comfort to the families of
those individuals, it unfortunately left unaddressed the
fate of thousands of others. We urge the regime and all
actors to immediately release arbitrary detainees in a
humane and orderly fashion and to share information
on those who have died in detention and return their
bodies to loved ones.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and
Acting Director Talahma for their briefings on the
political and humanitarian situation in Syria.
We have consistently supported the Special Envoy’s
mediation efforts to promote a Syrian-led and Syrianowned settlement that is based on resolution 2254
(2015), while respecting the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria, without external
interference. In that regard, we believe it is important
for the Special Envoy to adhere strictly to the mandate
established by the Security Council, which has at its
core the promotion of intra-Syrian dialogue, including
within the framework of the Constitutional Committee.
In that regard, we note Mr. Pedersen’s work to resume
regular meetings of the Constitutional Committee,
without any linkage to a specific location. We believe
that principled decisions on the modalities for future
rounds of intra-Syrian consultations should be taken by
the Syrians themselves.
The humanitarian situation in and around the
Syrian Arab Republic is determined to a large extent
by the consequences of the earthquake that occurred
on 6 February. Regrettably, there have been reports
this month that Israel repeatedly inflicted additional
damage that compounded the humanitarian situation.
On 7 and 22 March, Israeli fighter jets fired missiles
at the Aleppo international airport, which is the closest
8/20

23/03/2023

airport to the areas hardest hit by the earthquake, along
the Syrian-Turkish border. I would like to recall that
in addition to receiving international humanitarian
flights, that airport is also used by the United Nations
Humanitarian Air Service to transport all necessary
humanitarian supplies, including medicines, to the rest
of the country. Because of those Israeli strikes, aircraft
arriving from third countries have to be rerouted to
airports in Damascus and Latakia for some time.
Humanitarian aid was then transported from those
areas by road to the same province of Aleppo. Against
the backdrop of the growing fuel crisis in what was once
a self-sufficient country, including in oil resources,
such additional costs have dealt a serious blow to the
logistical capabilities of humanitarian workers, while
the needs of the population continue to increase.
Another factor complicating the humanitarian
situation in the country is the ongoing occupation of
the resource-rich Trans-Euphrates by the United States.
This glaring violation of international law does not
bother Washington, which is accustomed to lecturing
others. On 4 March, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff of the United States Armed Forces Mark Milley,
accompanied by journalists, paid a visit to the Rumeilan
American base in north-eastern Syria, showing once
again that abiding by the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Syria is not part of the United States’ plans.
Since Syria is pursuing an independent policy,
the United States and its satellites deny it the right to
develop independently. According to the information
we have and despite the existing humanitarian
exemptions, it is not possible to bring into the country
heavy construction equipment, which is urgently
needed for clearing rubble in earthquake-ravaged areas
in Government-controlled territory. The reason given
is the same as for fertilizers — that they are dual-use
goods. That is a very convenient bureaucratic excuse
for Washington and Brussels. We also have to deal
with banking overcompliance, which undermines
humanitarian efforts. Foreign companies simply
refuse to contract with the United Nations. We ask the
Secretariat not to cover for Washington and Brussels.
Ultimately, they undermine not only the humanitarian
efforts of the United Nations on the ground, but also the
image of the Organization as a whole.
Since 9 February, 900 trucks with humanitarian
aid have already entered territory not controlled by
Damascus through the three checkpoints on the SyrianTurkish border. According to United Nations estimates,
23-08430

23/03/2023

The situation in the Middle East

the number of trucks crossing the border on a daily basis
has doubled compared to last year. The vast majority of
them are sent to Idlib.
This shows that there is no problem with the
functioning of all three checkpoints and no impediment
to the United Nations visiting the rebel areas of northwestern Syria, where militants are operating. As at
15 March, according to the Secretariat, there have
already been 27 such missions. This month, the areas
controlled by Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham were personally
visited by World Health Organization head Tedros
Adhanom Ghebreyesus and United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees Filippo Grandi. It turns
out that, owing to the dire humanitarian situation in
the region, the terrorists gladly opened the doors to
all United Nations representatives, providing them
and humanitarian convoys from Türkiye with the
necessary security guarantees. At the same time, we
hear from the Secretariat that the United Nations does
not have sufficient guarantees for humanitarian crossline deliveries from Damascus. The United Nations
therefore lowers its gaze and shrugs its shoulders,
despite the fact that the need for increasing cross-line
supplies is directly set out in resolution 2672 (2023).
We call on the leadership of the humanitarian wing
of the United Nations to stop hiding behind politically
correct language, to stop pandering to terrorists and
their backers and to call a spade a spade. The Al-Nusrah
Front does not even plan to provide humanitarian
workers with access from Damascus. And since
these gangsters can choose to accept humanitarian
assistance from wherever they wish, it follows that the
humanitarian needs of the region are not as high as we
are being told.
Under these conditions, there is good reason to
wonder to what extent there is a need for the crossborder mechanism. Its United Nations mandate expires
soon. We have repeatedly noted how flawed this system
is, as it violates the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Syria. The hypocrisy that we are seeing with regard
to cross-line deliveries increasingly convinces us that
the provision of humanitarian supplies to all regions
of Syria should be carried out with the consent of the
legitimate Government of the country — as is the case
with the opening of two additional border crossings in
Bab Al-Salam and Al-Rai.
In conclusion, we would like to inform the
Council that on 13 March, 56 Russian children aged

S/PV.9291

3 to 17 were returned to Russia — 49 of them from
refugee camps in the Trans-Euphrates and 7 from
an orphanage in Damascus. That required not only
painstaking preparatory work, but also negotiations
with local authorities. In the course of such contacts,
we reached an agreement for the return of another 200
Russian children.
We call on other States to step up efforts to bring
their nationals back from internally displaced persons
camps in Syria.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I thank Mr. Geir Pedersen and Mr. Tareq
Talahma for their important briefings.
Last week marked the twelfth year of the war in
Syria. Syrians are still suffering from the horrendous
consequences of that war. The recent earthquake
exacerbated the humanitarian crisis in Syria and added
to the pain of the Syrian people. It is high time to move
towards a new phase of stability and development
in Syria, and for countries to turn the page on their
disagreements in order to address the Syrian crisis
without polarization or divisions in the international
system. Traditional and hard-line positions that
differentiate and discriminate between a Syrian in
Damascus and a Syrian in Idlib must be set aside.
In the context of our discussion today on the
humanitarian and political situations in Syria, I would
like to make the following five points.
First, we underscore that security and stability in
Syria will not be achieved without addressing the various
security challenges and focusing all diplomatic efforts
on resolving the crisis rather than simply managing it.
In that regard, we reiterate our support for the efforts of
the United Nations and the Special Envoy for Syria to
bridge regional and international political viewpoints
in order to break the current stalemate in the political
track, which has become increasingly pressing.
We also support the Secretary-General’s call for
a ceasefire across Syria. We reiterate our rejection of
foreign interference in Syria and stress the need to respect
its sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
In that context, we strongly condemn the air strikes
that resulted in damage to the Aleppo international
airport. We call on all States to uphold international
law and protect civilian infrastructure, particularly in
the aftermath of a humanitarian catastrophe.

23-084309/20

S/PV.9291

The situation in the Middle East

Secondly, we stress that activating the Arab role
in resolving Arab crises, including the Syrian crisis, is
indispensable for achieving stability in the region. Syria
is an Arab country, and it cannot be separated from the
Arab region. Likewise, Arab countries must embrace
Syria and help heal its wounds, as demonstrated by
the Arab solidarity with our Syrian brothers after the
disastrous earthquake. In line with our commitment to
strengthen Arab and regional security and stability, my
country recently hosted the Syrian President as part of
our continued solidarity with the Syrian people in those
harsh conditions.
Thirdly, with regard to the humanitarian situation,
we reiterate our full support for the brotherly people of
Syria during this critical time. For its part, the United
Arab Emirates continues to respond to the difficult
situation resulting from the earthquake by providing
relief and medical aid as well as field hospitals to Syria
and Türkiye, and by working closely with the United
Nations to alleviate the suffering of those affected.
To that end, we provided an aid package of more than
$300 million for both countries, including $20 million
to support the United Nations emergency response plan
for Syria. In the aftermath of the earthquake, my country
has also received a number of survivors from Syria in
need of medical treatment for critical conditions.
Fourthly, we stress the urgency of reaching all the
areas affected by the earthquake by all appropriate
routes. Regrettably, in a dangerous exploitation of an
ongoing disaster, no cross-line humanitarian assistance
has been delivered since the earthquake. Terrorist
groups are arbitrarily denying humanitarian access
inside Syria in flagrant disregard for humanitarian
values and principles, which is only increasing
civilians’ suffering. It is therefore imperative to ensure
that cross-line aid is unobstructed and reaches those in
need, in accordance with resolution 2672 (2023).
Fifthly and finally, we stress the importance of
making every possible effort to facilitate the safe and
dignified return of Syrian refugees to their homeland
and to fulfil their humanitarian needs. That must be
taken into consideration while implementing earlyrecovery and reconstruction projects. In that regard,
we express our support for dialogue between Syria
and Türkiye aimed at making progress on the return
of refugees. The current situation in Syria cannot go
unaddressed. Our brother people of Syria deserve to
live in a secure and stable environment, and efforts
10/20

23/03/2023

must be stepped up at every level to bring an end to the
crisis there.
In conclusion, I congratulate the people of Syria,
along with all Arab and Islamic peoples, on the
beginning of the blessed month of Ramadan, hoping
that it brings goodness and blessings to everyone.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Acting Director
Talahma for their briefings.
The humanitarian situation in north-west Syria
has been a matter of particularly deep concern for the
international community since the powerful earthquake
struck on 6 February. The Syrian Government has
opened the Bab Al-Salam and Al-Rai crossing points,
which has greatly improved the efficiency of the
transfer of supplies. China welcomes that development
and appreciates the positive interaction and cooperation
between the Syrian Government and the United Nations,
as well as the effective coordination work of the various
United Nations humanitarian agencies.
In the next phase, the humanitarian assistance to
Syria should be more organically integrated with postdisaster reconstruction, helping the Syrian side to
restore infrastructure, strengthen and rebuild housing
and maintain water and power supply systems. To that
end, it is important to continue to promote relevant
early-recovery projects. The Secretariat should consult
closely with all the parties and work actively to make
the appropriate plans. It will also be necessary to
incorporate the clearance of explosive remnants of war
into early-recovery projects as soon as possible so as
to create a safe working environment for post-disaster
reconstruction. At the same time, we want to point
out that three obstacles have to be overcome in order
to further improve the delivery of humanitarian relief
in Syria.
First, no progress whatsoever has been made in
terms of cross-line relief operations in north-west
Syria over the past month. The Secretariat should make
greater efforts to promote that relief work and report
problems to the Council in a timely manner to facilitate
the quest for solutions.
Secondly, given that it is an important piece of
civilian infrastructure and a key hub for the transfer
of humanitarian supplies, the safe operation of Aleppo
airport should be guaranteed. We are concerned about
the further Israeli air strike that occurred at the airport
23-08430

23/03/2023

The situation in the Middle East

yesterday and hope nothing similar will happen again.
Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity must
be respected.
Thirdly, while the countries concerned announced
a temporary relaxation or suspension of the unilateral
sanctions on Syria after the earthquake, such
temporary measures cannot make up for the systemic
damage caused by their long-term sanctions. They
should immediately and unconditionally lift all illegal
unilateral sanctions on Syria and stop artificially
exacerbating the humanitarian disaster.
With regard to the political process in Syria,
China welcomes Special Envoy Pedersen’s extensive
engagement with all parties on the implementation
of resolution 2254 (2015), in line with his step-forstep approach. China supports a resumption of the
Constitutional Committee meetings as soon as possible
in accordance with the principle of a Syrian-led and
Syrian-owned process.
We welcome the visit of the Syrian President to the
United Arab Emirates and the meeting between the two
Heads of State, as well as Tunisia’s consideration of a
restoration of diplomatic relations with Syria. We look
forward to a positive outcome for the proposed meeting
of the Deputy Foreign Ministers of Russia, Iran, Türkiye
and Syria. We are confident that assistance from the
countries of the region will help to boost the chances
for a political settlement in Syria. We also call on more
countries to take the initiative in creating a favourable
external environment for a political settlement.
The current security situation in Syria remains
complex. The international community must combat
terrorism in Syria in all its forms and manifestations
with zero tolerance. Any attempts to exploit
terrorism for individual purposes will backfire and
be counterproductive.
Finally, we once again urge foreign forces to
withdraw all elements of their illegal military presence in
Syria and to cease plundering Syria’s natural resources.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I appreciate the information provided by Special
Envoy Pedersen and by the Acting Director of the
Operations and Advocacy Division of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
Mr. Tareq Talahma.
We acknowledge the efforts of United Nations
teams and their partner agencies on the ground to

S/PV.9291

continue to deliver humanitarian assistance to the
Syrian population in the context of a dramatic increase
in the number of homeless and displaced people. The
contributions of donor States have been crucial, and
in that connection our delegation supports the request
of the Secretary-General to identify strategies that
will enable the entire amount of the flash appeal that
he made on 14 February to be collected as quickly as
possible. According to figures compiled by OCHA,
an estimated 8.8 million people have been affected by
the earthquakes, half of them very severely. The health
system is on the verge of collapse, aggravated by the
growing numbers of cases of cholera, the coronavirus
disease, stomach infections and skin conditions. The
perception of insecurity is high, especially for women
and children who survived the tragedy and have been
left homeless. In addition, there is a worrisome number
of children in need of nutritional assistance and access
to basic services and health care.
Against the backdrop of devastation due to the war
and the recent earthquakes, it is unacceptable that acts
against the lives and integrity of the civilian population
are being committed and that strategic infrastructure
essential to citizens’ basic subsistence is being destroyed,
all in flagrant violation of international humanitarian
law. Ecuador categorically condemns the missile
attacks on a residential neighbourhood in Damascus, as
well as the destruction of the infrastructure of Aleppo
international airport, which obstructed air traffic at a
particularly sensitive time, considering the immense
needs for humanitarian assistance.
The Security Council has demonstrated its
commitment to identifying strategies for alleviating
the suffering of the Syrian people. The adoption of
resolution 2672 (2023) has kept the Bab Al-Hawa border
crossing open while opening two additional trans-border
crossings — Bab Al-Salam and Al-Rai — following the
earthquake, thereby enabling the entry of 910 trucks
with humanitarian aid into north-west Syria. We urge
the Government of Syria to keep those crossings open
indefinitely and to cooperate with United Nations
agencies. Ecuador reaffirms its commitment to continue
to support initiatives that contribute to resolving
the multidimensional crisis, especially through the
implementation of Special Envoy Pedersen’s step-forstep strategy. We call for silencing the guns in Syria.
It is more important than ever for the countries of the
region and the international community to now show
their solidarity with the people of Syria.

23-0843011/20

S/PV.9291

The situation in the Middle East

Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
make this statement on the political situation in Syria in
my national capacity. With regard to the humanitarian
aspects, I echo what our colleague from Brazil stated on
behalf of our two countries, and I would like to thank
Special Envoy Pedersen and Mr. Talahma.
In March 2011, Syrian people marched through the
streets of Dara’a and Damascus in search of reform.
In many parts of Syria, the walls still bear traces of
those first months in the form of graffiti that reflects
not only the sadness and anger of Syrians but also
their unshakeable determination to build a new future.
Some 12 years after the first demonstrations, Syria
remains marked by conflict. The repression of the
civic aspirations of an entire generation of Syrians, the
destruction of infrastructure and cultural and social
ties, and the forced displacement of millions of people
both inside and outside the country have changed it
forever. After 12 years of conflict, the detention and
enforced disappearance of tens of thousands of Syrians
continues to weigh heavily on Syrian society. The issue
of detainees and missing persons remains a key peace
and security concern.
In the face of the gaping void left by those
disappearances, and by the ashes and rubble caused
by the conflict and more recently by the earthquakes,
finding a political solution to the conflict in Syria
remains of the utmost importance, and Syrian women
have an important role to play in that regard. In order to
improve women’s social, material, human and political
conditions in their country, we support the full, equal
and meaningful participation of Syrian women in
decisions that affect their future, their needs and their
aspirations for the future, whether they are citizens,
refugees or political or civil society representatives.
That is in line with the women and peace and security
agenda and resolution 2254 (2015). In that regard, we
welcome the inclusive nature of the Syrian Women’s
Advisory Board and its efforts to promote dialogue.
As Special Envoy Pedersen recently said, “the
situation in Syria is untenable, and to carry on in the
same manner defies humanity and logic”. Switzerland
supports the Special Envoy’s efforts to rebuild trust
between the different parties in the current context so
that this moment can be a turning point. We call for the
United Nations to play an active role in the search for a
political solution to the conflict, and we will continue
to make Geneva available to host all types of talks and
initiatives aimed at promoting a lasting peace in Syria.
12/20

23/03/2023

Switzerland is concerned about the continued
violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law committed by all the
parties throughout the country since 2011. We call on
all the parties to the conflict to respect their obligations
in that regard in order to put an end to the disastrous
situation in which civilians and the people who are
deprived of their liberty because of the conflict find
themselves. We remain particularly concerned about
the continuing grave violations perpetrated against
children. Ensuring justice and combating impunity are
prerequisites for a lasting peace. In that connection,
Switzerland supports, for example, the work of the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
for Syria. We would also like to underscore the role that
the Security Council can play in combating impunity. It
is important to prevent such violations of international
law, including international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, from being repeated in
the future in Syria or elsewhere.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Envoy Pedersen and Mr. Talahma for their briefings
and for the work of their teams.
Some 12 years ago, Syrian people peacefully took
to the streets to demand freedom, political reform
and a Government that respects and upholds human
rights. The Al-Assad regime met those demands with
a brutal assault against them. The earthquake last
month added further tragedy to that crisis. The United
Kingdom continues to direct our support to the Syrian
people, having provided $4.6 billion in humanitarian
assistance since 2011. In the wake of the earthquake,
we announced an additional $52 million across Syria
and Türkiye to fund food, medical supplies and shelter.
Those resources must reach the more than 4.1 million
people in north-west Syria in the most effective and
efficient means possible, including through predictable
cross-border access. We welcome the United Nations
efforts to deliver and scale up that support. But let us not
make the mistake of thinking that the conflict is over.
Even after the earthquake, hostilities have resumed,
with numerous examples of regime attacks harming
civilians, while the billion-dollar narco-industry of
captagon stemming from Syria presents a new and
destabilizing risk to the region.
As the Secretary-General said on the anniversary
of the conflict, the support and solidarity provided in
the aftermath of the earthquake must be channelled
into renewed energy on the political track. We need to
23-08430

23/03/2023

The situation in the Middle East

address the fundamental issues behind the conflict. An
inclusive and accountable end to the conflict is urgently
needed. Resolution 2254 (2015) provides the framework
for delivering the sustainable and lasting peace that
the people of Syria deserve. We welcome all efforts to
make progress on that track, including the important
engagement of Special Envoy Pedersen and Member
States in the region this week. I urge all colleagues in
this Chamber to play their role in delivering peace for
the Syrian people.
Next week, we will hear from the SecretaryGeneral about the plight of the families who are still
searching for their loved ones and his call to consider
establishing a mechanism for the missing. That is an
issue that affects all Syrians on all sides of the conflict.
We hope that the United Nations can come together to
give them some answers.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I would like to thank Special
Envoy Pedersen and Mr. Tareq Talahma, Acting
Director of the Operations and Advocacy Division
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, for their briefings.
I would also like to start my statement by
mentioning that this month marks 12 years since the
beginning of the crisis in Syria. We should not forget the
tragic stories of each and every victim — the murdered
and the imprisoned, the homeless and the displaced,
and the trauma of the children who have known only
conflict since birth. The earthquake was a nightmare
on top of a nightmare. An unprecedented approach
is needed to deal with that unspeakable calamity. We
need a drastic expansion of humanitarian aid and longlasting assistance for the early recovery of the area
affected. Japan has already provided emergency relief
supplies and humanitarian assistance amounting to
approximately $18.5 million.
As a country with a history of major earthquakes,
Japan can use its experience to identify what will be
needed next. The priority should be promptly addressing
secondary disaster risks, including the further
collapse of buildings and the spread of epidemics, and
making buildings and local communities resilient to
earthquakes, as Foreign Minister Hayashi highlighted
in his statement at the Brussels donor conference
earlier this week. Donors should therefore continue
to support the Syria flash appeal and humanitarian
response plan generously. We must make full use of all
aid modalities and further strengthen the coordination

S/PV.9291

among all humanitarian stakeholders, including
non-governmental organizations and civil society.
Japan again welcomes the agreement between
the Syrian Government and the United Nations
to establish two additional cross-border points to
enable more assistance to reach the north-west. We
also acknowledge the blanket approval by the Syrian
Government of cross-line aid. We have already
witnessed approximately 1,000 United Nations aid
convoys carrying relief supplies that provide a glimmer
of hope amid the devastation, but further cooperation
is needed. At the same time, we reject military actions
aimed at exploiting the emergency for selfish gain.
The recent air strikes on north-west Syria and the
attack on Aleppo’s international airport are extremely
disturbing and have seriously hindered humanitarian
assistance operations.
The holy month of Ramadan is a time for reflection
and self-restraint. A cessation of hostilities and a
countrywide ceasefire are essential both for delivering
necessary aid and for promoting political dialogue
among the parties concerned. We are very worried
by the lack of a timetable for convening the ninth
meeting of the Constitutional Committee in Geneva,
an essential piece for advancing the political process.
The Constitutional Committee is the only format that
can bring all actors together for dialogue, and it must
not be obstructed by any Security Council member.
We recognize that regional diplomatic activities have
intensified since the earthquake, and we hope that
will create a better environment for Special Envoy
Pedersen’s step-for-step and step-by-step approach to
lead to tangible outcomes.
Finally, it is the Syrian people who have risked
their own lives to save those buried in the rubble. It is
they who must lead the political process that is needed
if the dignified and beautiful country that was Syria
is to be restored. It is the Council’s responsibility to
support that process.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Pedersen and Mr. Talahma for their briefings. I
would like to underscore two points.
France has just increased its assistance to the
Syrian people once again. International donors pledged
€950 million at the conference held in Brussels on
Monday, 20 March. France has announced an additional
contribution of €7 million, bringing its assistance since
the earthquake to a total of €26 million, which will

23-0843013/20

S/PV.9291

The situation in the Middle East

help meet the essential needs of the people affected by
the earthquake. France went into action immediately,
dispatching 40 tons of emergency supplies to meet
the crucial needs the day after the disaster. And while
the earthquake led to further displacement, half of
Syria’s population had already been forced to leave
their homes since 2011, and we commend the efforts
of the States that have been hosting Syrian refugees for
12 years. We will continue to support them, including
through the seventh Brussels conference in June. We
should also point out that we have several resettlement
programmes with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees.
However, the humanitarian tragedy of the
earthquake must not make us forget the realities of
the war in Syria. As the Special Envoy reiterated
today, a nationwide ceasefire must be a priority for
all parties. In the interests of the Syrian people, who
long for a lasting peace, France will stand firm and
will not change its position towards the regime until
genuine and sustainable progress towards a political
solution based on resolution 2254 (2015) is made. The
earthquake of 6 February cannot erase the regime’s
brutality towards its people or the war crimes that it is
responsible for. So far more than 155,000 people have
been disappeared, and most of them have spent time
in the regime’s prisons. France will continue its fight
against impunity without let-up.

23/03/2023

the fundraising conference in Brussels on Monday this
week to help Türkiye and Syria in the aftermath of the
devastating earthquake.
The conflict is anything but frozen, with people
being killed every day by bombs dropped from the
sky, tanks or terrorist attacks. Syria remains a killing
field, drenched in the innocent blood of civilians,
including women and children, and with more than
100,000 Syrians forcefully disappeared or detained by
the horrific Mukhabarat. There is no political process
in Syria. The stillborn Constitutional Committee
shows no signs of life. Seven years after its adoption,
resolution 2254 (2015), a sine qua non condition for the
resolution of the conflict in Syria, remains a dead letter.
The Al-Assad regime is chiefly responsible for Syria’s
ranking as the third least peaceful country in the world,
according to the Global Peace Index in 2022.
We have collectively failed to stop the Syrian
regime from slaughtering its own people. We have
failed to hold the regime accountable for the gravest
crimes — war crimes, crimes against humanity and the
repeated use of chemical weapons with total impunity.
There can be no peace in Syria without securing justice
and accountability.

Mr. Spasse (Albania): I would like to begin
by thanking Mr. Petersen and Mr. Talahma for
their briefings.

We strongly support all attempts to force the
Syrian regime to abide by the Council’s resolutions and
begin to cooperate in good faith to start the political
transition in Syria. We strongly support the creation of
a new mechanism to clarify the fate and whereabouts
of missing persons, as recommended by the SecretaryGeneral in August 2022. We strongly support the full
implementation of resolution 2672 (2023) and the
renewal of cross-border aid operations in north-west
Syria, as well as the opening of new border-crossing
points to meet the rising demand for humanitarian
aid, which must never be politicized. Coming to the
rescue of those most in need is the very least that the
international community can do to show the Syrians
that they have not been abandoned, so that they can
survive and maintain their faith in humankind.

It saddens us deeply that every time we take the
floor to speak on this file, we struggle to find the
words to describe the deterioration of the catastrophic
situation in Syria, which is entering its thirteenth year.
The humanitarian crisis deepens by the day. More than
70 per cent of the population needs urgent humanitarian
aid to survive. We commend the European Union and
international donors for pledging $7.5 billion during

The devastating consequences of the earthquake
continue to reverberate in Syria. Six weeks later, we
are still grappling with the tremendous loss of life,

Systematic, large-scale corruption has reached
unprecedented levels. Syria now accounts for 80 per
cent of the global production of Captagon, in a State-run
drug trade estimated to be worth more than $57 billion
that benefits the regime, a few businessmen close to the
regime and the militias present in Syria, and that is a
destabilizing factor for the entire region. France would
therefore like to have more information from the United
Nations on the production of Captagon.

14/20

Mr. Camilleri (Malta): I begin by thanking Special
Envoy Pedersen and Mr. Talahma for their sobering
remarks. On this special day, we also wish all Muslims
communities around the world Ramadan Kareem and
Ramadan Mubarak.

23-08430

23/03/2023

The situation in the Middle East

the destruction of thousands of homes and the deadly
consequences for the already frail and crumbling
civilian infrastructure across the country. While
we commend the work of the United Nations and its
agencies, we also recognize the need to increase the
amount of aid that is provided to north-west Syria and
ensure that it arrives where it is needed as quickly as
possible. We take note of the concerns highlighted by
the Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on the Syrian Arab Republic.
Enormous needs remain. Without a major scalingup and greater support for the United Nations and
humanitarian agencies in Syria, the levels of avoidable
mortality are bound to rise. In that regard, Malta takes
positive note of the increase in the number of trucks
sent through the Bab Al-Salam crossing in recent days.
The Bab Al-Hawa crossing is where the overwhelming
majority of trucks have crossed to date, which further
underscores the continued importance of keeping the
cross-border mechanism open and operational. We also
call on all parties to support and facilitate the flow of
cross-line aid from Damascus to the north-west and
north-east. Malta was concerned to see reports of air
strikes targeting the Aleppo airport on 6 March. We
share the concerns of the Resident Coordinator for
Syria on the potential implications of such attacks for
the humanitarian aid operation.
The Syrian conflict entered its thirteenth year this
month. The reality is that no remaining actor or group can
resolve this conflict alone. As years of destruction have
demonstrated so vividly, there is no military solution to
the conflict, but there are many areas in which progress
can be made in line with resolution 2254 (2015), which
remains the only viable path forward out of the current
status quo. For example, the transparent and verifiable
release of those detained arbitrarily in Syria, as well as
the provision of information on the whereabouts and
the fate of the missing and those forcibly disappeared,
are within the power of the parties. Such steps would
result in a true political breakthrough. We urge the
Syrian authorities to allow the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to visit
the Syrian Arab Republic and establish a field presence
there. The reconvening and resumption of the work of
the Constitutional Committee in Geneva would also
send a positive signal, as would the development of
policies and legislation on eliminating discrimination
against women and girls in all spheres of life and

S/PV.9291

achieving gender equality, including through quotas
and special measures.
Violence against women and girls remains
pervasive. Malta calls on the Syrian Arab Republic
and all parties to the conflict to strengthen the national
child protection framework and to end the recruitment
and use of children and prevent its recurrence. We
once again reiterate our call on all parties, in particular
the Syrian delegation, to engage constructively in the
process. Malta therefore remains supportive of a genuine
Syrian-led and -owned political process facilitated by
the United Nations, with all key stakeholders working
constructively and coherently for the people of Syria.
In addition, we emphasize that any and all returns of
Syrian refugees and those internally displaced must
be safe, legal and voluntary, in line with the criteria
set forth by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees.
I conclude by highlighting our full support for
the work of Special Envoy Pedersen and his step-forstep initiative. Now is the time to break the deadlock,
pursue accountability, and move towards a just and
lasting peace.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the African members of the
Security Council (A3), namely, Gabon, Mozambique
and my own country, Ghana.
We thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and the
Acting Director of the Operations and Advocacy
Division of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Tareq Talahma, for their
briefings. We also welcome the participation in this
meeting of the representatives of the Syrian Arab
Republic, the Islamic Republic of Iran and Türkiye.
The confluence of 12 years of conflict and a natural
disaster of epic proportions in the middle of winter
has magnified the suffering of the Syrian people. The
earthquake unfortunately struck 15.3 million Syrians,
representing some 70 per cent of the population, at a
time when they were already in need of humanitarian
support. Sadly, it has claimed more than 6,000 lives and
injured many more. Hundreds of thousands have been
rendered homeless in winter conditions, with more
remaining unaccounted for after the disaster.
There has never been a more critical time, in which
the support of the international community is as urgently
needed by Syrians, as now. The exponential rise in the

23-0843015/20

S/PV.9291

The situation in the Middle East

number of people in need of humanitarian support
following the disaster requires additional resources. All
efforts geared towards rallying global support for the
people of Syria should be given the needed backing by
all. Accordingly, we thank all donors that have risen to
the challenge to provide generous contributions, which
as at 21 March stood at approximately $312.1 million of
the $397 million needed through the Syria earthquake
flash appeal. We also appreciate the efforts of the
European Union and the other international donors that
have pledged approximately $1 billion in support of the
earthquake relief efforts in the country. As we make an
urgent appeal to the international community to help
raise the remaining approximately $85 million needed
to fully fund the flash appeal, we are reminded that
the country’s humanitarian response plan remains more
than 90 per cent underfunded. The people of Syria
continue to count on our support in that regard at this
time of suffering, and we must not let them down.
In the middle of the unfolding tragedy, we deplore
the unrelenting military hostilities by the parties,
including the terrorist attacks carried out by Da’esh
and Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham along the front lines. Those
senseless attacks, which continue to claim the lives
of civilians, are plunging Syria into deeper levels of
instability. The deaths of 42 civilians, including four
women and 13 children, as well as the injury of 52 others
as a result of those hostilities, are deeply distressing.
As always, in the context of continuing hostilities and
the resulting protection concerns, women and girls
pay the highest price, particularly in terms of health
care. We condemn the targeting of innocent civilians
and civilian infrastructure and draw the attention of all
the parties to their obligation to adhere to international
humanitarian law and the relevant Security Council
resolutions. We remind the parties that the escalation of
violence jeopardizes and undermines efforts to reach a
peaceful resolution of the conflict and call on them to
exercise maximum restraint, as there can be no military
solution to the crisis.
Also of particular concern to us are the continued
attacks by foreign forces targeting civilian infrastructure
in Syria, which are protected by international
humanitarian law, at a time when the country is at its
lowest ebb. We condemn the air strikes attributed to
Israel on 7 and 22 March, which targeted the Aleppo
international airport and disrupted the distribution of
critical humanitarian assistance by the United Nations
and other aid agencies assisting the victims of the
16/20

23/03/2023

earthquake in the country. We recall that similar air
strikes on the same airport in September 2022 caused
material damage and interrupted service delivery. We
call on Israel to desist from such attacks on Syria and
to resort to pacific means to address its concerns, with
the support of the international community.
Given Syria’s current circumstances, the need for
a political solution to the conflict is ever-more urgent.
Resolution 2254 (2015) remains the leading road map
to achieve the desired political solution, taking into
account the widest spectrum of Syrians, including the
voices of women and civil society. We reiterate that the
most viable avenue for sustainable peace and stability
is a Syrian-led, Syrian-owned and United Nationsfacilitated political process that meets the aspirations
of the people of Syria.
In furtherance of the political process, the A3 is
firm in its support for United Nations Special Envoy
Geir Pedersen’s continued efforts, including his stepfor-step process, to find a lasting political solution
to the conflict. The parties must therefore commit
to the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015),
including a nationwide ceasefire and cooperation to
break the current deadlock in the small body of the
Constitutional Committee.
Tackling the issue of detainees, including
facilitating the release of detained vulnerable groups,
such as the elderly, as well as women and children, and
clarifying the status of missing persons would be a
significant confidence-building measure. Advancement
in that area will further contribute positively to the
Special Envoy’s step-for-step approach to creating a
pathway for progress on the political track.
Returning to the humanitarian situation, 12 years of
armed conflict have devastated the country’s economy,
with record-level inflation, and have weakened the
local currency, while, at the same time, food prices are
skyrocketing beyond the purchasing power of ordinary
Syrians, with as many as 12.1 million people said to be
food insecure. Social and basic services are collapsing,
with power shortages, a fuel crisis and water scarcity,
particularly impacting ordinary Syrians, who now have
to endure a cholera outbreak on top of all that they have
been through. We commend the United Nations for its
cholera immunization drive and call for measures to
deal with the root causes of the disease.
The dire humanitarian situation in Syria demands
our urgent and collective action. With that in mind,
23-08430

23/03/2023

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9291

the A3 affirms its steadfast support for the use of all
modalities to deliver aid to every person in need in
Syria. The cross-border aid mechanism, as well as
cross-line deliveries, remains crucial to alleviating the
suffering of the Syrian people. We also commend the
recent efforts to expand cross-line deliveries across
north-west Syria and call on the parties to work closely
with the United Nations to create a safe and secure
environment for the further expansion of cross-line
support. However, greater attention should be paid to
the relatively more sustainable humanitarian efforts
through early-recovery and livelihood activities, which
may help to reduce the continued dependence on aid.

S/PV.9285), twisting facts and manipulating events,
consistent with the campaigns to mislead public opinion
that those countries have been waging against the Syrian
State since 2011 and until today. In their statement,
those countries sought to evade their involvement in the
bloodshed of Syrians, whether through direct aggression
or through their tools in the form of various terrorist
organizations. They tried to exonerate themselves from
the severe human suffering of the Syrian people as a
result of the collective punishment policies through
the blockade and unilateral sanctions that they impose,
not to mention their persistent disregard in depriving
Syrians of their national wealth and resources.

Furthermore, to ease the colossal humanitarian
burden in camps, we call on States to repatriate their
citizens, especially women and children, from camps
in Syria, such as Al-Hol, which have been subjected
to severe insecurity, in a safe and dignified manner, in
line with the standards of international humanitarian
law. Unfettered and unhindered humanitarian access
must also be granted for the necessary support to be
extended to those in the Rukban camp.

The policy of double standards that governs
the Western mentality has distorted the facts in the
Council, claiming to support Syria’s sovereignty, unity
and territorial integrity while never intervening to stop
the repeated and systematic Israeli acts of aggression
against Syrian territory, the most recent of which was
the Israeli aggression that targeted Aleppo International
Airport at dawn yesterday, Wednesday, 22 March. That
act of aggression caused the airport to be out of service
for the second time during this month, in a double crime
against a civilian facility that since the earthquake has
been used to support the delivery of humanitarian aid.

In conclusion, the A3 reiterates that resolution 2254
(2015) remains the most viable solution to the conflict.
Progress on the political process will open the muchawaited pathway to peace, which can be realized only
through a nationwide ceasefire and a Syrian-led, Syrianowned and United Nations-facilitated political process.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Pedersen
and Mr. Talahma for their briefings.
Over the past 12 years, the Syrian Arab Republic
has sent hundreds of identical letters to the Security
Council and the Secretary-General. It has briefed
the Council countless times regarding the aggression
against its sovereignty and the violations against its
unity and territorial integrity, as well as the blatant
interference in its internal affairs. However, those
issues have not been addressed with the necessary
seriousness and responsibility owing to the destructive
policies pursued by three permanent members of the
Security Council, namely, the United States, the United
Kingdom and France.
It is reprehensible that those three countries, along
with Germany, made a joint statement on 16 March (see

Those countries deplore the situation of Syrian
refugees and displaced persons but ignore the fact that
they directly worked to undermine the state of security
and stability in which the Syrian people were living,
which caused many to leave their areas of residence.
We see those countries expressing their concern over
illegal drug trafficking before the Council while they
themselves created an environment conducive to
terrorist and criminal organizations carrying out crossborder activities, which brought them sizable financial
returns that helped to finance their criminal activities.
How can it be accepted that successive United States
Administrations have been providing an umbrella of
protection for Israel, helping it to evade punishment
for its terrorist crimes, and insisting on preventing the
Council from discharging its responsibilities to stop
such crimes and ensure accountability for them?
How is it possible to justify the visit by the United
States Chief of Staff on 4 March to a military base
of United States forces present illegally in north-east
Syria in a covert manner, and not condemn it as a
violation of Syria’s sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity?

23-0843017/20

S/PV.9291

The situation in the Middle East

How can we believe the claims of the United States
and its allies that they are genuinely contributing to
counter-terrorism efforts and implementing Security
Council counter-terrorism resolutions to save the world
from the scourge of terrorism, while the United States
supports a base for terrorists in Al-Tanf, in southeast Syria? Together with its allies, the United States
promotes a terrorist group such as the White Helmets,
which is an arm of the terrorist Al-Nusra Front/Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham, as a humanitarian organization.
How can we explain their refusal to take back the
terrorist fighters and their families who hold their
citizenship, while shirking their responsibility to
prosecute and hold those terrorist fighters accountable
and rehabilitate and reintegrate their families into
their societies?
Syria has always called for separating issues
of human rights promotion and protection from
any political considerations, but some still insist on
politicizing them. In that regard, I would like to refer to
the campaign organized within the United Nations and
led, unfortunately, by the same Western countries that
follow a hostile approach to raising the issue of missing
persons in the Syrian Arab Republic in an attempt to
launch another politicized international mechanism
whose sole aim is to distort facts and increase pressure
on a country that has been fighting terrorism on behalf
of all the peoples of the world.
Any credible process to reveal the fate of missing
persons in Syria requires knowing the fate of the
thousands who were killed as a result of the military
air strikes carried out by the so-called international
coalition led by the United States of America during
its aggression on Syrian cities. It also requires knowing
the fate of those who went missing at the hands of such
Security Council-designated terrorist groups such as
the Da’esh organization, Jabhat Al-Nusra/Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham and other terrorist organizations, over more
than 10 years.
In accordance with the Syrian Constitution
and relevant legislation, the Syrian Government is
committed to applying the procedures to search for
missing persons, whether at the hands of terrorist
organizations or foreign occupation forces. It strives to
locate them, including through cooperation within the
framework of the Astana format to reveal the fate of
missing persons held by terrorist groups. Syrian lawenforcement institutions also carry out independent
18/20

23/03/2023

investigations into each incident of missing persons
where those missing persons have been registered by
a complaint or an official report, especially in northeast Syria, which is occupied by the United States of
America and its terrorist and separatist allies.
We have witnessed another aspect of politicizing
humanitarian issues while addressing the repercussions
of the earthquake that struck Syria and Türkiye
on 6 February. Preparations for the Brussels donor
conference to support the victims of the earthquake
in Syria and Türkiye were recently made without
any coordination with the Syrian Government,
which represents a country that was affected by the
disaster, and neither was it even invited to participate
in the conference. Indeed, the organizers of the
conference also excluded the participation of the most
prominent national humanitarian actors from Syrian
non-governmental organizations.
The politicization of humanitarian and development
work in Syria is also evident in the insistence of the
United States and the European Union to continue
imposing their illegal and inhumane coercive measures
on the Syrian people. Those measures have prevented
the provision of items needed to rescue earthquake
victims and support those affected by the earthquake.
As for the measures of promoting exemptions for
humanitarian purposes, they are refuted by facts that
prove that they are ineffective and mere propaganda.
The Syrian Arab Republic is committed to
providing facilities to the United Nations and
international organizations with the aim of delivering
support and relief aid to all affected areas by various
means, including through the two additional border
crossings that it decided to open by a sovereign decision
to facilitate the humanitarian response in affected areas
under the control of terrorist organizations, which
deserves respect and support. The crossing of nearly
1,000 trucks carrying aid from the United Nations to
north-west Syria is the best proof of that. To question
that decision and allege that humanitarian aid is being
diverted from its intended recipients is bad behaviour
to undermine the efforts of the Syrian Government.
In conclusion, the Syrian Arab Republic appeals
to all countries to objectively consider all expressed
concerns and calls for certain countries to abandon
their hostile policies, refrain from distorting the facts
about the Syrian State and stop fabricating accusations
against it. It also urges donors to show solidarity with
23-08430

23/03/2023

The situation in the Middle East

the Syrian people in those difficult circumstances and
end their suffering by mobilizing financial pledges
in line with the scope and severity of the damage.
Overcoming the repercussions of the Syrian crisis
requires that Member States have sincere political will
to help Syria, support the efforts of the Syrian State and
its national institutions to achieve early recovery and
economic revival and to allow Syrians to build a better
future for their homeland.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Ms. Ershadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): We thank
Mr. Pedersen and Mr. Talahma for their informative
and insightful briefings.
The humanitarian situation in Syria remains
challenging, particularly after the recent devastating
earthquake. We commend the United Nations and
humanitarian agencies that are tirelessly working to
provide essential support and relief to those affected in
Aleppo, Hama and Latakia.
However, despite those efforts, the latest report of
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
highlights that resource gaps persist and need urgent
attention. We call on the international community and
donors to continue providing support for humanitarian
efforts in Syria.
We hope that Mr. Griffiths’ recent visit to Syria
on 21 March, when he met and consulted with Syrian
authorities, will result in an increase and improvement
in the delivery of aid and support to those in need.
We applaud the Syrian Government’s ongoing efforts
to promote and ease humanitarian access to all parts
of Syria.
We call for the full implementation of resolution
2672 (2023) with a focus on early-recovery projects
that seek to rebuild crucial infrastructure, which is
a necessity for all Syrians, and to improve cross-line
aid operations. These efforts will not only provide
urgently needed relief to the Syrian people, but also
pave the way for sustainable long-term development.
It is also crucial that humanitarian aid is provided
impartially and without discrimination, free from
politicization or any other conditions. This is vital to
ensure that the most vulnerable individuals receive the
assistance they require and that humanitarian efforts
are not hindered by external factors. In the meantime,
the international community must focus on lifting the

S/PV.9291

inhumane unilateral sanctions in order for the current
humanitarian crisis to be addressed more effectively.
Those unlawful measures have made it extremely
challenging for the Syrian people to access basic
needs, hindering their Government’s ability to provide
essential services and improve living conditions.
As a friend of Syria, Iran stands in solidarity with the
Syrian people during these difficult days and remains
dedicated to providing them with the support and aid
they need to overcome their challenging situation. Iran
was one of the first countries to respond to Syria’s
humanitarian appeals and has sent humanitarian
shipments to the areas affected, including essential
supplies of food and non-food items alike. Furthermore,
on 9 March, our Foreign Minister led a delegation to
visit the earthquake-affected area in Latakia. During
the visit he reaffirmed Iran’s commitment to supporting
Syria and remarked that Iran will continue to be a
steadfast friend to the people and the Government of
Syria in these very challenging times.
Although international law prohibits the targeting of
critical civilian infrastructure, and although it is always
imperative to uphold humanitarian principles, the
Israeli regime has continued its aggression and terrorist
attacks on Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity
by deliberately and systematically targeting critical
infrastructure. In a continuation of its aggression and
terrorist attacks, on 7 March the Israeli regime made
several air strikes on Aleppo’s international airport,
forcing it to close temporarily. Another terrorist attack
occurred just yesterday, 22 March.
Those heinous terrorist attacks have had severe
humanitarian consequences for the people of Aleppo,
who are already facing a humanitarian crisis, and can
only worsen their situation. We strongly condemn
them, as they target civilian infrastructure and violate
international humanitarian law and the Charter of the
United Nations, posing a serious threat to regional
peace and stability. The international community must
come together to condemn those attacks, hold the Israeli
regime accountable for its violations and take the action
needed to prevent further aggression against Syria’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity. In particular, the
Security Council must reject its double standards and
take responsibility by explicitly condemning the Israeli
regime for its ongoing violation of the fundamental
principles of international law and the Charter.

23-0843019/20

S/PV.9291

The situation in the Middle East

If we are to ensure a lasting and effective political
solution to the Syrian crisis, we remain steadfast in
our belief that a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political
process, facilitated by the United Nations, is the
only viable approach to ending the crisis. While we
reaffirm our commitment to the national sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of the
Syrian Arab Republic, together with our Astana format
partners we will continue our tireless efforts to achieve
long-term and sustainable normalization in and around
Syria. We also affirm our strong support for the ongoing
work of the Constitutional Committee and commend
the Special Envoy for his unwavering and continuing
efforts to facilitate the meetings of the Committee,
as well as his contacts with the Syrian parties, which
represent important steps towards advancing the
political process.
The illegal presence of foreign military forces
in Syria constitutes a blatant violation of the Charter
and international law and is the primary source of
insecurity in the country. We call for the immediate
and complete withdrawal of those forces, which is
essential to creating an environment that is conducive
to resolving the crisis and restoring peace and stability
in the region.
Finally, we welcome the recent and increased
diplomatic contact between Syria and its regional and
international partners. Improving Syrian diplomatic
relations with the region and beyond is critical to
ensuring Syria’s security, stability and prosperity and
would especially help to ensure the safe and sustainable
return of refugees and internally displaced persons. We
stand ready to assist in that regard.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Türkiye.
Mr. Önal (Türkiye): I join others in thanking Special
Envoy Pedersen and Mr. Talahma, Acting Director of
the Operations and Advocacy Division in the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
Last week the conflict in Syria entered its
thirteenth year. The Syrian people continue to suffer
from the ravages of war and displacement. Even before

20/20

23/03/2023

the earthquakes, the people’s humanitarian plight
was intolerable, and the earthquakes have worsened
an already fragile situation, rendering humanitarian
needs even more acute. In the current circumstances,
the continuation of United Nations cross-border
humanitarian assistance is more critical than ever.
As it stands, in addition to Bab Al-Hawa, the Bab
Al-Salam and Al-Rai crossings are also functioning.
As the Secretary-General underlined last week, there
is an urgent need to guarantee longer-term cross-border
access to north-western Syria.
As the crisis in Syria continues, we cannot afford
to remain complacent in the face of the current
state of affairs. The earthquakes and post-disaster
emergency needs have once again demonstrated the
risks of procrastination. The political process must be
reinvigorated. Resolution 2254 (2015) does in fact give
us the basic guidelines for a viable political solution. In
the meantime, preserving calm on the ground will be
important for the smooth continuation of humanitarian
efforts and for advancing the political process.
As we have come to emphasize, the creation of
suitable conditions for the voluntary, safe and dignified
return of refugees must be an integral part of our overall
efforts to find a durable solution to the crisis and is
indeed a collective responsibility of the international
community. Türkiye remains committed to the political
unity and territorial integrity of Syria and determined
to disrupt the malign and separatist agendas of terrorist
organizations, primarily the Kurdistan Workers’ Party/
People’s Defence Units and Da’esh.
The plight of the Syrian people must be alleviated.
It will take a multidimensional approach and the
involvement of all main stakeholders. For its part,
Türkiye will continue to join all international efforts
towards that end.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

23-08430
