S/PV.7775

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7775th meeting

Thursday, 22 September 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. McCully/Mr. Van Bohemen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(New Zealand)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Moustafa
Ms. Royal
Mr. Okamura
Mr. Aman
Mr. Churkin/Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Ndiaye
Mr. Ybañez
Mr. Klimkin
Mr. Johnson
Mr. Johnson
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts
Aviation security
Letter dated 16 September 2016 from the Permanent Representative of New
Zealand to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2016/791)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-29547 (E)
*1629547*

S/PV.7775

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
Aviation security
Letter dated 16 September 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of New Zealand
to the United Nations addressed to the
SecretaryGeneral (S/2016/791)
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Heads of State and Government, Ministers and other
representatives present in the Security Council
Chamber. Their presence today underscores the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Australia, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, Germany, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Romania,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland
and Turkey to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Fang Liu,
Secretary General of the International Civil Aviation
Organization, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/791, which contains the text of a
letter dated 16 September 2016 from the Permanent
Representative of New Zealand to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Ms. Fang Liu.
Ms. Fang Liu (spoke in Chinese): I am pleased and
honoured to have been invited by the President of the
Security Council to attend today’s meeting.
2/21

22/09/2016

(spoke in English)
I wish to express my sincere thanks to the President
of the Security Council, Mr. Gerard van Bohemen of
New Zealand, for inviting the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO) to address the Council
on international civil aviation security issues, and to
New Zealand’s Foreign Minister, The Honourable
Murray McCully, for presiding over this meeting.
ICAO has been contributing to the implementation
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy since 2006, as well as to the relevant Security
Council resolutions. In particular, I would highlight
resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005) and 2178 (2014).
ICAO is one of the 38 entities of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF), which is mandated
to strengthen the coordination and coherence of
counter-terrorism efforts in the United Nations system.
We enjoy productive collaboration with all Security
Council bodies, in particular the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED).
ICAO was established in 1944 upon the signing
of the Convention on International Civil Aviation in
Chicago. We work with 191 Member States and industry
partners to adopt international civil aviation standards
and recommended practices and policies in support of
a safe, efficient, secure, economically sustainable and
environmentally responsible civil aviation sector. The
over 12,000 standards and recommended practices and
policies are contained in 19 annexes to the Convention
and used by ICAO member States as benchmarks to
ensure that local civil aviation operations and regulations
conform to global norms. In turn, these harmonized
national air transport regulations help States, airlines,
airports and others to cooperate in managing over
100,000 daily flights. This currently permits 3.5 billion
passengers per year — representing some 10 million
travellers each day, and one-third of the world’s trade
by value by air — to reach their global destinations
safely, securely and efficiently. It is important to stress
that the worldwide air transport network will double its
volume of flights and passengers by 2030.
ICAO also protects civil aviation through the
adoption of treaties. Among 19 United Nations counterterrorism treaties, eight were adopted by ICAO,
including most recently the Beijing Convention of
2010 and Montreal Protocol of 2014. In addition to
its standards-setting role, ICAO audits States’ civil
aviation oversight capabilities in the areas of safety
16-29547

22/09/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV.7775

and security, and coordinates targeted assistance and
capacity-building, utilizing these monitoring results.

anticipated that the ICAO Council will adopt them in
November.

Technical assistance is a major component of
the ICAO No Country Left Behind initiative, which
focuses on assisting all States on prioritized needs
to improve implementation under all ICAO strategic
objectives. The primary objective of aviation security
assistance is to support Member States in resolving
significant security concerns identified through the
ICAO Aviation Security Audit Programme, and to
assist them in implementing security standards and the
ICAO Traveller Identification Programme Strategy.

In terms of the outlook for international civil
aviation security, at present we consider it to be both
promising and challenging. I am pleased to inform
the Council that ICAO’s Universal Security Audit
Programme continues to record that levels of effective
implementation of aviation security standards are
steadily improving, at both the global and regional
levels. Intensive collaboration by States, under ICAO’s
leadership, is also permitting us to refine all the relevant
standards, recommended practices and best-practice
guidance based on risk management.

ICAO established in 2015 a regional aviation
security and facilitation plan for Africa, but
importantly, a great deal more is needed in terms of
commitments and cooperation on the part of States
and other international organizations if these and other
technical assistance efforts are to fully meet their
objectives. ICAO is also keenly aware of the critical
links between sustainable socioeconomic development
for States and safe, secure air transport operations, as
international aviation contributes roughly 3.5 per cent
to the world gross domestic product. While we strive
with our member States towards the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, that role is becoming more
important than ever.
Aviation security — or, more precisely, the
prevention of acts of unlawful interference against
civil aviation — is one of ICAO’s highest priorities.
I mentioned earlier that ICAO’s standards are set out
in 19 annexes to the Chicago Convention. Annex 17
is specifically focused on aviation security. They
cover a comprehensive range of measures, from
national organizational arrangements and allocation of
responsibilities to threat and risk assessments, baggage
and cargo security, physical security at airports and
incident response to international cooperation, among
many other matters.
The high-profile landside airport attacks in
Brussels and Istanbul earlier this year were a tragic
reminder of the enormous challenges faced in securing
public areas, the inseparability of aviation security and
national security and of the significant socioeconomic
consequences of terrorism. But they also remind us of
the resilience and responsiveness of the global civil
aviation network. Subsequent to those attacks, ICAO
rapidly developed new amendments to annex 17 aimed
at enhancing landside security at airport facilities. It is

Another very positive development we have taken
note of is the unprecedented level of multilateral
cooperation to support aviation security enhancement
initiatives. In addition to the ICAO African regional
security plan, the States of the Middle East region
recently adopted the Riyadh Declaration, which outlines
the need to improve aviation security in that region. But
at the same time, the threat and risk situation remains
complex and rapidly evolving, and so too must the
security measures to address them.
Threats posed by small weapons carried by
passengers, improvised explosive devices concealed
in baggage and cargo, and man-portable air defence
systems continue to require attention. As well, areas
of new or renewed concern, such as landside security,
cybersecurity, remotely piloted aircraft systems and
insider threats require urgent attention. And while
the overall effective implementation of ICAO’s global
standards is improving, there remains much room for
progress. That is especially the case in States that lack
national capacity or may otherwise be characterized
by under-developed civil aviation security systems and
programmes.
A cornerstone of ICAO’s aviation security
standards is the obligation of each State to designate
and specify to ICAO an appropriate authority within its
Administration. Those authorities are responsible for
the development, implementation and maintenance of
the national civil aviation security programme. Those
national civil aviation security focal points coordinate
the direct involvement of national police, intelligence,
customs, immigration, justice, foreign affairs, finance,
military and other agencies to ensure a cohesive,
whole-of-government national civil aviation security
programme. They must also coordinate the involvement

16-295473/21

S/PV.7775

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

of airline and airport operators and air-traffic service
providers within that broad national framework. In
other words, aviation security at the national level
must engage a large number of entities, and each must
contribute in a manner consistent with their respective
mandates and responsibilities. The same holds true at
the international level. But the required coordination
can be complex and challenging at times, mainly due
to variation among State coordination mechanisms and
their resulting impacts on the global framework.
States are therefore called upon to help ensure that
all of their relevant domestic entities work closely and
effectively. To help drive the needed national focus
on global harmonization, ICAO therefore coordinates
closely with its member States, the CTED, the
World Customs Organization, INTERPOL and other
members of the CTITF, regional aviation and security
organizations and many others to enhance civil aviation
security. Throughout those efforts, a recurring theme is
securing and mobilizing States’ political will, as well
as enhancing national capacities.
The Security Council’s focus will serve to heighten
the efforts by the global community on aviation security,
encourage intensified political engagement by the States
to effectively implement ICAO’s security standards and
to support ICAO’s technical assistance activities to the
States in need. For the coming 2017-2019 triennium
of the ICAO work programme, the centrepiece in the
field of aviation security will be the development of
a new global aviation security plan. Among the goals
envisaged for the plan are greater technical assistance to
States to build their capacity and achieve higher levels
of effective implementation of annex 17 standards on
aviation security, accelerate the development of human
resources in aviation security, process and technology
innovation to enhance the effectiveness and efficiency
of security measures and greater use of many aviation
disciplines to improve security.
The global plan will establish and align targets
and objectives tailored to States’ needs, together
with an effective mechanism for monitoring global
progress. Under that new ICAO global aviation
security plan, States, regions, industry operators and
other stakeholders will be unified through a strategic
framework that offers clarity on all priorities for
aviation security enhancement. It will establish
individual, bilateral and multilateral means to address
those priorities, time frames for achieving results and
the consequences to be expected when commitments are
4/21

22/09/2016

not delivered. That will provide ICAO with invaluable
support in achieving its aviation security objectives and
in effectively contributing to the Security Council’s
resoluitons and the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
The President: I thank Ms. Fang Liu for her
briefing.
Members of the Council have before them document
A/2016/797, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Angola, Australia, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal,
the Republic of Korea, Romania, Senegal, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Turkey, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, the United States of America and
Uruguay.
The Council is ready to proceed to vote on the draft
resolution before it.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements before
the voting.
Mr. Moustafa (Egypt): At the outset, I should like
to thank you, Sir, and the New Zealand presidency of
the Council for the commendable way in which the
proceedings have been conducted during September.
I should also like to extend my appreciation to
Ms. Fang Liu, Secretary General of the International
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), for her valuable
briefing.
The timing of the submission of the draft resolution
before us is questionable, coming as it does just a few
days before the triennial 39th session of the ICAO
Assembly, which takes place in the last week of this
month. The Assembly gathers all ICAO members to
address all aspects related to civil aviation and aviation
safety and security.
The introduction of today’s draft resolution
suggests a desire to meddle in ICAO’s business in order
to have the draft resolution adopted before that session.
However, as agreed by the members of the Council,
the goal of the draft resolution is to raise awareness
within the international community about the gravity
of the situation and the threats posed to civil aviation
security, and to recall the incidents that have taken
place since 2011. The threat is growing and aims to
16-29547

22/09/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV.7775

influence national economies and relations among
States. We must recall the gravity of the threat in order
to promote cooperation among countries, provide the
technical assistance needed, respect the sovereignty of
countries and emphasize the role of ICAO as the global
body in charge of such issues.

In favour:
Angola, China, Egypt, France, Japan, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Russian Federation, Senegal, Spain,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).

In view of its awareness of the importance of
countering the terrorist threat and of protecting its
citizens and tourists, Egypt continues to work closely
with all countries and with ICAO. A recent review of
aviation practices and procedures in Egyptian airports
took place, in line with the Chicago Convention on
International Civil Aviation, and it is my pleasure
to inform the Council that the ICAO audit team has
given Egypt a positive assessment for its application of
standard security procedures. The Egyptian authorities
received a formal letter from ICAO in August,
indicating the progress made by Egypt in the field of
aviation security. We hope that other countries are at
the same level.

The President: The draft resolution received
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2309 (2016).

We believe that the threat to civil aviation requires a
collective effort to counter terrorism in a comprehensive
manner by addressing the root causes that lead to
terrorism within countries and by countering it in all
its forms. If we are serious, we ought to engage in
intensive cooperation and stop financing terrorism and
providing safe haven to terrorists. We should also halt
all attempts to use social media to spread messages of
hatred and terrorist propaganda.
We must equip and assist countries in fighting
terrorism in the required manner. We should also keep
pace with the fast-changing attitudes and resources
of terrorist groups, and adopt uniform measures and
standards for countries that have been victimized by
terrorism, which seeks to destroy their economies. We
should not treat victims differently depending on their
origins, but sympathize with all victims of terrorism.
It is our ethical and political duty to treat everyone
equally.
Lastly, we reaffirm Egypt’s commitment to
countering the scourge of terrorism on the basis of
cooperation, openness and transparency. We will work
to offer practical responses to the threat to the field of
civil aviation security.
The President: I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.
I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Boris Johnson,
Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
Mr. Johnson (United Kingdom): I am most grateful
to Ms. Fang Liu for her comprehensive briefing on
behalf of the International Civil Aviation Organization.
The United Kingdom wholeheartedly welcomes the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2309 (2016) thanks
to the strong and united action of the Council. This is
the first resolution ever to focus on the threat posed
by terrorists to civil aviation, and it demonstrates our
joint resolve to protect our citizens from an escalating
danger. We have come a long way since the first
scheduled commercial flight took off from Florida over
100 years ago. Today, over three billion passengers
reach their destinations by air every year, and it is those
lives that we are acting to protect today.
We only have to remember some of the recent
tragedies to see the urgency of our task. The attacks
on airports in Brussels and Istanbul, the destruction of
the Russian Metrojet aircraft over Sinai last year and
the explosion on board a Dallo Airlines flight from
Mogadishu in February. All of those outrages posed a
serious threat to international peace and security. All
were stark reminders of how civil aviation faces an
evolving danger from terrorists, who probe relentlessly
for chinks in our collective armour. And there is one
reality that none of us here can escape — we all depend
on each other to provide a secure aviation environment.
No country alone can safeguard what is by its very
nature a global activity. That is why action here in the
Security Council at the global level is so important.
By adopting the resolution today, the Security
Council has delivered a resounding call to action for the
entire international community. The resolution provides

16-295475/21

S/PV.7775

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

for specific arrangements to be consistently applied. It
also makes clear that precautions should be adapted
in response to the changing tactics of the terrorists.
The resolution encourages all countries to observe the
security standards laid down by the International Civil
Aviation Organization. And we recognize that, if all
nations are to meet this challenge, assistance will often
be required. Targeted capacity development, training
and other technical help will all be needed. I believe
that such assistance should be provided with the full
knowledge that protecting civil aviation represents a
vital objective for all of us.
In conclusion, over the past two years the Security
Council has taken a series of steps to counter the
terrorist threat. Just as the danger has evolved, so has
our response. We have sought to counter the emergence
of Daesh. We have taken steps against the phenomenon
of foreign terrorist fighters. We have tried to block,
or otherwise disrupt, the many channels of terrorist
financing. The resolution represents another significant
step forward in that common struggle. It provides a
comprehensive approach to safeguarding civil aviation
from terrorism, and it shows the determination of the
entire international community to keep our citizens
safe.
The United Kingdom looks forward to the full
implementation of the resolution after this Council’s
unanimous show of support. Doing so will involve
working both nationally and internationally with our
partners. We also welcome the Council’s intention to
remain seized of this vital matter. The terrorists will
not relent in their efforts to attack civil aviation, so we
must never cease to persevere together to thwart their
evil desires. Air travel is one of the greatest liberators
that the human race has ever known, and the resolution
will help us to continue to enjoy that freedom in safety.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Jeh Johnson, Secretary of Homeland
Security of the United States of America.
Mr. Johnson (United States of America): First, we
express our appreciation to the United Kingdom and
Secretary Johnson of the United Kingdom for bringing
attention to this important issue on aviation security. I
thank Secretary Johnson for his leadership on the issue.
I also wish to commend the work of the International
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) and its Secretary
General, Ms. Liu, on matters of aviation security. We
are therefore glad that we are having this meeting, and
6/21

22/09/2016

we welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution 2309
(2016).
I regard aviation security today as an urgent
matter. The resolution that we just adopted refers to
recent terrorist attacks on civil aviation as a matter of
grave concern. We agree with that characterization.
For us in the United States, the defining moment for
aviation security was 11 September 2001. A whole
new Government agency dedicated to transportation
security, our Transportation Security Administration
(TSA), was created as a result. Today in the United
States, the TSA is the agency of our Government that
interacts most with the public on a daily basis. The
reality is that today there is a continuing international
threat to aviation security, including the terrorist threat.
Recent attacks have demonstrated that the terrorist
threat to aviation security and airport security are as
serious as ever. As noted in the resolution, terrorist
organizations continue to regard civil aviation as an
attractive target for attacks. That is fully consistent
with our own Government’s assessment. Terrorist
organizations continue to seek to exploit perceived
gaps in our aviation security.
The good news is that in recent years, the
international community has taken significant steps
to strengthen aviation security and restore public
confidence in aviation. There is still more to do. In
the United States, the TSA, led by Administrator Peter
Neffenger, has rededicated itself to its aviation security
mission. Our airlines have supported that effort. Two
years ago, we enhanced aviation security measures at
international airports for flights bound to the United
States. I am pleased that other nations have adopted
similar enhancements.
Since last year following the crash of Metrojet
Flight 9268, we have focused on enhanced security
around passengers, luggage, cargo and other items
brought on flights bound for the United States. We
are actively researching and investing in new aviation
security technology to track current threats. Our
Congress has also authorized us to donate aviation
security equipment to other countries.
After years during which we reduced the number of
TSA officers, we have reversed that trend and are hiring
more. We have converted large numbers of part-time
TSA employees to full-time. We are adding more bombsniffing dogs to the aviation security mission. We have
embarked upon a programme called TSA Precheck to
16-29547

22/09/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

encourage passengers to submit to a background check
in advance of their flight.
Earlier this year, despite increased air travel
volume in the United States and longer lines at airport
screening checkpoints, we refused to shortcut aviation
security. We are seeking more agreements with other
nations to accept air marshals on commercial flights
to and from the United States. We are actively seeking
more preclearance arrangements with Governments
around the world, under which our customs officers are
positioned overseas to screen passengers before they
board flights to the United States.
We encourage other nations to rededicate
themselves to the matter of aviation security. As
Secretary Johnson noted, we all depend on each other on
this issue. We encourage increased information-sharing
on aviation security best practices among nations and
continued investments by other nations in aviation
security technology. Through ICAO, let us continue to
standardize aviation security practices.
The United States of America strongly supports
full implementation of the resolution that we have just
adopted, and we encourage other nations to do so as
well. The resolution provides an important opportunity
to reaffirm our commitment to aviation security and
advance global standards so as to address the evolving
terrorist threat. Resolution 2309 (2016) sends a clear
message, namely, security for international flights
is an issue of concern for the Security Council.
The resolution calls on all States to work with the
established United Nations structures to develop more
effective international standards for aviation security.
The resolution calls on States to urgently address any
gaps or vulnerabilities and to work vigorously and
swiftly to address States’ concerns about threats to
international flights. I note in particular the provision
in the resolution that calls upon States to ensure that
“such measures take into account the potential role
of those with privileged access to areas, knowledge
or information that may assist terrorists in planning
or conducting attacks” (resolution 2309 (2016)
para. 6 (c))
We will continue to work with the United Nations,
our international partners and ICAO to strengthen
standards that keep the global aviation system safe and
secure.

S/PV.7775

The President: I now give the floor to Her Excellency
Ms. Ségolène Royal, Minister of Environment,
Energy and Marine Affairs of France, responsible for
International Climate Relations and President of the
twenty-first session of the Conference of the Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change.
Ms. Royal (France) (spoke in French): As the
Security Council is aware, France has yet again violently
and most painfully been struck by terrorist attacks. For
that reason, I wish to thank the New Zealand presidency
and the United Kingdom for organizing this ministerial
meeting of the Council dedicated to aviation security.
My ministerial responsibilities include oversight of
land, rail and air transport modes.
I would like to thank the Secretary General of the
International Civil Aviation Organization for her very
enlightening statement regarding the vulnerability of
civil aviation and possible avenues for improvement.
I would like to commend the numerous efforts she
mentioned in her briefing by the organization in the area
of aviation security. I assure her of France’s continued
support in that work.
The targeting of civil aviation by terrorists began
in Entebbe in 1976, and there have been various other
deadly attacks against civil aviation over the past
few decades, claiming thousands of lives. Despite
considerable strengthening of security measures,
this threat remains present and topical, as Mr. Boris
Johnson so rightly said, reiterated by Mr. Jeh Johnson,
Secretary of Homeland Security. Da’esh claimed
the attack downing Metrojet Flight 9268 in the Sinai
on 31 October, which claimed 224 lives. In Somalia,
Al-Shabaab has claimed the attack that struck Daalio
Airlines on 2 February. What has changed in these
attacks is both the intensity and global nature of the
threat, as well as the methods used by terrorists. This
is why it is extremely important that the international
community continue to mobilize itself against this
scourge and that it shows greater solidarity. I welcome
the unanimous vote that has just taken place because, as
the Secretary General rightly said, , we are all linked to
one another: we leave one place and arrive in another.
As such, there is clear international solidarity. This is
why it is so important for us to be able to detect weak
links, which are all chinks in our collective armour. In
the past, the Group of Seven (G-7) mobilized itself by
granting pride of place to this topic in the action plan
adopted at G-7 Summit in Ise-Shima in May. We will

16-295477/21

S/PV.7775

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

have to ensure that commitments undertaken at the
Summit are effectively implemented.
I will conclude by underlining two important
issues.
First, as the Secretary General stated, it is important
that States implement the standards set out in annex 17
of the Convention on International Civil Aviation, to
which they have subscribed, by ratifying the text, but
also that they move beyond them, without hesitation,
when required.
Secondly, it is very important to lend assistance
to States that request it to ensure that they are able to
upgrade their airport infrastructure and bring them
in line with international norms. Such States must
make the necessary efforts to ensure that the air routes
linking them to the rest of the world remain reliable
and sustainable, which is also in the interests of their
economic development. That is why the mobilization of
all the expertise of a State’s administration responsible
for aviation security must remain unfailing.
I would also like to mention security in airports,
to which Ms. Fang Liu also referred, specifically the
link between national and international security. Very
recently in France there was an attack on a European
Thalys train. The attack fortunately claimed no victims,
thanks to the courage of a number of individuals on the
train, some of whom were American, who were able
to incapacitate the terrorists. Following that attack we
installed a number of detector gates in stations and, in
the same vein, we are currently looking at the possibility
of placing security checkpoints at the entrances of
airports, not only when one wishes to board the plane
but also when one enters the airport itself. Moveable
gates have also been deployed, as well as a number of
patrol dogs, as was just mentioned by the Secretary of
Homeland Security of the United States.
We have to bear in mind the necessity to exchange
best practices in terms of new security technologies,
namely, moveable gates, which are much more difficult
to identify and are extremely effective. For the fact is
that there is a democratization of air transport taking
place, with the costs of flying falling, leading to a
growing number of travellers. Especially following the
tragedy in Nice, one can imagine the awful tragedy that
could strike if there were an attack during the holiday
period, with airports full of families with children.
Reinforcing detector gates in airports is therefore
something I believe to be essential. As the minister
8/21

22/09/2016

responsible for safeguarding air transport, this is one
of my concerns when I think of the possible damage
that could be caused from attacks launched where there
are large numbers of people. An example of this is in
airports during the holiday period where there are a
great many people and a great many families.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Senegalese abroad of the Republic of
Senegal.
Mr. Ndiaye (Senegal) (spoke in French): It is a
pleasure for me to see all Security Council Members
here at this public debate on a clearly important and
relevant topic. Terrorist attacks on civil aviation have
happened with alarming frequency in recent years.
They pose yet another threat to international peace and
security.
The Senegalese delegation also wishes to extend
its gratitude to the United Kingdom, sponsor of this
initiative, which gives us an opportunity to begin
considering the ways and means to effectively rise to
the new challenges civil aviation faces. That is why we
voted in favour of and co-sponsored resolution 2309
(2016), which the Council has just adopted. This is yet
another important step in the right direction.
In accordance with the provisions of the
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO),
every State has a responsibility to guarantee the
effective implementation of all security-related
measures to protect civil aviation against unlawful
acts. For several years, Senegal has undertaken a vast
programme to bolster its civil aviation security in both
its territory and in its air space. The policy has enabled
the adoption by the National Assembly of my country
of a new civil aviation code through its law 2015/10,
adopted on 4 May 2015.
Senegal has also set up a number of aviation rules and
regulations to improve the implementation of security
measures and procedures. This regulatory framework
was significantlhy updated at the national level within
the framework of the implementation of the provisions
of annex 17 to the Chicago Convention on International
Civil Aviation and of the related Universal Security
Audit Programme. Senegal has also created a platform
to exchange sensitive information with other States in
order to affectively face the rise in new threats, attacks
and unlawful acts using aircraft and airports. Pursuant
to decree 2015/1969 of 21 September 2015, Senegal has
16-29547

22/09/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

set up a monitoring system for civil aviation security,
based on ICAO’s provisions. That will ensure the
security of air transport in our territory for the setting
up of a national civil aviation security programmes.
The national civil aviation security programme and its
annexes cover everything within the framework of civil
aviation security. This applies to security measures
for domestic flights, threat assessment, airport-safety
programmes, operator-safety programmes, personnel
selection and background checks, training and
performance standards, screening-agent satisfaction,
quality-management programmes and cooperation
among States.
Senegal has also ratified the relevant provisions
of the West African Economic and Monetary Union
(WAEMU) related to air transport, in particular
Regulation 10 (2013), on civil-aviation security, and
Decision 11 (2013), dated 26 September 2013, on the
implementation of safety practices and procedures
within the member States of WAEMU. These provisions
are aimed at creating a set of rules for preserving civilaviation security in the WAEMU space, with regular
updates based on the evolution of risks and threats as well
as on technological progress. Each member of WAEMU
reserves the right to apply more stringent measures to
meet a particular requirement following the results of a
threat analysis. Senegal supports the idea of improved
​​
cooperation among ICAO, the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee through its Executive Directorate.

S/PV.7775

The global aviation industry depends on a vast
network that growing ever-more important everyday.
The International Air Transport Association estimates
that there are over 5,000 aircraft flying at any given
time, carrying over 8 million people, while transporting
140,000 tonnes of cargo daily. Moreover, the aviation
industry supports over 57 million jobs and generates
$2.2 trillion in economic activity. The global economic
benefits and significance to human activity today are
enormous. As such, the global aviation industry must
be protected with measures designed to provide safety
and security for its passengers.
Malaysia shares the view that the global aviation
network is an attractive target for international
terrorism. The sharp increase in attempts to disrupt
and threaten civil aviation over the past few years is
proof of this view. The cold and calculating logic
of terrorists was obvious in the attacks against the
Brussels International Airport and Istanbul Atatürk
Airport earlier this year. When such attacks are
successful, the consequences are devastating in terms
of both lives lost and undermined public confidence.
Taken together, both could bring about even broader
negative consequences. With two back-to-back aviation
tragedies, Malaysia is acutely aware of the challenges
associated with addressing negative public perceptions
and loss of public confidence.

The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Dato Sri Anifah Aman, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Malaysia.

Against such a background, my delegation concurs
that the threats posed to aviation security by terrorism
constitute threats to international peace and security.
It is therefore right for the Council to be seized of
this issue. In this regard, I wish to thank the United
Kingdom for leading the Council to adopt resolution
2309 (2016) this morning. Malaysia is pleased to
support and co-sponsor the resolution, as it seeks to
establish a better and stronger linkage between the
Council’s ongoing counter-terrorism work with ICAO’s
norms- and standards-setting work.

Mr. Aman (Malaysia): First of all, I wish to
congratulate you, Mr. President, as well as the entire
delegation of New Zealand, on so ably steering the
Security Council’s proceedings and work this month.
I am pleased to participate in this very important and
timely meeting. We hope it will make a meaningful
contribution towards improving the state of global
aviation security. Accordingly, I thank Secretary
General of the International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO), Ms. Fang Liu, for her insightful briefing.

By enabling such linkages between ICAO and the
Security Council, especially in the Council’s subsidiary
bodies, including the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001) and the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate, we are hopeful that such
cooperation and collaboration would over time result in
tangible improvements in global aviation security in all
its aspects. At the same time, my delegation believes that
resolution 2309 (2016) could also inform discussions
within the ICAO General Assembly, scheduled to begin

In conclusion, my delegation welcomes and looks
forward to the organization of the upcoming special
meeting on threats to civil aviation and awaits with great
interest the briefing on the meeting’s results, which will
be presented to the Security Council in 12 months.

16-295479/21

S/PV.7775

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

early next week, on possible updates to the Global
Aviation Safety Plan.
In the span of just four months, Malaysia suffered
not one but two civil-aviation disasters, namely, the
tragedies of Malaysian Airlines Flight MH-370 and MH17. These tragedies continue to hang heavy on our hearts
as they do on the hearts of the families and loved ones of
the victims. These two civil aviation tragedies — while
not ostensibly linked to terrorism — do offer some
instructive lessons relevant to the aims and objectives
of resolution 2309 (2016). In that regard, with a view to
sharing Malaysia’s experience, I wish to make two key
observations.
First, with respect to the civil-aviation authorities’
initial instinct or reflex in both cases to investigate
and determine whether the air disasters were caused
by terrorism or other factors, the immediate provision
of expertise and assistance from both States and
international organizations, including the ICAO, to
determine probable causes, were, in our view, crucial to
dispelling the notion that either MH-370 or MH-17 was
brought down by acts of terrorism. Such quick action
helped maintain public perception and confidence.
Secondly, pursuant to the need for increased
preparedness and prevention-capacity, Malaysia
introduced new security measures, including the
deployment of hi-tech monitoring systems and
additional security personnel across all international
airports in Malaysia. We have taken steps to improve
informationand
intelligence-sharing
through
deployment of the Advance Passenger Information
System and the Advanced Passenger Screening System
to provide early warning and curb possible travel of
foreign terrorist fighters, in line with the provisions
of resolution 2178 (2014). We have also strengthened
our legal and operational framework by revamping the
Malaysian National Security Council, which has, among
its core functions, the assessment and monitoring of
terrorist threats and activities in the country.
I am also pleased to share that the South-East Asian
region through the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) is also giving priority to aviation
security. The adoption of the ASEAN Transport
Strategic Plan 2016-2025, the key regional policy
document on aviation security, adopted in December
2015, is an example of increased coordination and
cooperation in my region on this issue.
10/21

22/09/2016

I wish to also take this opportunity to reassure
all concerned that Malaysia, together with all our
partners, remains committed to bringing closure to all
outstanding questions on MH-370 and MH-17. We are
most grateful for the encouragement and assistance we
have received from all our partners and friends to this
end. With specific regard to MH-17, I wish to reaffirm
Malaysia’s commitment to implementing the provisions
of resolution 2166 (2014) and count on the support and
cooperation of all concerned partners in this regard.
In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm Malaysia’s
unwavering commitment to combating and eradicating
the scourge of terrorism as part of our shared collective
responsibility, including through joint, coordinated
and concerted efforts at all levels. These efforts must
be premised on the full respect for international law,
including human rights and humanitarian law, as well
as respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Pavlo Кlimkin, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Ukraine.
Mr. Klimkin (Ukraine): Mr. President, I want to
thank you for taking the laudable initiative to convene
today’s meeting. I also wish to thank our briefer today,
Secretary General of the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO), Ms. Fang Liu, for providing a
real and extensive outlook on the topic and the work
of the United Nations and its specialized agencies in
this field. It would be remiss of me not to commend
the efforts of the United Kingdom, which we really
appreciate, in preparing the resolution that was adopted
today (resolution 2309 (2016)).
The key words here — civil aviation and terrorist
attacks — remind me immediately of the tragic events
of 11 September, which occurred just a few blocks from
here. Fifteen years ago, the international community
was prompted to take decisive steps in the fight against
terrorism and to strengthen security regulations in civil
aviation so as to reduce terrorist risks in this sphere.
Nevertheless, the terrorist threat to air transportation
systems continues to grow. Such threats take different
forms, including terrorist shootings aimed at bringing
down aircraft, smuggling explosives on board, hijacking
and using an aircraft as an improvised guided cruise
missile, and exploiting the airways to move fighters and
human or material resources to conflict zones. Other
challenges include attempts to compromise security at
16-29547

22/09/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

airports, including cyberattacks as well as conventional
terrorist attacks in airports; insider threats; and threats
of the use of improvised explosive devices, man-portable
air defence systems (MANPADS) and other surface-toair missiles against civilian targets, including during
takeoff or landing.
Despite the activities of ICAO and other relevant
organizations dealing with issues of aviation security,
there is a persistent need to improve mechanisms for
States’ cooperation in this field and to increase their
capacity to confront the terrorist threat.
The holding of today’s meeting at such a high level
proves the importance of this issue and the common
understanding of the need to improve public confidence
in safe air travel. Airports have long been attractive
targets for terrorist groups attempting to cause
numerous civilian casualties. Owing to the importance
of the air transportation system in ensuring the proper
functioning of modern societies, its destruction or any
disruption of its work are bound to attract a significant
level of public attention.
Taking into consideration the recent terrorist
attacks against airports in Belgium and Turkey,
provisions concerning the protection of such critical
infrastructure facilities should be duly reflected in
terrorism-prevention programmes. States should
conduct specialized vulnerability assessments, in
collaboration with airport operators and stakeholders,
to identify weaknesses, interdependencies and ways
of improving the protection of airports against a
growing number of diverse threats, both physical and
cyberrelated. Close cooperation between the relevant
State authorities in this field with private operators
should also be maintained.
We strongly believe that there is an urgent need for
the United Nations and its specialized bodies, together
with ICAO, to develop preventive measures against
possible threats as well as to ensure strict and effective
international and national controls on the import,
export, transfer or retransfer and storage of MANPADS
and other missile weapons to mitigate potential risks.
Regrettably, Ukraine has faced such a problem
in dealing with the terrorist activities in the Donbass
region of Ukraine carried out with the direct support
of the Russian Federation since 2014. On 17 July
2014, Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 was shot down
by terrorists in the sky over the eastern part of
Ukraine, killing 298 people. This terrible atrocity is

S/PV.7775

a potent reminder of the gravity of the threat posed
to civil aviation by terrorist groups armed with such
sophisticated weapons.
In this regard, I wish to underscore the need for
the full implementation of resolution 2166 (2014),
in particular with regard to the Security Council
demand to bring to account those responsible for
this incident and to cooperate fully with efforts to
establish accountability.
As the Council may recall, last year’s efforts to set up
an international tribunal to prosecute those responsible
was sabotaged in this Chamber owing to the veto of
the Russian Federation. Such a tribunal, I am confident,
would have been our most effective instrument for
responding to this heinous crime. Nevertheless, we
continue our work with other partner States within the
joint investigation team and with other grieving nations
to address the situation and to present options for a
mechanism to establish full accountability. This should
be done within the proper time frame, because justice
delayed is justice denied.
The aforementioned horrendous crime prompted
ICAO to undertake several initiatives related to conflict
zones, including establishing the Task Force on Risks
to Civil Aviation arising from Conflict Zones, setting
up the Conflict Zone Information Repository, and
publishing detailed guidance on the threats posed to
commercial flights by surface-to-air missile systems.
We strongly support such ICAO activities and
call for the enhancement of the global system of
information-sharing about such threats. It is also
imperative that special attention be given to conflict
zones in the risk-assessment process during the
mapping of flight routes.
Here I would like to highlight another important
issue. The responsibility for air-traffic services in the
high seas over the Simferopol Flight Information Region,
which includes Crimea, was delegated to Ukraine by
regional air navigation agreements as approved by an
ICAO Council decision of February 1997. Ukraine has
faithfully fulfilled its responsibilities and provides airtraffic services in accordance with ICAO Standards
and Recommended Practices.
Following the illegal occupation of Crimea in April
2014, the Russian Federation started to interfere in the
international emergency frequency in the air-traffic
service provided by Ukraine. Such actions create

16-2954711/21

S/PV.7775

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

serious threats for flights within international airspace
over the high seas and run counter to the Chicago
Convention and its annexes 15 and 11, as well as the
relevant ICAO regulations in this area.
The Russian Federation, having unilaterally
resorted to the provision of air navigation services
within the Simferopol region, has also violated General
Assembly 68/262, on the territorial integrity of Ukraine,
adopted in March 2014. It is obvious that the publication
of aeronautical information by the Russian Federation
can only be regarded as an attempt to legitimize its
unlawful activities.
We wish to emphasize the importance of strict
adherence to the Standards and Recommended
Practices of ICAO by all Member States without any
exception, especially in the airspace over the high seas.
At present, the use of explosive devices constitutes
a significant threat to civil aviation. The urgency of this
risk is underlined by the number of incidents that took
place in 2015 and 2016. Moreover, modern technologies
that allow for the production of non-traceable weapons
components bring this threat to a new level. This calls
for introduction of additional security enhancements at
airports, including screening protocols to reduce the
risk of explosives or weapons entering the premises of
being smuggled onboard the aircraft by passengers or
facility employees.
Information-sharing among international partners
is another tool to address the challenges faced by
international civil aviation. Therefore, we encourage
Member States to strengthen sharing agreements with
foreign partners and to continue working closely with
the law-enforcement and intelligence communities as
well as competent international organizations such as
INTERPOL to monitor for watch-listed terrorists.
This also brings us to the issue of stopping the flow
of foreign terrorist fighters by countering their transit,
in line with the relevant Security Council resolutions,
and implementing the Council’s bans on terrorists.
We believe that the primary obligation to prevent the
movement of foreign fighters lies primarily with the
source countries, which have to spot and stop their
flows at the earliest stages.
We support universal implementation of Advance
Passenger Information/Passenger Name Record data
systems throughout the world and an active use of
the INTERPOL Stolen and Lost Travel Documents
12/21

22/09/2016

database to check travellers’ information against current
sanctions lists. If duly implemented, these measures
can be a classical win-win scenario for Governments
and airlines. We call for ICAO and other relevant
international organizations to assist those Member
States in need to ensure universal implementation of
the above-mentioned standards.
In conclusion, I would like to note that by adopting
resolution 2309 (2016) today, we have sent a strong
message to the international community on the need to
focus its efforts in developing new standards of aviation
security and safety to confront terrorist threats to civil
aviation. To neutralize these threats effectively, we must
ensure that our global and national plans to combat the
terrorism scourge, including those introduced within
the United Nations, are adaptive and responsive to
emerging dangers.
The United Nations, its counter-terrorism agencies
and bodies — such as the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force — and ICAO must play an
absolutely proactive role in strengthening the capacities
of Member States to achieve this goal.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the Minister for Foreign Affairs of New
Zealand.
New Zealand welcomes today’s opportunity to
discuss the serious threat to international peace and
security posed by terrorist targeting of civil aviation.
I thank the Foreign Secretary of the United
Kingdom, Mr. Boris Johnson, for his leadership on
resolution 2309 (2016), which was just adopted by the
Council. Air links are critical to New Zealand. More
than 99 per cent of our international visitors arrive
by air, and around 15 per cent of our exports are
transported by air. The security of international civil
aviation is therefore of vital importance to my country.
As we commemorate the fifteenth anniversary of
the September 11 attacks in New York, we need no
reminding that terrorist threats to civil aviation are
not a new phenomenon. The Council has already taken
action to address the travel of foreign terrorist fighters,
including by restricting their access to planes as a
means of transport. But recent attacks demonstrate that
civil aviation remains an attractive target for terrorists,
and advances in technology have made terrorist threats
to aviation harder to detect.
16-29547

22/09/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The international community must remain vigilant
in ensuring that international standards are responsive to
a constantly-evolving threat environment. As countries
gather for the triennial session of the International Civil
Aviation Organization’s (ICAO) Assembly later this
month, we encourage them to reflect on the collective
views of this Council in their deliberations. ICAO
remains the primary forum for improving international
aviation security standards and deserves the support of
the international community and of the Council.
New Zealand supports an approach to aviation
security that is risk-based and tailored to different
circumstances. This is particularly important for
States with limited capacities and lower risk profiles,
including the many small island developing States of
our region. It does not make sense to expect the same
systems and approach from Tuvalu as we have from the
United States.
But agreeing to standards is only the first step.
The more challenging and important task is ensuring
that these are effectively implemented. New Zealand
therefore welcomes the focus in today’s resolution
on international cooperation, including technical
assistance. We continue to provide significant technical
support in aviation security efforts, in particular to
improve regional air security in the Pacific. However,
enhanced aviation security can only ever provide a
short-term bandage. The far greater challenge lies in
addressing the conditions that motivate and enable
those who commit these acts of terrorism.
In this respect, we need to reflect on the
effectiveness of this organ, which is charged with
maintaining international peace and security. The
Security Council’s track record of delivering sustainable
resolution of major conflicts is poor, and the resources
of the United Nations are heavily focused on providing
peacekeeping and humanitarian support for victims
of conflict rather than preventing conflict in the
first place, or resolving conflicts before they become
intractable. Major improvements to the United Nations
machinery, including this Council, are well overdue in
these respects. They are matters that all members of
this Council have a responsibility to address.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Ignacio
Ybáñez, Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of Spain.

S/PV.7775

Mr. Ybáñez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the presidency of New Zealand and to you, Minister
McCully, for convening this meeting. I also congratulate
the Foreign Minister of the United Kingdom, Minister
Johnson, and his team on their good work in introducing
and facilitating the adoption of resolution 2309 (2016),
which we have just adopted. I also thank Ms. Fang Liu,
Secretary General of the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO), for her excellent briefing.
Spain is aware of the threat posed by terrorism
to civil aviation, and has therefore supported and
co-sponsored todays’ resolution from the start. It is
obvious that civil aviation is a priority target of terrorist
groups around the world. It is a critical sector of our
economies and no State is free of this threat. Aircraft
in flight are particularly vulnerable, and they and their
passengers are far from their own national security
forces during long periods. The terrorists know this
and try to take exploit the opportunities offered by
this weakes link in the chain of protection. Often, they
have an edge over the States that are entrusted with
protecting their civilians.
Every State knows that, no matter how effective their
security measures may be, the security of its nationals
depends on the effectiveness of the measures in the
States where they embark, transit and land. Citizens
of all countries can be threatened in any corner of the
world in the air spaces subject to the sovereignty of one
or several States, not one of which may be the issuer
of their passports. Terrorism is indeed a global threat
and, by definition, its threat to civil aviation makes it
a global threat. Joint responses from all Governments
and the same security protocols, standards and codes of
conduct are therefore critically important.
By adopting resolution 2309 (2016), we are hoping
that when we fly the security framework will be the
same for all citizens, regardless of where they come
from or where they are going. We must seek to avoid
the vulnerabilities that may arise in any region and
do so pursuant to the spirit of ICAO and its motto that
no country will be left behind. For reasons of clear
solidarity, but also because citizens of any country may
be at risk wherever they are, it is in all our interests
to ensure that no Government lacks the necessary
capacities to address this threat.
We commend the extraordinary work of the
International Civil Aviation Organization. Our
objective in supporting today’s resolution is to give full

16-2954713/21

S/PV.7775

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

backing to its work. Indeed, we see here a wonderful
example of good practices and cooperation among
various actors of the United Nations system that are
responsible for the fight against terrorism. We therefore
believe it important and strategic for ICAO and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
to maintain and strengthen their cooperative efforts
against terrorism that targets civil aviation.
The Security Council reminds countries to abide by
the ICAO recommendations and to give it the support
it needs not just to prevent but to anticipate this everchanging menace, ever ready to come up with new
threats to security. My country is an active participant
in various national and international projects related
to the terrorist threat to aviation that are consonant
with the provisions of resolution 2309 (2016), which
we have just adopted. We are working on areas such
as methodologies and the use of technology to detect
explosives. We are also working on man-portable
air defence systems, drones and ways of identifying
terrorists at border points. We are also implementing
advanced passenger recognition systems. We believe
that the more information we can exchange, the
greater and more immediate the effect on improved
flight security.
I would like to conclude by emphasizing that with
the work that is currently under way, coupled with
today’s resolution, civil aviation is likely to be ever more
safe and secure, but we must ensure that every State
complies faithfully with the resolution’s provisions.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to welcome you, Sir, and thank you for
presiding over today’s Security Council meeting. I would
also like to thank Ms. Fang Liu, Secretary General of
the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO),
for her briefing.
As globalization continues to advance, the air
transport sector is playing an increasingly important
role in social and economic development and progress
at the national level. However, terror attacks targeting
the international civil aviation system are a scourge
that destroys lives and property. Maintaining the safety
and security of international civil aviation is vital
to the promotion of international travel, interaction
and cooperation, intraregional and interregional
connectivity and global economic recovery and
development. In that regard, I would like to share China’s
perspective on the issues, focusing on three points.
14/21

22/09/2016

First, we should focus our efforts on improving the
civil aviation safety and security system and reinforcing
security measures, establishing a multi-pronged
approach that covers airport security, ground security
screening, industry regulation and internal risk control,
and all aimed at strengthening civil aviation security
safeguards. Resolution 2309 (2016), which we have
just adopted, refers explicity to States’ obligations
to do more in such areas as airport security checks,
sharing passenger information and security-screeningtechnology sharing and cooperation. It is incumbent
on all States to implement the provisions of today’s
resolution, launch more substantive initiatives in the
relevant areas and continue to improve civil aviation
security standards.
Secondly, we should strengthen international
cooperation on civil aviation security. States should
commit to the notion that humankind is a community
with a shared future, and should work to comprehensively
strengthen such cooperation. Countries with more
developed civil aviation sectors should take the real-life
difficulties that developing countries are dealing with
seriously, and help them develop their capacities in the
areas of building infrastructure, training and providing
logistical services. The Security Council, as the world’s
primary body for the maintenance of international peace
and security, should provide political guidance and
secure the commitment of all parties to strengthened
international cooperation and civil aviation security.
ICAO, as the technical agency responsible for
formulating aviation safety and security standards,
should help States to comprehensively implement of
the relevant international standards. The Council and
ICAO should improve their synergy by strengthening
their division of labour and collaboration, both working
within the purview of their respective mandates.
Thirdly, we should work unremittingly to combat
terrorist acts that compromise the safety and security
of civil aviation. Every State should maintain uniform
standards and take a zero-tolerance approach to
terrorism, with no distinction between acts of terror,
all of which should be firmly countered, regardless
of the countries they target or the means they employ.
International action against terrorism should promote
the greatest possible scope for the leadership of the
United Nations and the Security Council, abide by the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, strengthen effective coordination, create
an internationally united front against terrorism and
16-29547

22/09/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

maintain an uncompromisingly combative posture
towards it. In the light of the characteristics of terrorist
activities relating to civil aviation, and the requirements
of resolution 2309 (2016), all parties should improve
their intelligence sharing at both international and
regional levels, enhance their cooperation on border
control and law enforcement and take effective action
against cross-border movements of terrorists, especially
when they are returning to their countries of origin.
China is an important member of the international
counter-terrorism community. We will continue
to promote bilateral and multilateral anti-terror
cooperation in accordance with our laws on counterterrorism and civil aviation safety and security, and
with international conventions. We will continue to
raise our civil aviation safety and security standards
and work with the international community to fight
terrorism effectively and keep aviation safe and secure.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): There can be no doubt as to the urgency of
today’s topic. Civil aviation has been and will remain a
highly attractive target for terrorists. At the outset, we
would like to once again express our condolences to
the families and friends of all those who have lost their
lives as a result of air transport tragedies. We would
also like to thank Ms. Liu Fang, Secretary General of
the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO),
for her detailed briefing on ICAO’s role and efforts in
the field of aviation security.
The Russian delegation took an active part in
developing resolution 2309 (2016), which the Council
adopted today, aimed at adding impetus to States’
efforts to implement ICAO standards and the provisions
of the counter-terrorism conventions, as well as the
relevant Security Council resolutions. In considering
the specifics of aviation security, the international
community should be guided primarily by the work of
ICAO, as the specialized international organization in
the field. The ICAO Assembly will meet in Montreal
in a few days’ time and is expected to take a number
of important decisions related to aviation security and
terrorist threats. It will present a report on progress
in implementing the ICAO Comprehensive Aviation
Security Strategy, and will address the issue of
developing a global aviation security plan by 2018. We
are pleased that the drafters of the resolution took into
account our proposals designed to ensure that, without
undermining the ICAO mandate, the Security Council’s
new initiative is clearly incorporated into its efforts,

S/PV.7775

decisions and plans for the direction its activities should
take in the future.
Terrorist threats against civil aviation are evolving.
Criminals are constantly taking advantage of new
technologies to seek new ways to circumvent security
systems, including in airports. It is therefore important
to continue to strengthen our capacity to react rapidly
to new challenges as they appear, particularly those
related to cybersecurity, landside security, remotely
piloted aircraft systems and improvised explosive
devices. One of the key objectives of today’s decision
is to urge States to join in increasing the widespread
and effective adoption of existing aviation security
standards and recommendations. Ultimately, it is our
job to combine our efforts to achieve an integrated and
sustainable system for protecting international civil
aviation against illegal interference.
We welcome the productive cooperation between
the Security Council’s counter-terrorism entities and
ICAO, such as when Ms. Fang Liu briefed the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) in June. ICAO has also
begun cooperating with the Monitoring Group of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities. We
note the regular flow of information from ICAO to the
United Nations on efforts to combat terrorism, included
in the relevant reports of the Secretary-General. Today’s
resolution is aimed at strengthening cooperation
between the Security Council and ICAO, primarily
through the CTC, in order to identify gaps in States’
aviation security. We urge both the Committee and
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force to
use that analysis to improve programmes for technical
assistance to States.
We look forward to a planned special meeting of
the CTC in 2017 on the terrorist threats to civil aviation.
Our country will continue to undertake decisive steps
to counter terrorist threats. That applies fully to the
threat to civil aviation. However, that evil will only be
defeated by closing ranks. We are convinced that the
fight against any form of terrorism will require the
further consolidation of efforts with the good-faith
implementation of States’ international commitments.
I am forced now to say a few words with regard to
the statement just made by the Ukrainian delegation.
The Ukrainian delegation did not limit itself to the

16-2954715/21

S/PV.7775

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

topic that was planned for our discussion. It attempted
to hold this meeting hostage so that it could advance
unacceptable provocations. We are not going to yield to
such provocations.
We will limit ourselves to noting that, since the
Ukrainian side decided to raise the subject of the disaster
concerning Flight MH-17, it would be good to recognize
the guilt of Kyiv in that matter and its responsibility for
the fact that the Ukrainian authorities did not close the
airspace over the eastern part of the country in which
Kyiv had deployed major military operations. We have
again heard no recognition or acknowledgement of that
responsibility.
As far as Russia is concerned, we insisted that
resolution 2166 (2014) adopted by the Council on
the downing of the Malaysia Airlines plane include
provisions on the need to carry out an independent
international investigation in accordance with the
governing principles of international civil aviation and
with ICAO playing a leading role. Our delegation called
for the active use of the provisions of resolution 2166
(2014), which provides for comprehensive assistance by
the United Nations in the investigation. Unfortunately,
the Secretary-General has not submitted a range of
proposals for United Nations assistance to the Security
Council. It would be beneficial, in our view, for ICAO
also to join the investigation.
We call for the rapid adoption of yet another
resolution that would ensure access to the crash site
for the investigation mission. Unfortunately, interested
parties preferred bilateral agreements with Ukraine,
which, regrettably, were overly protracted and did not
allow for the immediate launch of an investigation. We
insisted on the inclusion of a provision in the text of
resolution 2166 (2014) for an immediate cessation of all
military activities in the area immediately bordering
the crash site. Kyiv violated that provision in August
2014, when the Ukrainian authorities unilaterally
declared that they would disengage from the ceasefire,
as a result of which the investigation mission was
forced to cease its work for a lengthy period. A great
deal of time has passed, but the criminal investigation
has not yet been concluded. And it has been carried
out in a closed format. Can one consider it to be an
independent, impartial and unbiased investigation?
That is questionable. Only the future will tell. It is
nevertheless getting harder for us to accept that after
the statements that we have heard here today.
16/21

22/09/2016

In the course of the work on resolution 2309 (2016),
which we just adopted, the Ukrainian delegation
unilaterally attempted to water down proposals that
would confirm the responsibility of States for the
security of civil aviation within their air space. I think
everyone understands why they did so.
Turning to the issue with regard to air traffic control
over Crimea and the Black Sea, Ukraine was also unable
to refrain from politicizing that topic, including within
ICAO, which would have entailed additional costs for
carriers and inconvenienced passengers. Above all, it
would have created flight safety risks. Russia is able to
provide the necessary information in connection with
air security in its airspace above Crimea and the Black
Sea.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): Allow me to express my
gratitude to you, Sir, for convening today’s important
and timely meeting on aviation security. I also thank
Ms. Fang Liu, Secretary General of the International
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), for her briefing.
Above all, I would like to thank the United Kingdom
and Mr. Boris Johnson for taking the lead in putting
today’s meeting together. We believe that it is timely
for the Security Council to take this issue up, given the
growing threat to the security of aircraft and airports
in recent years.
Civil aviation has been an attractive target for
terrorists over the past decades, as this city remembers
very vividly and literally through what it witnessed
15 years ago. There has been much progress in improving
aviation security worldwide since that tragedy, but
there have been enough instances to remind us that the
threat against aviation security remains high.
Resolution 2309 (2016), which was just adopted
unanimously, provides the political momentum to
accelerate global efforts to address the issue. Japan
was therefore pleased to co-sponsor the resolution. We
believe that it sends a strong political message of our
unified determination to the international community.
According to statistics published by ICAO, Japan
is the world’s seventh largest air-transport State. That
single statistic is indicative of the critical importance
of aviation security in our national interests. Today, I
would like to highlight three ways in which Japan has
been working to improve aviation security worldwide.
First, there are our domestic efforts. Japan is
widely known for its public safety, and, at the same
16-29547

22/09/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

time, Japanese authorities are nevertheless working
tirelessly to mitigate possible threats of terrorism to
civil aviation. For example, the installation of body
scanners in airports throughout the country is under
progress, a measure driven by the Ministry of Land,
Infrastructure, Transportation and Tourism.
Secondly, we provide international assistance to
partner States. Last year, Japan funded the placement
of surveillance cameras in international airports in
Africa to bolster their security. In South Asia, over
the past three years, Japan has provided assistance
that can mitigate terrorism risks to civilian aviation
to Pakistan and Bangladesh. We have also hosted a
seminar on aviation security with our partners from
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
through the Japan-ASEAN Integration Fund. In
addition to those past efforts, Prime Minister Abe
announced earlier this month that Japan will provide
approximately $450 million over the next three years
to Asia for comprehensive counter-terrorism measures,
including the enhancement of airport security. Japan
will remain engaged in assisting other countries to
address the threat.
Thirdly, I would like to touch upon the role that
Japan has played in ICAO. Japan firmly supports
the important role that ICAO has played in the area
of aviation security and has been actively working
on the Aviation Security Panel and various working
groups under the Panel, including the meeting of the
working group on guidance material that Japan hosted
in Fukuoka last January. Beyond our activities on the
Panel, Japan has been the second largest contributor to
the regular ICAO budget since 1987 and makes large
contributions to activities related to security.
There is a strong need for the international
community to keep taking steps to improve aviation
security. In that context, I would like to refer to the Group
of Seven (G-7) action plan on countering terrorism and
violent extremism, which was developed in May under
the Japanese presidency of the G-7 to strengthen the
overall capacity of the international community to fight
against terrorism and violent extremism, including in
the area of aviation security. As mentioned in the action
plan, Japan calls upon all States to duly implement the
standards of annex 17 to the Chicago Convention on
International Civil Aciation and also to recognize and
address the threat to access control and other airport
landside-security-related measures covered therein.

S/PV.7775

We also believe that there is room for improvement
to fill the gaps between the outcome of ICAO audits
and aviation security measures on the ground. We
look forward to furthering our discussions at the
upcoming session of the ICAO Assembly, which will
start next week and at which Japan will contribute to
the discussion on the development of a global aviation
security plan.
Our fight against terrorist threats to civil aviation
is far from over. As a responsible member of the
international community and of the Security Council,
Japan will continue its efforts in tackling our common
threat.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela is grateful to you, Sir, for convening this
informative meeting to address an issue of particular
importance to the international community and our
country. We also appreciate the briefing of Mr. Fang
Liu, Secretary General of the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO).
My delegation voted in favour of resolution 2309
(2016), based on our firm commitment to fight terrorism
and our categorical rejection of the commission of
terrorist acts, whatever their motivation, whenever or
by whomsover they are committed, because such acts
deliberately undermine international peace and security
and constitute flagrant violations of international law.
The most recent terrorist attacks, particularly
those committed by Da’esh, are evidence of how
vulnerability in the face of that terrible scourge and the
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters have become
a global one. More than 30,000 persons, including
youths and women, from more than 100 countries
have joined terrorist groups, as noted in the most
recent reports of the Monitoring Group of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999,) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities.
Civil aviation has always been a target of terrorist
acts. One only need to consider the attacks against the
Cubana de Aviación plane in 1976, which cost the lives
of 73 Cuban athletes, among other incidents. However,
since the terrible attack in New York on 11 September
2001, we have seen greater awareness of the phenomenon
and the need to improve and strengthen civil aviation
security regulations. However, the recent attack against
Flight 9268 of the Russian airline Metrojet, almost a

16-2954717/21

S/PV.7775

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

22/09/2016

year ago, reminds us that there is still much to do in
this area.

terrorist act. We must all be committed in the fight
against this phenomenon.

We would like to pay tribute to all the victims of
such violent acts..We note with regret that, on some
occasions, those events have been used to exacerbate
the political rhetoric against specific countries. The
fight against terrorism in civil aviation requires
cooperation and trust among all of us, because terrorist
groups continue to come up wiht new ways and means
to strike.

Venezuela believes that the fight against terrorism
must take place within the framework of stepped up
international cooperation, in accordance with existing
international and regional instruments, including the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the norms of international law, with full
respect for human rights, fundamental freedoms and
the rule of law. If we depart from those premises to
prevent, combat and eliminate terrorism, we will be
contributing to its radicalization.

The security of international civil aviation plays a
key role in the complex web of preventing and combating
terrorism. While this is ultimately a question in the
ambit of the Security Council as the organ responsible
for maintaining international peace and security, my
country believes that ICAO is the sole specialized agency
with the competence to build consensus in developing
and monitoring the standards and recommended
practices required for international civil aviation. In that
regard, Venezuela considers it necessary to continue to
strengthen national civil aviation systems, including
their evaluation mechanisms, without undermining
each State’s authority and sovereignty so that we can
effectively and on a sustainable basis tackle the terrorist
threat. In that respect, capacity-building, technical
assistance, transferring technology on favourable terms
and mobilizing resources are of critical importance.
Similarly, strengthening international and regional
cooperation will prove to be greatly important in that
battle.
Venezuela considers that, in the fight against
terrorism and violent extremism, the preventive
approach is always the best way to tackle this scourge.
It is important that we adopt and implement coordinated
initiatives tailored to each national case and reality,
geared towards undermining the clear strategy of
groups with extremist ideologies that have decided to
promote violence and intolerance. It is also important
to address the root causes fuelling this reprehensible
practice and to devise effective and innovative strategies
to counter extremist and terrorist narratives and to help
our societies to think critically. The aim is to prevent
radicalization, recruitment and the mobilization of
resources, including through the inappropriate use of
communications and information technologies.
It is very important that no country protect or give
haven to the perpetrators of terrorist crimes against
civil aviation. There can be no justification for any
18/21

In conclusion, I would like to highlight the need
that, more than ever, we must be frank and resolute in
fighting terrorism and that we do not selectively draw
on the provisions set out in the relevant international
instruments and resolutions of this multilateral forum
that prohibit the transfer of small arms and lights
weapons, including the man-portable air defence
systems, as well as the financing, training and
provision of havens to terrorist groups, as well as
the implementation in a comprehensive and balanced
manner of the four pillars of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this informative meeting on the terrorist
threat to civil aviation.
As was clearly expressed in the concept note
(S/2016/791, annex), the Security Council has focused
its attention on other emerging aspects of international
terrorism, such as its financing and the phenomenon
of foreign terrorist fighters. Today, the expansion and
evolution in aviation terrorism requires us to concentrate
our efforts on its prevention and suppression.
I would also like to express my appreciation to
Ms. Fang Liu, Secretary General of the International
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), for her briefing
and to commend the work of the United Kingdom in
leading the negotiations that allowed us today to adopt
the important resolution 2309 (2016), which Uruguay
also co-sponsored.
In recent years, terrorist acts against civil aviation
have adopted forms that transcend the classic definition
of aviation piracy. In addition to the diversion and
hijacking of aircraft and hostages, we have also seem
other forms of crimes, such as attacks perpetrated
16-29547

22/09/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

on airport facilities. The Beijing Convention on the
Suppression of Unlawful Acts Relating to International
Civil Aviation and its Protocol of 2010 criminalize, inter
alia, the use of civil aircraft as weapons to cause deaths,
injuries or harm, the use of dangerous materials to
attack aircraft or other objects, as well as cyberattacks
against air-traffick-control systems or stations.
There is no doubt that terrorists have found civil
aviation a useful target, not solely for destructive
purposes but also for the media exposure they so
eagerly seek. Their acts have huge international impact
due to their lethal and multiple side effects, with
large-scale psychological and social impacts. The high
number of victims of various nationalities in attacks
against aviation can produce, without doubt, the most
devastating and critical aspect, but it is not the only
kind. The economic, trade, political, cultural and
other types of consequences are also myriad. I recall
that millions of persons use aircraft for the purposes
of work, tourism or visiting their families, and that
States base and promote their relations on the basis of
the numerous exchanges facilitated by that means of
transport.
Attacks on civil aviation are also attacks on closer
relations and dialogue among civilizations, regional
integration and the wide range of exchanges unique to
the era of globalization. As early as 1944, the Chicago
Convention on International Civil Aviation noted in its
preamble that
“the future development of international civil
aviation can greatly help to create and preserve
friendship and understanding among the nations
and peoples of the world, yet its abuse can become
a threat to the general security”.
Resolution 2309 (2016), beyond its unobjectionable
purposes, is underpinned by the spirit of cooperation
and solidarity that must prevail to address and defeat
international terrorism.
My country abides by the international legal
instruments that make up the counter-terrorism
framework for global civil aviation. We attach particular
importance to international standards and best practices
in addressing civil aviation security. We are party to the
Chicago Convention on International Civil Aviation,
signed in Chicago on 7 December 1944, and deposited
our ratification instrument on 14 January 1954. By
way of various national laws, Uruguay approved the
Tokyo Convention on Offences and Certain Other Acts

S/PV.7775

Committed on Board Aircraft, of 14 September 1963 and
The Hague Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful
Seizure of Aircraft of 16 December 1970 and adhered
to its Protocol for the suppression of unlawful acts of
violence at airports serving international civil aviation
in February 1988. We also approved the International
Convention against the Taking of Hostages, adopted by
the General Assembly on 17 December 1979, and the
Convention on the Marking of Plastic Explosives for
the Purpose of Detection, signed on 1 March 1991.
At the institutional level, our national civil aviation
and aviation infrastructure directorate is the competent
agency tasked with implementing civil aviation
policy in Uruguay. Through it, we seek to guarantee
the security, regularity and efficiency of aviation
operations and the delivery of services in our national
airspace throughout Uruguay, in accordance with the
relevant international standards and requirements. We
have in place regulations to protect civil aviation against
unlawful acts of interference, based on Uruguay’s
aviation regulation 17 on aviation security and relevant
guidelines and directives.
In terms of policy, decree 267/003, of 1 July 2003,
authorized the national aviation security programme,
which is aimed at ensuring the security, regularity and
efficiency of international civil aviation in our country.
It further provides the necessary safeguards against
unlawful acts of interference through regulations,
methods and procedures. The programme aims to
maintain the security of national and foreign carriers
providing services from Uruguay and the security of
civilian airports servicing international flights. It is
geared towards meeting the international standards
and recommendations in annex 17 to the Chicago
Convention on International Civil Aviation, as well as
the relevant provisions on aviation security set out in
annexes 2, 6, 9, 10, 11, 13 and 14.
Through decree 267/003, my country also
established the national committee for civil aviation
security, which, inter alia, advises the competent
security authority regarding necessary safety measures
in tackling threats to civil aviation, airports and
services. Furthermore, decree 225/010, of 26 July
2010, establishes the policy framework for proper
coordination of the State’s intelligence services.
Uruguay believes that, in order to address the
growing, ever-changing terrorist threat to civil
aviation, it is necessary to implement the safety

16-2954719/21

S/PV.7775

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

standards approved by the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO), so as to achieve better
standards, systems and methods linked to the various
operational aspects of civil aviation. However it is
clear that many countries have neither the technical
capacity and knowledge nor financial resources
necessary to implement those standards. It is therefore
important that the countries with such capacity provide
technical assistance, including technology transfer
and programmes, as well as financial resources, to
the countries in need. Accordingly, cooperation is
proven to be the key element for concrete and effective
implementation of best practices and the highest
standards of civil aviation security. Uruguay considers
cooperation as an imperative that must be achieved
at both regional and international levels and further
complemented by efficient coordination under the aegis
of the ICAO.
Allow me to conclude by reiterating our firm
conviction that the changing and growing challenges
generated by terrorist threats to civil aviation can be
successfully addressed only from that perspective. That
is to say, we must reaffirm our indelible commitment to
invest national capacities and resources commensurate
with the requisite of achieving that objective.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank the New Zealand
delegation for convening this meeting on the terrorist
threat to civil aviation. We are grateful to Ms. Fang Liu,
Secretary General of the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO), for her comprehensive briefing
on the crucial issue of civil aviation in contemporary
life.
The international community is faced with
myriad new threats to peace and security that are
a main cause for the weakening of the old system of
collective security that the international community
relied upon after the Second World War. Among those
threats is international terrorism, which has reached
an unprecedented dimension and boldness. Terrorism
has become a global phenomenon of unpredictable
character. As such, dealing with the issue of civil
aviation security and the threats posed by international
terrorism to that vital sector has become a top priority
to be dealt with.
International terrorism has changed the way in
which international aviation operates traditionally,
namely, as a symbol of freedom enhancing increased
20/21

22/09/2016

intimacy among the peoples of the world. It is an
evolution that terrorists seek to curb and undermine.
Terrorist attacks against civil aviation, as any other
kind of international terrorist act, constitute a threat
to international peace and security, and as such are
criminal and unjustifiable regardless of the motivations
or aims of its perpetrators. The terrorist threat to civil
aviation has forced a more coordinated response on the
part of the international community, mainly towards
preventive anti-terrorism measures aimed at foiling
such attacks in conformity with international treaties
and conventions on civil aviation.
We commend the work of the International Civil
Aviation Organization and the enactment of regulations,
practices and procedures to protect civil aviation against
illegal interference and to ensure that those measures
are appropriate against the surge of security threats.
Angola, as a member of ICAO, has been working
closely with that agency with a view to aligning its
domestic practice and procedures with ICAO directives,
in particular with regard to transportation infrastructure
and technical expertise. We have adopted a vast number
of measures and legislations to verify and monitor
the civil aviation sector by incorporating the norms
enacted by ICAO into the national legal framework.
This has been at the forefront of our efforts as a means
of contributing to the protection and security of civil
aviation. The restructuring of the National Institute
of Civil Aviation in order to make it an efficient and
credible regulatory mechanism; the reform of the the
National Company of Airports Exploration and Air
Navigation to efficiently manage airport infrastructure;
and the restructuring of the TAAG Angola Airlines
are some of the measures adopted in line with the
recommendations of ICAO.
By adopting resolution 2309 (2016), which we were
pleased to co-sponsor, the Security Council is sending
an unequivocal message on the importance of fighting
the threat posed to civil aviation by terrorist groups.
It also highlights the importance of adequate security
parameters for civil aviation, enhancing technical
cooperation and mitigating the threat of attacks in the
framework of the global fight against terrorism.
In conclusion, we wish to reiterate Angola’s
commitment to working towards implementing
effective measures to counter and mitigate this
threat, particularly through reinforcing partnerships
and applying the norms and standards set by the
16-29547

22/09/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

International Civil Aviation Organization in order to
strengthen security in this vital sector of contemporary
life.
The President: The representative of Ukraine has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Fesko (Ukraine): I would like to make a couple
of points in response to the Russian delegation.
First, let me remind all those present in the
Chamber, especially those who have conveniently
forgotten, of what happened two years ago. If it were
not for Russian weapons, the presence of Russian troops
and the sustained effort to fuel a military conflict in
the Donbas region, we would not have to discuss the
downing of MH-17.
Secondly, Ukraine has cooperated fully with all
international partners on this issue. I do not think that
any party has anything to say about our readiness to
cooperate. There was an issue regarding access to the
MH-17 crash site; access was blocked by people wearing
not the Ukrainian military uniform, but other military
uniforms. We insisted on immediate access right away,
but for whatever reason it did not happen.
Thirdly, last year the whole world witnessed Russia
veto the attempt to establish an international tribunal
on MH-17. Ukraine has nothing to hide. We want the
truth to become known, and we want the perpetrators
to be brought to justice; but somehow this effort has
foundered. Why? We all know how it happened. Quite
a few of the delegations here were also present last year.
Finally, on a different subject, we really appreciate
the Russian Federation establishing the new practice
of disclosing to the whole United Nations community,

S/PV.7775

in public in the Chamber, details of texts negotiated
by Council members. This is a positive step towards
implementing transparency, and we look forward to the
continuation of this practice on the Russian side.
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russia) (spoke in Russian): I
would like to respond very briefly to the delegation
of Ukraine. This is a serious event. We are discussing
the fight against terrorism — real terrorism, not that
of which he is attempting to accuse the inhabitants of
the eastern part of his country. I call on him to join
this very important work, rather than continuing to
speculate on this topic and the human tragedies that
have taken place.
The President: The representative of Ukraine has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I would
encourage an early end to this exchange.
Mr. Fesko (Ukraine): I apologize. We have just
witnessed a classic case of switching the blame and
obfuscating the situation. I have never mentioned
or blamed anybody, including any citizens, living
in the eastern part of our country. If I am mistaken,
I would really appreciate being corrected. I was
talking first about Russian military aggression,
and secondly, about terrorism. That is what we
experienced — State-sponsored terrorism. We may
have different opinions regarding this, but this is how
Ukraine sees it.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

16-2954721/21
