so

Genera) Auemb)y-Twenty-nd SenJon

( b) The cessation of all repressive action against
the people of the Territory;
( c) The release of political prisoners and political
detainees and the return of political exiles to the
Territory;
9. Appeals to all Member States to render all necessary assistance to the people of the Territory in their
struggle to obtain freedom and independence;
10. Requests the Special Committee to continue its
examination of the situation in the Territory and to
consider the establishment of a sub-committee on Oman;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to take, in consultation with the Special Committee, appropriate measures for the implementation of the relevant General
Assembly resolutions and to report thereon to the Assembly at its twenty-third session.

1627th plenary meeting,
12 December 1967.
2311 (XXII). Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples by the specialized
agencies and the international institutions
associated with the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized
agencies and the international institutions associated
with the United Nations",
Havi.ng examined the relevant reports of the
Secretary-Genera1 8 and the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial ·countries and Peoples, 9
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of
14 December 1960, and in particular paragraph 1 of
the Declaration and the fifth preambular paragraph
of the resolution,
Considering that, by virtue of the Charter of the
United Nations and in conformity with the agreements
between the United Nations and the specialized agencies
and the International Atomic Energy Agency, the
United Nations shall make recommendations for the
co-ordination of the policies and activities of the specialized agencies,
Recalling further its resolutions 2105 (XX) of 20
December 1965, 2107 (XX) of 21 December 1965,
2151 (XXI) of 17 November 1966, 2184 (XXI) of
12 December 1966 and 2189 (XXI) of 13 December
1966, requesting the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the specialized agencies concerned to increase the economic, social and humanitarian
assistance to the refugees from colonial Territories,
Taking note of the fact that the national liberation
movemen·ts in some colonial Territories of Africa have
asked the specialized agencies for urgent assistance in
various social fields, particularly education, health and
nutrition,
8 Jbid., agenda

item 66, document A/6825.
addendum to agenda item 23 ( A/6700/Rev.l), chapter I, section VIII and annex III; chapter V, annex.

1. Recognizes that the specialized agencies, the International Atomic Energy Agency and the international institutions associated with the United Nations
should extend their full co-operation to the United
Nations in achieving the objectives of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
to the specialized agencies which "have co-operated with
the United Nations in seeking to implement the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
3. Recommends the specialized agencies and international institutions concerned to take urgent and
effective measures to assist the peoples struggling for
their liberation from colonial rule, and in particular
to extend, within the scope of their respective activities,
all necessary aid to the oppressed peoples of Southern
Rhodesia and the Territories under Portuguese domination and to work out, in co-operation with the Organization of African Unity and through it with the
national liberation movements, concrete programmes
to this end;
4. Also recommends the specialized agencies and
international institutions not to grant any assistance
to South Africa and Portugal until they renounce their
policy of racial discrimination and colonial domination ;
5. Requests all States, directly and through action
in the specialized agencies and international institutions
of which they are members, to facilitate the implementation of the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly;
6. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
consider, in consultation with the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, appropriate measures
for the co-ordination of the policies and activities · of
the specialized agencies in implementing the f'elevant
resolutions of the General Assembly;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to assist the
specialized agencies and the international institutions
concerned in working out appropriate measures to
implement the relevant resolutions and to report thereon
to the General Assembly at its twenty-third session ;
8. Requests the Special Committee to examine this
question and to report to the General Assembly at its
twenty-third session.
1631st plenary meeting,
14 December 1967.

2347 (XXII). Question of the Trust Territory of
Nauru

The General Assembly,
RecaJling the Trusteeship Agreement for the Territory of Nauru approved by the General Assembly
on 1 November 1947,10
RecaJling its resolutions 2111 (XX) of 21 December
1965 and 2226 (XXI) of 20 December 1966,
Mindful of the relevant provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations and General Assembly r~olution
1514 (XV) of 14 December 1%0 containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples,

9 Ibid.,

10 See General Assembly resolution 140

(II).
