UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1996/31
24 July 1996
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH AND
FRENCH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3682nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 24 July 1996 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Burundi", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council is gravely concerned at recent information on
political developments in Burundi. It strongly condemns any attempt to
overthrow the present legitimate Government by force or coup d’état.
"The Security Council takes note of the letter dated 22 July 1996 from
the Secretary-General to the President of the Council (S/1996/591). The
Council condemns the massacres of civilians including that of more than
300 women, children and elderly men in Bugendana commune in Gitega
province. The Council calls upon all parties to the conflict in Burundi to
cease immediately any acts of violence and to cooperate fully with all
those who are seeking to bring an end to the vicious cycle of violence.
The Council urges all parties to exercise restraint and requests the
Burundi authorities to conduct a proper investigation of the massacre.
"The Security Council once again urges the authorities and all parties
concerned in Burundi to set aside their differences, renounce the use of
force and demonstrate a firm political will for the prompt settlement of
the conflict.
"The Security Council deplores the recent forced repatriation of
Rwandan refugees from refugee camps in Kibezi and Ruvumu and calls upon the
Government of Burundi to honour its obligations under the Convention
relating to the Status of Refugees of 28 July 1951, and to desist from
further refoulement of refugees. The Council is also concerned at reports
of Rwandan cooperation in the forced repatriation process.
"The Security Council supports the efforts of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and urges all parties to work with UNHCR
to ensure that the rights of refugees are respected. The Council calls
upon the international community to respond favourably to the recent appeal
to fund their activities in the region.

96-18764 (E)

240796

/...

S/PRST/1996/31
English
Page 2

"The Security Council stresses its full support for the efforts of
former President Nyerere including the agreements of the Arusha Regional
Summit of 25 June 1996 (S/1996/557), and welcomes the full support of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) for these agreements. The Council
supports also the acceptance by the Arusha Regional Summit of the request
by the Government of Burundi for security assistance in order to complement
and reinforce the Mwanza peace talks as well as for creating conducive
security conditions for all parties to participate freely in the Mwanza
process. The Council encourages all parties to work in a constructive
manner with former President Nyerere. It urges the Government of Burundi
to grant permission to the International Technical Committee, established
at the Arusha Summit, to enter the country in order to work out the
logistics of the regional peace plan.
"The Security Council emphasizes the importance of the continued
cooperation of the United Nations with the OAU, the European Union, the
United States and other interested countries and organizations in
coordination with former President Nyerere, aimed at achieving a
comprehensive political dialogue between the parties in Burundi. In this
regard, the Council expresses its support for the efforts of the OAU and
its observer mission (MIOB) and welcomes the extension of the mandate of
MIOB.
"The Security Council reiterates the importance it attaches to the
contingency planning called for in paragraph 13 of resolution 1049 (1996),
and notes the consultations which have already taken place. In the light
of recent developments, it requests the Secretary-General and Member States
concerned to continue to facilitate contingency planning for a rapid
humanitarian response in the event of widespread violence or a serious
deterioration in the humanitarian situation in Burundi.
"The Security Council reminds all Burundian parties of their
responsibilities for restoring peace and stability in Burundi, and
underlines its commitment to follow events in Burundi closely and recalls
its readiness, as set out in resolution 1040 (1996), to consider the
adoption of further measures should the parties fail to demonstrate the
necessary political will for a peaceful solution to the crisis. The
Council will remain seized of the matter."

-----
