S/PV.9197

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9197th meeting

Monday, 21 November 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Agyeman. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ghana)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mrs. Kamboj
Mr. Mythen
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-70334 (E)
*2270334*

S/PV.9197

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea did
not issue airspace or maritime safety notifications
for any of those launches. Unannounced launches
represent a serious risk to international civil aviation
and maritime traffic.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Japan and the Republic of Korea to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo
Ms. DiCarlo: According to the official news
agency of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and various Government sources, at around 10.15 a.m.
local time on 18 November, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea test-fired what it described as a newtype intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM), which
it named the Hwasong-17. The missile reportedly flew
a distance of 1,000 kilometres and to an altitude of
approximately 6,100 kilometres. It is reportedly the first
successful test of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s largest and most powerful missile, capable of
reaching all of North America.
The launch was the latest in a series of alarming
activities related to its nuclear-weapon and ballistic
missile programmes that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has conducted in 2022, including
over 60 launches using ballistic missile technology.
Two of those launches involved ballistic missiles
characterized by the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea as being of intermediate-range, and three
as intercontinental-range. Other launches involved
shorter-range missiles using ballistic technology and
other systems, which the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea has stated are for use to deliver so-called
tactical nuclear weapons. This year it has also carried
out launches using ballistic missile technology to test
so-called hypersonic weapons and satellite systems.
2/14

21/11/2022

The Secretary-General has strongly condemned
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s latest
intercontinental ballistic missile launch, the second
ICBM launch this month. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s continued pursuit of its nuclearweapons programme and launches of ballistic missiles
blatantly violate relevant Security Council resolutions
and have led to a significant escalation of tensions. We
reiterate our calls on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to desist from taking further provocative
actions and to fully comply with its international
obligations under relevant Security Council resolutions.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea also
appears to be actively pursuing its nuclear programme.
The Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) reported on 16 November that
the Punggye-ri nuclear test site “remains prepared
to support a nuclear test”. The IAEA has continued
to observe activity at the site. It has also observed
construction activities at the Yongbyon nuclear
facilities as well as indications that the 5-megawatt
nuclear reactor was operating.
This is the tenth time that the Council has met to
discuss the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
in 2022, yet the situation on the Korean peninsula
continues to head in the wrong direction. The repeated
missile launches, confrontational rhetoric and military
exercises contribute to a negative action-reaction cycle.
Tensions continue to increase, with no off-ramps in
sight. In addition, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic is complicating diplomacy by impeding
official and unofficial contacts with the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea.
It is critical to de-escalate and reduce tensions.
Communication channels must be enhanced, particularly
military-to-military, to lower the risk of miscalculation.
I join the Secretary-General in urging the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to take immediate steps to
resume dialogue leading to sustainable peace and the
complete and verifiable denuclearization of the Korean
peninsula. I also conveyed our serious concerns during
my meeting with the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s Permanent Representative on 9 November.
22-70334

21/11/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The Secretary-General counts on members of the
Council, as a united body as well as individually, to urge
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to refrain
from carrying out further launches using ballistic
missile technology or a seventh nuclear test. Unity
in the Security Council is critical, and a diplomatic
solution is the only way forward.
Let me conclude by stressing our concerns
regarding the humanitarian situation in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. The United Nations is
ready to assist the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea in addressing medical and humanitarian needs,
including those related to the COVID-19 pandemic. To
allow for a timely and effective response, we reiterate
our call for the unimpeded entry of international staff
and humanitarian supplies.
The President: I thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
for her briefing.
The United States condemns in the strongest
possible terms the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s blatant, brazen 7 November launch of an
intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM). It has been
widely reported that the missile landed just 125 miles
from Japan’s shores. That is the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s eighth ICBM launch this year,
one of an unprecedented 63 ballistic missiles in 2022.
That is more than two-and-a-half times its previous
annual record of 25. Sixty-three times this year the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has flagrantly
violated Security Council resolutions and attempted to
undermine the global non-proliferation regime. Sixtythree times this year the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea has shown an utter disregard for the safety and
security of the region and a complete lack of respect for
the Security Council. How many more missiles must be
launched before we respond as a unified Council?
The Secretary-General’s statement on Friday
condemned the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s launch of an intercontinental ballistic missile
and reiterated his call for the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to immediately desist from taking
any further provocative actions and fully comply with its
international obligations under all the relevant Security

S/PV.9197

Council resolutions. It is time that the Security Council
made the same call as the Secretary-General. For too
long, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
acted with impunity. It has conducted escalatory and
destabilizing ballistic-missile launches without fear
of a response or reprisal from the Council. As noted
by the Under-Secretary-General, this is the tenth time
that we have met without significant action. The reason
is simple. Two veto-wielding members of the Council
are enabling and emboldening the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. They have allowed the regime to
launch this latest reckless missile test, which endangered
the lives of Japanese civilians and needlessly raises
tensions in the region. Those two members’ blatant
obstructionism has put the North-East Asian region and
the entire world at risk. It is simply impossible to be
considered a responsible steward of nuclear weapons if
one condones such behaviour.
I have been meeting with Member States across the
United Nations to hear their ideas on Security Council
reform, and I can say that when they talk about abuse
of the veto, they are talking about cases exactly like
this one. We will offer another opportunity for the
Council to hold the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea accountable for its dangerous rhetoric and
its destabilizing actions. The United States will be
proposing a presidential statement to that end. The
Council should be pursuing strong actions such as draft
resolutions of the kind we brought to a vote in May (see
S/PV.9048 and draft resolution S/2022/431). But as a
step forward, we are prepared to take our colleagues
up on their assertion that they would have considered
a presidential statement following the 24 March ICBM
launch by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. I
strongly encourage all of my colleagues in the Security
Council to join us in firmly condemning the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and taking action to curb its
unlawful advances of weapons of mass destruction and
ballistic missiles.
Let me be clear: the United States is committed to
pursuing a diplomatic approach. As we have repeatedly
stated, we are prepared to meet without preconditions.
And I call on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to engage in serious and sustained diplomacy. But it has
continued to refuse to respond and has instead chosen
to continue its reckless behaviour. The Council must
respond instead.

22-703343/14

S/PV.9197

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo for her informative and
factual presentation.
The facts speak for themselves. The intercontinental
ballistic missile (ICBM) launch by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea on 18 November is the
second within a month and the eighth this year, and
is reportedly one of its most powerful and therefore
most threatening. The unprecedented trend that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is setting with
the intensity of its ICBM launches and the frequency of
its ballistic-missile tests in general is beyond alarming.
Albania strongly condemns the continued blatant
violations of Security Council resolutions by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We deplore
the regime’s unacceptable escalatory actions and
provocations of its neighbours and the wider world.
Demonstrating continued reckless behaviour, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is launching
missiles close to civilian areas, and this is the second
time in three weeks that it has put the lives of people
on the Korean peninsula in danger, not to mention
demonstrated its repeated disregard of air space and
maritime safety notifications, which Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo clearly pointed out as well.
We have discussed the same issue several times,
in fact almost every month this year, including just
a few weeks ago (see S/PV.9183). The situation has
unfortunately only worsened. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has long put itself outside the law,
but that is not new or news. However, what may be news
is that despite such a blatantly unacceptable attitude,
the Security Council is silent and muted as if nothing
has happened. No wonder the regime in Pyongyang
considers that a licence to continue and do more of the
same. And that is exactly what is happening. This year
has seen a record number of launches of a variety of
ballistic, cruise and hypersonic missiles, enabling the
regime to advance its unlawful programme and test
improved and more powerful missiles, exacerbating
tensions, ignoring calls, disrespecting resolutions,
showing contempt for the Security Council and snubbing
the international community. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s regime has made deliberate threats
to peace and security on the Korean peninsula and
in the wider world its modus vivendi. That is beyond
troubling and should not be tolerated.
4/14

21/11/2022

The Council been unable since 2017 to show
unity and act on all the continuing destabilizing and
increasingly provocative activities of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. As a result, the regime
is becoming further weaponized in practice, identity,
mindset, attitude and behaviour. We wonder what
message is sent to those who believe in the United Nations
and its role when the Security Council proves unable to
deal with a regime that flouts without distinction every
Council resolution on the matter, ignores international
law and established rules of behaviour, disregards the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and
the International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards
and openly violates the sanctions regime. Where is the
Council’s power, role and responsibility to deal with
a continuing situation with a regime that has decided
to be destabilizing, escalatory and threatening to its
neighbours and the world? Those are questions that
need answers.
We therefore call on all Council members to
respond unanimously with a strong, action-oriented
Council product proportional to the gravity of actions
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and its
ballistic-missile programme and weapons-of-massdestruction proliferation regime. Failing to do so only
sends the wrong message, as we can testify. It also
erodes the credibility of the Council and betrays all who
expect the Council to stand up and act. We applaud the
common position adopted by the 10 elected members
of the Council, who came with a joint declaration
on 4 November calling on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to change course and for the Council
to show unity. Other members should do the same and
bring the Council together.
We will always support dialogue and diplomacy
for the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. We
urge the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
start acting responsibly, end its dangerous testing
manoeuvres and commit to dialogue and diplomacy.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is a regional
and global threat, and all the actors involved should
therefore take up their responsibilities and join efforts
that feed into and lead to diplomatic solutions. For that,
the Security Council must use every tool that it has in
its hands to make the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea change its course, abandon its weapons of mass
destruction, ballistic missile and nuclear programmes
and seriously engage in dialogue that leads to ending
its unlawful activities in a complete, verifiable and
22-70334

21/11/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

irreversible manner. Inaction would mean allowing the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to continue to
act with impunity for its reprehensible actions.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Under-Secretary-General for her briefing.
France condemns in the strongest terms the firing of
a new intercontinental ballistic missile on 18 November,
which fell within Japan’s exclusive economic zone.
France assures Japan and the Republic of Korea of its
solidarity following that irresponsible act.
The current escalation is dangerous. The
unprecedented increase in ballistic tests should be a
source of concern to all. Each of those launches is a
challenge to the authority of the Security Council and
a violation of its unanimously adopted resolutions. The
launches undermine the non-proliferation regime and
pose a threat to international peace and security.
Never before has North Korea fired so many
missiles, including intercontinental missiles. Never
before has it used such aggressive nuclear rhetoric.
It is now openly claiming that it intends to develop a
tactical nuclear arsenal, and it is conducting weapons
simulations. The International Atomic Energy Agency
has noted a pattern of activity that raises fears of a
seventh nuclear test.
North Korea relentlessly circumvents sanctions
by every means at its disposal, including through its
cyberattacks, which directly fund its programmes.
In that context, it would make no sense to ease the
sanctions. Pressure must be maintained, and increased
in certain areas. The North Korean regime must stop
diverting the country’s scarce resources to fund its
proliferation programmes to the detriment of the needs
of its population.
France will continue to call for North Korea to
rapidly return to the negotiating table in good faith in
order to achieve complete, verifiable and irreversible
denuclearization. We urge North Korea to respond to
the offers of unconditional dialogue made on several
occasions by States of the region.
We must be frank: the Security Council’s inaction
provides North Korea with cover to continue its
provocations. Such new provocations require a united,
responsible and resolute response from the international
community. The Council’s credibility is also at stake.
France will spare no effort to ensure that it acts in a united
manner to respond to the unprecedented escalation.

S/PV.9197

Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for her briefing.
Ireland once again condemns the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s latest launch of an
intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM), which landed
within Japan’s exclusive economic zone. That launch
not only violates Security Council resolutions, but it
also threatens the safety and security of people in the
region. We are particularly conscious of the ongoing
impact on the Republic of Korea and Japan.
In resolution 2397 (2017), the Council decided that
it would act in response to any further ICBM launches
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We
have now had eight such launches by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea this year alone. It is a matter
of the deepest concern that each of those launches
did not receive any Council response. Statements
were blocked, and a proportionate and balanced draft
resolution (S/2022/431) was vetoed by two members.
The silence of the Security Council in the face of
more than 60 ballistic missile launches this year sends a
very worrisome message to the countries of the region,
and a very dangerous one to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. It suggests that the Council is
unwilling, or unable, to uphold its own resolutions and
that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea can act
with impunity. That cannot stand.
Let us be clear. Through its actions and rhetoric,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is solely
responsible for raising tensions. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea alone has rejected dialogue
and negotiation. It has refused the repeated and
unfaltering offers of talks from the United States and
the Republic of Korea.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
rejected its obligations under the Charter of the United
nations, stating that it will not abide by Security
Council resolutions. The Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea has sought to establish itself as a nuclear
Power, following its stated intention of developing
tactical nuclear weapons. It threatens a seventh nuclear
test in contravention of Council resolutions.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
worsened the situation of its own people. It diverts
resources from legitimate humanitarian needs to illegal
military nuclear and ballistic missile programmes. It

22-703345/14

S/PV.9197

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

has blocked international humanitarian assistance,
including coronavirus disease vaccines.
It is now time for the Security Council to send a
clear signal that that is unacceptable and must end. The
actions of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
are a flagrant violation of the decisions and authority
of the Council. We call on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to engage in genuine dialogue and
respect its obligations under Council resolutions.
The Security Council must be clear that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea must completely,
verifiably and irreversibly end its illegal nuclear and
ballistic missile programmes, return to compliance
with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and meet its International Atomic Energy
Agency safeguards obligations. It must adhere to the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty without delay.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea can never,
and will never, be accepted as a nuclear-weapon State.
It is the rhetoric and actions of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea that create an everworsening problem. The Council must now, finally, be
clear in its response before it is too late.
Ms. Juul (Norway): First, let me thank UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing. We also
welcome the participation of the representatives of
Japan and the Republic of Korea in this meeting.
Norway is appalled by the continued launches of
ballistic missiles by the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea. We condemn in the strongest terms the
launch of an intercontinental ballistic missile on
18 November. The increase in the number of ballistic
missile tests since the beginning of this year is cause
for grave concern. Those launches are unprecedented
in frequency, diversity and scale. Furthermore, the
nuclear rhetoric of the State media of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and the reopening of the
nuclear test site at Punggye-ri are deeply troubling.
Both the Republic of Korea and Japan recently
experienced missiles landing within their economic
zones. The continued weapons development and testing
raise tensions and threaten peace and stability in the
region and beyond. They also endanger civil aviation
and maritime traffic in the region.
We urge the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to immediately refrain from further missile launches
and contribute to de-escalating tensions. Norway
6/14

21/11/2022

believes that diplomacy is the right, and only, way
forward for sustained peace and stability on the Korean
peninsula. For that to happen, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea must choose the path of dialogue.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
continued development of its nuclear and ballistic
missile programmes is deeply disturbing. We recall
that the development of such programmes is in
violation of multiple Security Council resolutions. It
is therefore regrettable that the Council continues to
be silent. We reiterate our call for the Council to show
unity in responding to the escalatory behaviour of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
The Council’s unanimously adopted sanctions
measures are an essential part of our efforts to slow the
development of, and counter, North Korea’s prohibited
weapons programmes. They are not intended to have
adverse humanitarian consequences for the civilian
population. Members of the Council continue to
show that they take the humanitarian situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea seriously.
Requests for humanitarian exemptions are swiftly
processed in the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006). The provisions contained in the
draft resolution discussed on 26 May (S/2022/431) would
also have considerably broadened the humanitarian
exemption mechanism.
Norway also remains worried about the humanitarian
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
We call on the Government of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to cooperate with the international
community to enable humanitarian assistance to reach
the North Korean people, including access for the
Resident Coordinator, the United Nations and other
international agencies. We also call on all Member
States to fully implement the existing Security Council
resolutions on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for
her briefing.
We too condemn in the strongest terms the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s further
serious breach of Security Council resolutions, which
threatens international peace and security. The Council
last discussed the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s ballistic missiles launches just over two weeks
ago (see S/PV.9183). At that meeting, all but two
22-70334

21/11/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Council members emphasized the seriousness of the
situation and supported a clear response. Yet despite
the egregious violation of Council resolutions, the same
two members prevented the Council from fulfilling
its role.
When the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea tested intercontinental ballistic missiles in
2017, the Council’s response on each occasion was
robust and unified, with the unanimous adoption of
resolutions 2371 (2017), 2375 (2017) and 2397 (2017).
Negotiations between the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and the United States began within months.
A return to dialogue remains the only means for
resolving the insecurity on the Korean peninsula.
However, continued silence by the Council in the
face of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
provocations will not achieve that. We therefore support
the draft presidential statement proposed by the United
States. The United Kingdom will continue to call on
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to cease its
illegal activity and to engage meaningfully with offers
of dialogue from the United States and the Republic of
Korea. Diplomacy remains the only option.
We strongly encourage the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to invest in food and medicine for
its people rather than in its illegal weapons programme,
to provide access for United Nations staff and to allow
aid to flow freely into the country. We welcome the
continued efforts of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) to quickly
exempt humanitarian assistance from sanctions.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
listened carefully to the briefing just delivered by
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo.
Currently, the situation on the Korean peninsula
is in a downwards spiral of rising tensions and
intensifying confrontation. China is concerned about
this. We hope that the parties concerned will continue
in the direction of a political settlement and try to meet
each other halfway in order to prevent the situation from
repeatedly escalating or even getting out of control.
The rising tensions on the Korean peninsula are not in
the interests of any party and are not something China
wants to see. The world today is full of uncertainties,
and the peninsula cannot afford the danger of a further
deterioration of the situation. The parties concerned
must focus on the overall peace and stability of the
entire peninsula and of North-East Asia at large, take

S/PV.9197

practical measures, play a positive role and make every
effort to promote a political settlement of the issue.
First, to make every effort to cool down the
situation, maintain stability and prevent turbulence,
under the current circumstances, all parties should
remain calm, exercise restraint, act and speak with
caution and refrain from taking any action that might
escalate tensions and lead to miscalculations in order to
prevent the situation from falling into a vicious cycle.
Secondly, to return to the correct path and restart
the dialogue, all parties should address the root cause of
the long-standing stalemate on the issue, work hard to
resolve their respective concerns in a balanced manner
and stay committed to the correct direction of dialogue
and consultation. The United States should take the
initiative, show sincerity, put forward realistic and
feasible proposals, respond positively to the legitimate
concerns of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and transform the dialogue from a formality
into a reality as soon as possible. The parties must be
focused on solving the problem, persist in advancing
the denuclearization process on the peninsula and, at
the same time, take concrete action to stop the military
exercises and ease the sanctions on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea.
Thirdly, the parties concerned must create
favourable conditions and advocate for peace and talks,
and the Security Council should play a constructive role
in that regard and should not always condemn or exert
pressure on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
The Council’s deliberations should help to ease tensions
and promote the de-escalation of the situation as soon
as possible so as to leave room for diplomatic efforts
rather than creating obstacles to that process. The
draft resolution on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea jointly submitted by China and Russia in the
Council would help ease the humanitarian situation
in the country, create an atmosphere for dialogue and
promote the realization of a political settlement. We
hope that all parties will give positive consideration
to it.
As a close neighbour of the Korean peninsula,
China is always committed to maintaining peace and
stability on the peninsula, realizing its denuclearization,
promoting the establishment of a peace mechanism there
and resolving issues through dialogue and consultation.
We once again call on the parties concerned to squarely
face the central issue of the long-standing stalemate

22-703347/14

S/PV.9197

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

on the peninsula, focus on the greater good of peace
and stability there, follow the dual-track approach
and the principle of phased and synchronized action,
resolve their respective concerns in a balanced manner
through meaningful dialogue and promote the political
settlement of the issue on the peninsula. China will
continue to play a constructive role in that regard.
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing. Since
September, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
has carried out multiple missile launches, which have
been gradually increasing in frequency and range. In
recent days, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
has carried out launches of ballistic missiles, including
intercontinental ballistic missiles, which were followed
by emergency alerts in the countries of the region.
Those repeated launches constitute a clear escalation
that threatens the peace and security of the Korean
peninsula, fuels tensions and instability and raises the
nuclear threat in the region to the highest level. My
country strongly condemns this escalation, in complete
violation of multiple relevant Security Council
resolutions, and remains deeply concerned about the
scope of the threat, especially as this escalation is
accompanied by offensive discourse, which is devoid
of any willingness to peace or détente or to return
to dialogue.
No country in the world should live under a
permanent nuclear threat. That is why my country
will not stop advocating for the outright prohibition
of nuclear weapons, which constitute a threat to
international security. We therefore call for the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula and reiterate
our opposition to the use of nuclear weapons and any
threat of the use thereof.
Gabon calls on the stakeholders and countries with
influence in the region to work towards the resumption
of dialogue with a view to returning to the 2017
agreement, especially its moratorium on long-range
missile launches. Gabon clearly and unequivocally
reiterates its condemnation of nuclear testing and
urges the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
renounce such testing. My country urges the parties to
refrain from any threat or action that could exacerbate
tensions on the Korean peninsula. We call on the
Security Council to seek consensus and to work for
appeasement and a return to dialogue with a view to
finding a political solution to the crisis. In the face of the
nuclear threat, the Council must remain unequivocally
8/14

21/11/2022

unified. Similarly, the Council must listen to the people
of North Korea who continue to face an alarming
humanitarian situation.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing, and we welcome
the delegations of Japan and the Republic of Korea to
this meeting.
Just two weeks ago, we met to discuss the launches
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea of
some 20 missiles, including one missile that fell in the
Republic of Korea’s exclusive economic zone and the
failed launch of yet another mission that was assessed
to be of intercontinental range (see S/PV.9183). This
morning, we heard again — and confirmed, with
great concern — the information that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea had launched a new
intercontinental-range ballistic missile, which landed
in Japan’s exclusive economic zone. This latest launch
adds to the dozens of launches of which we have been
duly informed this year and against which the Council
has been unable to send any signal. It seems to make no
difference whether the Democratic People’s Republic
is informed that there is an open debate or closed
consultations. It is clear that the silence has also sent the
wrong signal. The launches continue in open defiance of
the Council, its prior resolutions, the entire multilateral
system and the global non-proliferation regime.
We echo the Secretary-General’s condemnation of
this most recent launch and join him in his call for the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to desist from
any further provocative actions, comply fully with its
international obligations and immediately return to the
table and resume an inclusive dialogue.
Through our participation in the Security Council,
we have called several times on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to fully comply with its obligations,
cooperate without delay with the International Atomic
Energy Agency and resume political dialogue. Mexico
reiterates its support for the Council’s resolutions
to prevent the proliferation of nuclear and missile
technology and appeals to all States to observe
them scrupulously.
On 4 November, the elected members of the
Council jointly called on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to refrain from new launches, halt
the development of its nuclear programme and resume
dialogue. It is indeed necessary that the Council, in a
22-70334

21/11/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

united manner, make a clear statement: these launches
are simply unacceptable and must stop now.
Mexico will continue in the Security Council and
all other multilateral forums to support the efforts of
the international community to halt the development
of nuclear technologies and capabilities for military
purposes, support an atmosphere of respect and
cooperation
and
promote
confidence-building
measures, in order to reach a diplomatic solution
leading to the complete, verifiable and irreversible
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her
briefing today.
This is the second time we are meeting this
month on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
(see S/PV.9183). We condemn the recent launch of
an intercontinental-range ballistic missile by the
Democratic People’s Republic. This follows other
ballistic-missile launches in the preceding months,
following which the Security Council met. These
launches constitute a violation of the resolutions of the
Security Council relating to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. They affect the peace and security
of the region and beyond.
India calls for the full implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions relating to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We would also
like to again reiterate the importance of addressing the
proliferation of nuclear and missile technologies related
to the Democratic People’s Republic. Proliferation
of nuclear and missile technologies is a matter of
concern, as they have an adverse impact on peace and
security in the region, including India. We hope that
the international community and the Security Council
can be united on this front. We reiterate our continued
support for denuclearization towards peace and security
on the Korean peninsula.
Ensuring peace and security on the Korean
peninsula is in our collective interest. Going forward,
we will continue to support dialogue and diplomacy as
the means to resolve the issues on the Korean peninsula.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I also thank UnderSecretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing,
and I welcome the participation of the representatives
of Japan and the Republic of Korea in this meeting.

S/PV.9197

Kenya condemns the continued test-launching of
intercontinental ballistic missiles by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea in blatant violation
of multiple Security Council resolutions. The
unprecedented scale of missile launches this year, some
of them intercontinental ballistic missiles capable of
reaching distant targets, constitutes a grave threat to
peace and security of the region and the world at large.
Even more concerning is the reported development
of tactical nuclear weapons and preparations by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to carry out
nuclear-missile tests imminently.
The increasing frequency with which the launched
missiles are affecting sovereign territories of the
region, particularly Japan and the Republic of Korea, is
alarming. This provocation is escalating at a dangerous
rate and could, if not contained, plunge the region into
turmoil, with far-reaching ramifications worldwide.
The Korean peninsula has critical trading and
investment linkages with Africa. Our own peace,
security and stability are therefore endangered by
the escalation on the Korean peninsula. Indeed,
the last few months have taught us that actions that
undermine international peace and security affect
not only the immediate countries but also the distant
ones. Consequently, Kenya reiterates its call for the
immediate halting of any further provocative acts on
the Korean peninsula and full compliance with relevant
Security Council resolutions.
We further call for unconditional and genuine
dialogue that considers the concerns of all parties
in the region. This is the only viable path out of this
fragile situation. Kenya also urges the international
community, particularly States that have influence on
the region, to help restart diplomatic negotiations.
It is disturbing that the provocative acts are
happening against a backdrop of a deteriorating
humanitarian situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. We encourage the Democratic
People’s Republic to prioritize the needs of its people
over costly military ventures that threaten regional and
international peace and security. Meanwhile, all other
concerned parties should consider the humanitarian
plight of citizens of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea in all their actions to ensure that innocent
populations do not suffer.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for

22-703349/14

S/PV.9197

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

her briefing. I welcome the delegations of Japan and the
Republic of Korea to this meeting.
The last time we were in this Chamber to discuss
this file, we remarked on the relatively short period
of time since our previous meeting (see S/PV.9183). A
mere month had passed between the previous missile
that had overflown Japan and the salvo of launches
that brought us here at the beginning of November.
Now the space of time has gotten even shorter — two
weeks, to be precise — and we once again condemn in
the strongest terms the repeated launches in violation
of Security Council resolutions. Yet it seems clear to
us that something needs to change. While condemning
those missile launches is necessary and appropriate,
we cannot fall into a cycle in which the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea conducts a major missile test
every few weeks, after which we meet here to deliver
our statements and then move on to other business. If
we want to see progress on this issue, we must think
critically about how to proceed.
If the reports are correct, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has just done its first successful
test of the Hwasong-17, its newest intercontinental
ballistic missile (ICBM). By all accounts, it is
larger and more technologically advanced than its
predecessors. The missile joins North Korea’s two
other ICBMs, Hwasong-15 and Hwasong-14, in an
increasingly sophisticated nuclear arsenal that can
reach most of the world. We condemned that launch,
as well as the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
other ballistic-missile launches, in no uncertain terms.
Yet we must also face an uncomfortable reality. All
of North Korea’s intercontinental missile capabilities
were developed when it was already one of the most
sanctioned countries in the world. Resolution 2397
(2017), the last one we adopted on the file, in response to
the Hwasong-15 launch in November 2017, introduced
some of the harshest sanctions on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, including via caps or bans
on food and agricultural exports.
None of that has prevented the prodigious expansion,
quantitatively and qualitatively, of the North Korean
arsenal over the past five years, culminating in this most
recent test. It seems incontrovertible to us that while
sanctions may be a part of a comprehensive approach to
the issue, they are not the full answer. There can be no
doubt that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
repeated missile launches pose a threat to the peace
and security of the peninsula, the region and the world.
10/14

21/11/2022

There is also no doubt that it is the Council’s duty to act
to reduce that threat and safeguard the security of all.
But we must look to new and better tools to do so. We
are an organ of diplomacy first and foremost.
We believe that the first step to any progress on this
file is the ability to speak with a single voice. Above
all, we must make real efforts to achieve convergence
among ourselves in order to find common denominators
and bridge the gaps between our positions. That is how
we have always worked in the Council, even in times of
great division. It is not enough to agree to disagree. We
must agree on what we can agree on and find the will to
do more, not just through greater pressure but through
a broad approach that takes into account the full
complexity of the file. We all want a safer peninsula.
We all want reduced risks. We all want more stability
and predictability in the region, and we are all against
nuclear proliferation. We have common ground. Let us
build on it.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, UnderSecretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, for her briefing.
Russia is opposed to any military activity that
threatens the security of the Korean peninsula and the
countries of North-East Asia. However, we are once
again becoming trapped in a vicious circle that is very
familiar to us in the context of this issue. The United
States and its allies in the region carry out large-scale
exercises, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
reacts accordingly, and then we meet here to discuss it
all. The problem with that logic is that with each new
round, the positions of the parties and their actions
become increasingly provocative and dangerous for
international peace and security. In our opinion, the
reason for the events is clear. It is Washington’s desire
to compel Pyongyang into unilateral disarmament
with the help of sanctions and forceful pressure. As
part of their new concept of extended deterrence, the
United States, the Republic of Korea and Japan have
significantly increased their military training activities
in the region. On the eve of the North Korean launch,
the naval forces of the United States and South Korea
conducted a training exercise for missile defence
systems with the participation of destroyers. At the
same time, they carried out exercises with the use of
strategic bombers and a simulated strike on North
Korean ballistic-missile installations.
22-70334

21/11/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

At the previous meeting of the Council on the
matter (see S/PV.9183), we spoke in detail about
other large-scale exercises that Washington and its
allies conduct in the region. Irresponsible discussions
continue at the leadership level of those countries on
deploying United States deterrents, including nuclear
deterrents, on the Korean peninsula and in the region.
In that regard, it is obvious that Pyongyang’s missile
launches are a consequence of the United States’ shortsighted, confrontational military activity in the region
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, which is
damaging both to its partners in the region and to the
situation in North-East Asia as a whole. Moreover, the
situation on the Korean peninsula cannot be considered
in isolation from the complex processes that are taking
place in that part of the world. We cannot ignore
Washington’s increasingly aggressive promotion of its
unilateral security doctrine in the Asia-Pacific region,
which serves only to create artificial divisions in that
part of the world. New military blocs are being formed,
such as the alliance between the United States, Great
Britain and Australia, which raises serious doubts
about those States’ good intentions and does not help to
establish dialogue.
We deeply regret the fact that our Western
colleagues have consistently ignored Pyongyang’s
repeated calls for the United States to cease its hostile
activities, which would create opportunities for
dialogue. Pyongyang’s concessions in 2018 and 2019
and the positive signals that it sent were not taken into
account. It is precisely because of the position of the
United States that the Council was unable to marshal
the strength to respond appropriately and facilitate a
process of détente.
We believe that the mechanisms of the United
Nations, and the Security Council in particular, should
be leveraged to support inter-Korean dialogue and
multilateral negotiations rather than becoming an
impediment to them. Only then will it be possible to
discuss effective solutions to the problems that have
accumulated in the region, including the nuclear issue,
on the basis of mutually acceptable agreements. A
further escalation of sanctions against the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea will go beyond measures to
counter its prohibited missile and nuclear programmes
and threaten North Korean citizens with unacceptable
socioeconomic and humanitarian upheaval.
The quest for a political and diplomatic solution is
an integral part of the Security Council’s resolutions

S/PV.9197

on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Yet here in the Council we are once again limiting
ourselves to talking about preventive diplomacy. We
have not seen any real steps that go beyond promises
on the part of Washington and other Western States
to establish substantive dialogue with Pyongyang.
We listened carefully to the statement made today by
the representative of the United States, but we cannot
expect miracles if it all comes down to the United
States and its allies expanding military measures and
threatening sanctions, policies that only threaten to
create further tensions on the peninsula, which could
lead to unpredictable and dangerous consequences for
the entire North-East Asian region.
In our view, there is only one alternative today — the
need to ensure that all parties demonstrate restraint and
reaffirm, in practice their readiness to renew dialogue,
in line with previous agreements and commitments.
The Russian-Chinese draft political and humanitarian
resolution remains on the table, as do other initiatives
of our countries that could truly encourage the parties
to step up their negotiation efforts.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I also
thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing
and welcome the participation of the representatives of
Japan and the Republic of Korea in today’s meeting.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
launched its eighth intercontinental ballistic missile in
2022, and it is reported to have fallen just 125 miles
off the coast of Japan. This latest ballistic missile is
assessed to have capabilities that put in grave danger
not only the Korean peninsula but also many nations
around the world, including those sitting around this
table. We unequivocally condemn the actions of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, which violate
multiple Security Council resolutions. The country’s
dangerous behaviour threatens our collective stability
and prosperity.
The unprecedented escalation in the country’s
provocative actions and threats pose a challenge to
the Council’s responsibility to maintain international
peace and security. We remain deeply concerned that
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea seems to be
planning its seventh nuclear test. We once again call on
it to refrain from conducting any further illegal tests,
return to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, abandon all its nuclear-weapon and related
missiles programmes, implement the International

22-7033411/14

S/PV.9197

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Atomic Energy Agency safeguards and fulfil its
denuclearization obligations.
Nuclear proliferation cannot guarantee the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea security and
stability. On the contrary, the country’s determination
to pursue it will exacerbate tensions and instability
on the Korean peninsula and beyond. At a time
where the global non-proliferation architecture is
at a critical juncture, we call upon the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to abide by the Charter of
the United Nations, international law and the relevant
Security Council resolutions. It is high time to engage
in diplomacy and dialogue, avoid further escalation and
to make clear to the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea the Council’s expectations in that regard, leading
to a substantive dialogue among all parties.
While the Security Council has crafted a stringent
sanctions regime in order to prevent the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea from developing its nuclear
and ballistic capabilities, the country continues to
evade sanctions to finance its prohibited activities. The
new ways in which the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea resorts to funding its weapons arsenals have to
give us pause. The Security Council’s sanctions regime
should be able to effectively combat attempts by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to illegally
smuggle weapons and components via the black
market and to address cryptotheft activities. Council
members should come together, including within the
Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1718 (2006), so that we can close those
loopholes. We urge all Member States to fully comply
with the 1718 sanctions regime and effectively prevent
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea from
continuing to evade sanctions.
We see that the leaders of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea continue to divert the country’s
already scarce resources towards military capabilities
rather than to the people’s urgent humanitarian and
development needs. The humanitarian situation of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea population
remains a serious concern. The United Nations and other
relief organizations, together with the international
community, have expressed their willingness to
cooperate with the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea in order to alleviate the humanitarian suffering
of its people. We urge the country to respond to that
outreach. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
framed this latest ballistic missile launch as a signal
12/14

21/11/2022

projecting strength. Instead, it projects escalation,
instability and limited valuable resources channelled
to fund military capabilities instead of addressing the
desperate needs of the North Korean people.
There is still time to change that trajectory. It is
time for restraint, constructive engagement and genuine
will to prioritize dialogue regarding the country’s
nuclear programme. It is time for a clear message from
the Council that the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea must comply with the relevant Security Council
resolutions, in line with the call of the SecretaryGeneral, and for a real dialogue to genuinely begin.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ghana.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo for her briefing to the Security Council and
welcome the participation of the representatives of
Japan and the Republic of Korea.
The Council is meeting for the second time in
three weeks in order to discuss a second launch of
an intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The current
ICBM launch, which is reported to be the new
Hwasong-17 and described by some analysts as the most
powerful yet to be launched by the country, comes on
the heels of seven other ICBM launches and the launch
of a barrage of over 70 ballistic and other missiles this
year alone, all in clear violation of several Security
Council resolutions.
Ghana is gravely concerned about the continued
breach by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea of
existing Security Council resolutions. We strongly urge
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to refrain
from further ballistic missile launches and return to
full compliance with the Charter of the United Nations,
recent Security Council resolutions, the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, as well as the
International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards.
We also reiterate our call for the Council to speak
with one voice in urging all parties to work towards
de-escalating tensions in the region and resuming
constructive and credible dialogue. We hope that the
Council and all relevant parties will be able to act in
a swift manner in order to preserve the peace on the
Korean peninsula and ensure the humanitarian needs
of the people of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea.
22-70334

21/11/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Republic
of Korea.
Mr. Hwang (Republic of Korea): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this urgent
meeting of the Security Council. My gratitude also goes
to Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing.
The Republic of Korea condemns, in the strongest
terms, the continued ballistic missile launches of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, including
its intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) launch
on 18 November, which blatantly violates multiple
Security Council resolutions. It is simply appalling
to witness how the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, a United Nations State Member, can completely
disregard international norms, including the Charter of
the United Nations and the decisions of the Council.
Just after the ICBM launch, Pyongyang’s State
media announced that the leader of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea observed the launch
of its new type of ICBM and touted a pre-emptive
nuclear strike as a purpose it could serve. That clearly
demonstrates the deplorable reality that the North
Korean regime persistently prioritizes its unlawful
programme of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs)
at all costs, undermining the global non-proliferation
regime, threatening international peace and security
and neglecting the well-being and livelihood of its own
people under the deteriorating humanitarian situation
and ongoing self-imposed isolation.
In addition, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea released a statement in its Foreign Minister’s
name yesterday in an effort to justify its provocations
and denounce the Secretary-General’s recent statement
that condemned the country’s ICBM launch. By
publicly mocking the Secretary-General as a puppet of
the United States, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea once again highlighted its categorical refusal to
respect the authority of the United Nations.
We have witnessed how the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea is fully taking advantage of the
Council’s inaction and divisions to build up its nuclear
arsenal. Since May, when the Security Council failed
to adopt a draft resolution (S/2022/431) because of the
opposition of two permanent members (see S/PV.9048),
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has

S/PV.9197

launched 40 ballistic missiles and promulgated its new
law on nuclear-weapons policy, which set the threshold
for using nuclear weapons far lower than any other
country. Indeed, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea has become increasingly aggressive and
dangerous. Moreover, it now stands on the verge of its
seventh nuclear test.
The most recent Security Council resolution on this
issue, resolution 2397 (2017), adopted unanimously in
2017, explicitly decided to take action in order to restrict
further the export of petroleum to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea in the event of the country’s
launch of an ICBM. In that vein, it is most regrettable
that the Security Council failed to implement its own
commitment witnessing Pyongyang’s eight ICBM test
launches this year. It is time for the Security Council
to respond, in a robust and united manner, to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s reckless
nuclear ambition. If the Council does not respond
firmly to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
continued illegal behaviour, it will inevitably lead
to more Member States deliberately ignoring their
obligations under Security Council resolutions.
In that context, the Republic of Korea duly requests
that all Council members support the swift adoption of
the draft presidential statement proposed by the United
States. It would be the minimum action expected
by the international community in the light of the
innumerable rounds of provocations by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea that endanger the world. In
the meantime, the existing Security Council sanctions
must be fully and faithfully implemented by all United
Nations Member States, especially Security Council
members. That may be the only way not only to impede
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s unlawful
WMD pursuits, but also to pressure Pyongyang to
reconsider its ill-advised behaviour and return to
diplomacy. Moreover, that is an obligation conferred
upon us all by the Charter of the United Nations.
Let me be clear once again: there should be no
excuses for the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
recent unlawful provocations. The combined military
exercises by the Republic of Korea and the United
States, which have long been conducted on a regular
basis and are defensive in nature, can never be an
excuse for the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
illicit nuclear and missile development. Speaking for
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is neither
constructive nor responsible and only emboldens the

22-7033413/14

S/PV.9197

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to persist in
choosing the wrong path.
Lastly, we reiterate our commitment to engaging in
serious dialogue with the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea without any preconditions and strongly urge
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to respond
positively to our offer. We owe it to future generations
and to our children in Korea to pass on a peaceful
denuclearized Korean peninsula, not dangerous
nuclear weapons.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I wish to thank Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo for her briefing.
Since the beginning of this year, North Korea has
repeatedly and persistently conducted more missile
launches, including different types of launches, at a
higher frequency than ever before. Not only has the
number of missiles increased, but so has the threat level.
In just the past two months, we have witnessed
unlawful missile launches, including one that flew
over Japan for the first time in five years and one
that impacted near the Republic of Korea’s territorial
waters. This time, North Korea again launched an
intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM)-class missile,
which impacted in the Japanese exclusive economic
zone, just 200 km from Hokkaido. That is a clear
escalation, which is unacceptable and unlawful. Japan
strongly condemns the launch and echoes and supports
the message of the Secretary-General in that regard.
Let me make three points.
First, those missile launches not only pose an
imminent and grave threat to Japan’s security, but
also endanger all people in the region. They endanger
vessels and expose aircraft in the surrounding area to
great safety risk. No one can be assured of a safe life
in the face of such continuously destabilizing conduct.
This is a serious threat, not only for Japan and the
Republic of Korea, but for the entire region and beyond.
Secondly, let me point out another unacceptable
aspect of the most recent launch. The ICBM-class
ballistic missile flew an estimated 1,000 km, with an
apogee of an estimated 6,000 km. At the same time,

14/14

21/11/2022

however, calculations based on the flight trajectory
indicate that the estimated capable range of the missile
could exceed 15,000 km. In that case, all of Asia, Europe,
North America, including New York, and Africa and
even part of South America would be within range of
that delivery system of unlawful nuclear warheads. Let
me repeat that the threat goes well beyond the region.
It is outrageous to allow North Korea to take the entire
international community hostage.
Thirdly and lastly, I must once again stress the
crucial need for the Council to firmly stand against this
serious challenge to international peace and security, as
well as to its own credibility. The Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2397 (2017), whereby it decided to
take action if North Korea were to launch an ICBM
or conduct a nuclear test. I have already stated several
times in this Chamber that we must not allow the
current situation to become a new normal.
The Charter of the United Nations is clear. All
Member States have agreed to carry out the decisions
of the Security Council. Violations should not go
unchecked. There are no smaller or larger violations. I
do not believe that the Council should tolerate ballistic
missile launches and wait for a nuclear test before
finally taking action. It is the unified determination
of all Council members never to allow a nuclear North
Korea with ballistic missile capabilities. That should
remain ironclad, irrespective of Council members’
bilateral relations with North Korea. Now is the time
for the Council to reaffirm that commitment by sending
a unified message. The draft presidential statement
proposed by the United States is a step forward while
we wait for stronger, more robust actions to be adopted.
In conclusion, Japan urges North Korea to
immediately and fully comply with all relevant
resolutions, to engage in diplomacy towards
denuclearization and to accept the repeated offers of
dialogue. Japan also urges all Member States to fully
implement the relevant resolutions and cooperate with
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1718 (2006). Japan reiterates its sincere
and strong expectation that the Council will fulfil its
responsibility by taking resolute action.
The meeting rose at 11.20 a.m.

22-70334
