United Nations

A/RES/69/156

General Assembly

Distr.: General
22 January 2015

Sixty-ninth session
Agenda item 64 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2014
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/69/484)]

69/156. Child, early and forced marriage
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 68/148 of 18 December 2013 on child, early and
forced marriage,
Recalling its resolutions 66/140 of 19 December 2011 and 68/146 of
18 December 2013 on the girl child and 67/144 of 20 December 2012 on the
intensification of efforts to eliminate all forms of violence against women, as well
as Human Rights Council resolution 24/23 of 27 September 2013, entitled
“Strengthening efforts to prevent and eliminate child, early and forced marriage:
challenges, achievements, best practices and implementation gaps”, 1 and all other
previous resolutions relating to child, early and forced marriage,
Guided by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 2 the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights3 and the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights,3 as well as other relevant human rights instruments,
including the Convention on the Rights of the Child 4 and the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, 5 together with the
relevant Optional Protocols thereto,6
Reaffirming the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action,7 as well as the
Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and
Development, 8 the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action 9 and the outcome
documents of their review conferences,
_______________
1

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53A
(A/68/53/Add.1), chap. III.
2
Resolution 217 A (III).
3
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
4
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
5
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
6
Ibid., vols. 2171 and 2173, No. 27531, and resolution 66/138, annex; and United Nations, Treaty Series,
vol. 2131, No. 20378.
7
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
8
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
9
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.

14-67600 (E)

*1467600*

Please recycle

A/RES/69/156

Child, early and forced marriage

Recalling the agreed conclusions adopted by the Commission on the Status of
Women at its fifty-seventh10 and fifty-eighth11 sessions,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights of 2 April 2014 on preventing and
eliminating child, early and forced marriage 12 and its summary report of 18 July
2014 on the panel discussion on preventing and eliminating child, early and forced
marriage, 13 and noting the summary report on the panel discussion held by the
General Assembly on 5 September 2014,
Recognizing that child, early and forced marriage is a harmful practice that
violates, abuses and impairs human rights and is linked to and perpetuates other
harmful practices and human rights violations and that such violations have a
disproportionately negative impact on women and girls, and underscoring the
human rights obligations and commitments of States to promote and protect the
human rights and fundamental freedoms of women and girls and to prevent and
eliminate the practice of child, early and forced marriage,
Deeply concerned about the continued prevalence of child, early and forced
marriage worldwide, including the fact that approximately 15 million girls are
married every year before they reach 18 years of age and that more than 700 million
women and girls alive today were married before their eighteenth birthday,
Noting with concern that the continued prevalence of child, early and forced
marriage has had a negative impact on the achievement and the overarching aims of
Millennium Development Goals 1 to 6, including in the areas of gender equality and
the empowerment of women and girls, poverty reduction, education, maternal and
child mortality and health, including sexual and reproductive health, and
recognizing that child, early and forced marriage continues to impair sustainable
development, inclusive economic growth and social cohesion,
Noting with concern also that poverty and insecurity are among the root causes
of child, early and forced marriage and that child, early and forced marriage remains
common in rural areas and among the poorest communities, and recognizing that the
immediate alleviation and eventual eradication of extreme poverty must remain a
high priority for the international community,
Recognizing that child, early and forced marriage is itself a barrier to
development and helps to perpetuate the cycle of poverty and that the risk of child,
early and forced marriage is also exacerbated in conflict and humanitarian crisis
situations,
Recognizing also that child, early and forced marriage is inherently linked to
deep-rooted gender inequalities, norms and stereotypes and to harmful practices,
perceptions and customs that are obstacles to the full enjoyment of human rights and
that the persistence of child, early and forced marriage places children, in particular
the girl child, at risk of being exposed to and encountering various forms of
discrimination and violence throughout their lives,

_______________
10
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2013, Supplement No. 7 (E/2013/27), chap. I,
sect. A.
11
Ibid., 2014, Supplement No. 7 (E/2014/27), chap. I, sect. A.
12
A/HRC/26/22 and Corr.1.
13
A/HRC/27/34.

2/4

Child, early and forced marriage

A/RES/69/156

Recognizing further that child, early and forced marriage undermines women’s
and girls’ autonomy and decision-making in all aspects of their lives and continues
to be an impediment to improvements in the education and the economic and social
status of women and girls in all parts of the world and that the empowerment of and
investment in women and girls is critical for economic growth, including the
eradication of poverty, as well as the meaningful participation of girls in all
decisions that affect them,
Noting with concern that child, early and forced marriage disproportionally
affects girls who have received little or no formal education and is itself a
significant obstacle to educational opportunities for girls and young women, in
particular girls who are forced to drop out of school owing to marriage and/or
childbirth, and recognizing that educational opportunities are directly related to
women’s and girls’ empowerment, employment and economic opportunities and to
their active participation in economic, social and cultural development, governance
and decision-making,
Recognizing that child, early and forced marriage constitutes a serious threat to
multiple aspects of the physical and psychological health of women and girls,
including but not limited to their sexual and reproductive health, significantly
increasing the risk of early, frequent and unintended pregnancy, maternal and
newborn mortality and morbidity, obstetric fistula and sexually transmitted
infections, including HIV/AIDS, as well as increasing vulnerability to all forms of
violence, and that every girl and woman at risk of or affected by these practices
must have equal access to quality services such as education, counselling, shelter
and other social services, psychological, sexual and reproductive health-care
services and medical care,
1.
Urges all States to enact, enforce and uphold laws and policies aimed at
preventing and ending child, early and forced marriage and protecting those at risk
and to ensure that marriage is entered into only with the informed, free and full
consent of the intending spouses;
2.
Calls upon States, with the participation of relevant stakeholders,
including girls, religious and community leaders, civil society, women’s and human
rights groups, men and boys and youth organizations, to develop and implement
holistic, comprehensive and coordinated responses and strategies to eliminate child,
early and forced marriage and to support already married girls, adolescents and
women, including through the strengthening of child protection systems, protection
mechanisms such as safe shelters, access to justice and the sharing of best practices
across borders;
3.
Calls upon States and the international community to create an
environment in which the well-being of women and girls is ensured by, inter alia,
cooperating, supporting and participating in efforts for the eradication of extreme
poverty, and reaffirms that investment in women and girls and the protection of their
rights are among the most effective ways to end the practice of child, early and
forced marriage;
4.
Calls upon States to promote and protect the right of women and girls to
education through enhanced emphasis on quality education, including catch-up and
literacy education for those who have not received formal education, while
recognizing that education is one of the most effective ways to prevent and end
child, early and forced marriage and to help married women and girls to make more
informed choices about their lives;

3/4

A/RES/69/156

Child, early and forced marriage

5.
Urges Governments to promote and protect the human rights of all
women, including their right to have control over and decide freely and responsibly
on matters related to their sexuality, including sexual and reproductive health, free
of coercion, discrimination and violence, and to adopt and accelerate the
implementation of laws, policies and programmes that protect and enable the
enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms, including reproductive
rights, in accordance with the Programme of Action of the International Conference
on Population and Development,8 the Beijing Platform for Action14 and the outcome
documents of their review conferences;
6.
Encourages relevant United Nations entities and agencies to continue to
collaborate with and support Member States in developing and implementing
strategies and policies at the national, regional and international levels to prevent
and eliminate child, early and forced marriage, as well as to support already married
girls, adolescents and women;
7.
Recalls the inclusion of a target on eliminating all harmful practices,
such as child, early and forced marriage, in the outcome document of the Open
Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals, 15 recognizes child, early and
forced marriage as a barrier to development and the full realization of women’s and
girls’ human rights, and recognizes the need to give due consideration to the
inclusion of the target in the post-2015 development agenda in order to help to
ensure progress towards the elimination of child, early and forced marriage;
8.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report to the
General Assembly, before the end of its seventieth session, on progress towards
ending child, early and forced marriage worldwide since the issuance of the report
of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights of 2 April 2014,12 with
particular emphasis on high-prevalence countries, best practices for programmes
aimed at ending the practice and supporting already married women and girls, gaps
in research and implementation and legal reforms and policies related to this matter,
using information provided by Member States, United Nations bodies, agencies,
funds and programmes, civil society and other relevant stakeholders;
9.
Decides to consider the issue of child, early and forced marriage at its
seventy-first session under the item entitled “Promotion and protection of the rights
of children”, taking into account the multifaceted and worldwide nature of the issue
of child, early and forced marriage.
73rd plenary meeting
18 December 2014

_______________
14
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
15
See A/68/970 and Corr.1.

4/4
