A/64/PV.27

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fourth session

27

th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 28 October 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

f

President:

Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 19
Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba
Report of the Secretary-General (A/64/97)
Draft resolution (A/64/L.4)
Mr. Mohamad (Sudan): On behalf of the Group
of 77 and China, I am honoured to speak in this
plenary meeting on agenda item 19, “Necessity of
ending the economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed by the United States of America
against Cuba”.
The Group of 77 and China have always been
firmly against this embargo. The heads of State and
Government of the Group of 77 and China at the
Second South Summit, held in Doha, Qatar, from 12 to
16 June 2005, firmly rejected the imposition of laws
and regulations with extraterritorial impact and all
other forms of coercive economic measures, including
unilateral sanctions against developing countries, and
called upon the Government of the United States to put
an end to the economic, commercial and financial
embargo against Cuba, which, in addition to being
unilateral and contrary to the Charter of the United
Nations, international law and to the principle of goodneighbourliness, causes huge material losses and
economic damage to the people of Cuba.

In this regard, the Group of 77 and China would
like to reiterate once again their long-standing position
on this important matter. At their recent thirty-third
annual meeting held here in New York on
25 September 2009, the ministers for foreign affairs of
the States members of the Group of 77 and China
“firmly rejected the imposition of laws and
regulations with extraterritorial impact and all
other forms of coercive economic measures,
including unilateral sanctions against developing
countries, and reiterated the urgent need to
eliminate them immediately. They emphasized
that such actions not only undermine the
principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and international law but also severely
threaten the freedom of trade and investment.
They, therefore, called on the international
community neither to recognize these measures
nor apply them”. (A/64/489, annex, para. 39)
The Group of 77 and China take note of the
replies of Governments and bodies within the United
Nations system to the Secretary-General’s request for
information on the matter, contained in his report on
the implementation of resolution 63/7 (A/64/97). Sadly,
they unequivocally show that the embargo remains
largely unchanged and continues to impose severe
economic and financial restrictions on Cuba.
Furthermore, the debilitating impact of the global
economic crisis on Cuba and the continued embargo by
the Government of the United States will contribute to
further aggravating the hardships of and imposed on
the people of Cuba.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

09-57988 (E)

*0957988*

A/64/PV.27

The Group of 77 and China calls on the United
States to heed the increasing appeals of the
international community to put an end to the fivedecade embargo and to fully adhere to the principles of
mutual respect and non-interference in the internal
affairs of a sisterly nation. The embargo frustrates
efforts towards the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals and negatively affects regional
cooperation in that area.
The Group of 77 and China is committed to
working towards a better world for all, in which
nations large and small can coexist peacefully. The
achievement of such peaceful coexistence among
nations requires adherence by all nations to the
cardinal principles of the United Nations Charter and
the peaceful conduct of relations among nations.
The Group of 77 and China will again fully
support the draft resolution against the embargo
(A/64/L.4) and urges all States Members of the
Organization to do so as well.
The President (spoke in Arabic): Before giving
the floor to the next speaker, I would like to propose
that the list of speakers for the debate on this item be
closed.
It was so decided.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement on this
important item, and would like to start by welcoming
His Excellency Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Cuba, to the General Assembly.
The Non-Aligned Movement once again renews
its commitment to defending, preserving and
promoting the United Nations Charter and international
law, and stresses its commitment to promoting,
preserving and strengthening multilateralism and the
multilateral decision-making process.
On the basis of that principled position, the
Non-Aligned Movement firmly reiterates its rejection
of the adoption and implementation of extraterritorial
or unilateral coercive measures or laws, including
unilateral economic sanctions or other illegal measures
contrary to international law, that seek to exert pressure
on non-aligned countries to prevent them from
exercising their right to decide, by their own free will,
their own political, economic and social systems. We
therefore call on all States to refrain from recognizing
such measures or laws, which undermine the principles

2

enshrined in the United Nations Charter and
international law and severely threaten the freedom of
trade, navigation and investment.
Furthermore, the Non-Aligned Movement
opposes and condemns such measures or laws and their
continued application, and urges other States to do
likewise, as called for by the General Assembly and
other United Nations organs. The Non-Aligned
Movement once again requests States applying such
measures or laws to revoke them fully and
immediately.
Moreover,
in
accordance
with
international law, the Non-Aligned Movement supports
the claim of affected States, including targeted ones, to
compensation for the damage incurred as a
consequence of the implementation of extraterritorial
or unilateral coercive measures or laws.
The economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed by the United States of America against the
Republic of Cuba has been in place for 50 years, and
70 per cent of Cubans have been born under it. The
Non-Aligned Movement expresses its concern over the
continuation of that long-standing unilateral policy,
especially since the overwhelming majority of States
has consistently rejected it, as evidenced by last year’s
General Assembly resolution on this item (resolution
63/7), which received the support of 185 Member
States.
The heads of State and Government of the
Non-Aligned Movement, at its fifteenth summit
conference held in Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt, in July
2009, reiterated once again in the final document
adopted by the summit their long-standing position on
the necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States against
Cuba. We therefore call upon the Government of the
United States of America to put an immediate end to
the embargo.
Furthermore, during the summit in Sharm
el-Sheikh, the heads of State and Government of the
Non-Aligned Movement adopted an exceptional
declaration, entitled the “Special Declaration of the
Heads of State and Government of the Non-Aligned
Movement on the necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba”. That
declaration reflects the importance that the
Non-Aligned Movement attaches to that issue, and

09-57988

A/64/PV.27

marked the end of Cuba’s outstanding presidency of
the Non-Aligned Movement for the past three years.
From another perspective, I would like to
underscore that the embargo, in addition to being
unilateral and contrary to the United Nations Charter,
international law and the principle of goodneighbourliness, continues to cause huge material loss
and economic and financial damage, which have had a
negative impact on the welfare and well-being of the
people of Cuba.
The Non-Aligned Movement also reiterates its
deep concern over the widening of the extraterritorial
nature of the embargo against Cuba and rejects the
reinforcement of measures adopted by the United
States Government, aimed at tightening the embargo,
as well as all other recent measures carried out by the
Government of the United States of America against
the people of Cuba.
Therefore, the Non-Aligned Movement once
again urges the Government of the United States of
America to immediately and fully comply with all
resolutions of the General Assembly related to the
necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba. Similarly, the Non-Aligned
Movement urges all States to strictly comply with
resolutions 47/19, 48/16, 49/9, 50/10, 51/17, 52/10,
53/4, 54/21, 55/20, 56/9, 57/11, 58/7, 59/11, 60/12,
61/11, 62/3 and 63/7. All those resolutions relate to the
necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba.
To conclude, I would like to highlight that,
despite the continuation of the embargo and all its
negative effects, the Cuban Government conducted its
presidency of the Non-Aligned Movement over the
past three years in a highly capable and commendable
manner that preserved and advanced the interests of the
States members of the Non-Aligned Movement and
contributed to enhancing the interaction between the
Non-Aligned Movement and the larger membership of
the United Nations.
In addition, these past few years have also
witnessed an increased dynamism in Cuba’s
international relations with all regions of the world. In
that context, I would like to state that the new United
States Administration has embarked on a path of
openness and engagement with the outside world.

09-57988

Thus, the Non-Aligned Movement looks forward to
that new policy being extended to Cuba as well and
leading to the immediate end of the long-standing
embargo.
Mr. Bart (Saint Kitts and Nevis): I, too,
recognize the presence of the Foreign Minister of
Cuba.
I have the honour to address the General
Assembly on behalf of the 14 States members of the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM), which also aligns
itself with the statements made by the representative of
the Sudan on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and
the representative of Egypt on behalf of the NonAligned Movement.
CARICOM member States continue to reiterate
their unequivocal opposition to the United States
imposition of the economic, commercial and financial
embargo against Cuba, which has been opposed by the
overwhelming majority of the international community
for the past 17 years. The unilateral imposition of
extraterritorial laws on third States is contrary to both
the letter and the spirit of the United Nations Charter,
and the embargo itself continues to run counter to the
principles of multilateralism, international law,
sovereignty and free trade that this body traditionally
champions.
The stubborn persistence of the embargo is
apparently impervious to the sustained chorus of
international criticism and to the logic of a world that
has changed immeasurably over the four and a half
decades since the blockade was first imposed. The
embargo has now outlived the cold war by 18 years. It
has outlasted the terms of eight United States
presidents and that of Cuban President Fidel Castro.
Over 70 per cent of Cubans alive today were born
under the embargo.
CARICOM considers the embargo to be an
anachronism that has succeeded only in contributing to
the suffering of generations of ordinary Cubans and
unnecessarily increased tensions between the United
States and Cuba. It serves no justifiable legal, political
or moral purpose in the twenty-first century.
The punitive embargo is of a particular concern to
CARICOM, which shares a history, culture and
brotherhood with the people of Cuba. Cuba is the most
populous State of the Caribbean region and an integral
part of the pan-Caribbean process. Caribbean ties with

3

A/64/PV.27

Cuba have historical significance, cemented by years
of active cooperation at various levels. The States
members of CARICOM continue to maintain their
close relations with Cuba through a wide range of
programmes of cooperation in areas including trade,
health care, infrastructure and human resource
development. Our future regional development is in
many ways reliant upon our collective advancement
and progress. In that context, we view the embargo not
just as a punitive act against Cuba, but as an
impediment to our shared regional development.
This year’s report of the Secretary-General
(A/64/97) on the implementation of resolution 63/7,
like previous reports on this matter, outlines responses
from an overwhelming majority of Member States that
share a common perspective on the continued
unilateral embargo against Cuba. Indeed, the report
demonstrates that the embargo even affects the manner
in which organs and agencies of the United Nations
system carry out their work in Cuba.
CARICOM States therefore reaffirm the position
of the Group of 77 and China and the Non-Aligned
Movement in opposing such unilateral actions, and we
maintain the position that constructive engagement and
peaceful negotiations remain the only acceptable
means of advancing long-term peace and stability.
The significance of the embargo on the Cuban
economy continues to be of great concern to
CARICOM, and its humanitarian impact on the people
of Cuba, especially in the area of health care and food,
is especially saddening. The inability of Cuba to
acquire necessary medical equipment, spare parts and
the latest-generation medications because of the
embargo continues to affect the health-care system,
whereby treatment remains free of charge to the Cuban
people.
With the strengthened and more frequent storms
and hurricanes brought by climate change and Cuba’s
geographical susceptibility to these natural disasters,
the unacceptable humanitarian impact of the embargo
is becoming even more acute. Additionally, Cuba’s
access to construction materials and heavy equipment
is becoming increasingly impossible because of the
stringent rules on origins and restrictions against
corporations based outside of the United States.
The negative effects on the Cuban economy and
its growth are obvious and tangible. The embargo has
now cost Cuba almost $100 billion since its 1962

4

imposition. It is remarkable that even as Cuba struggles
with the recent unfortunate string of natural disasters
and the impact of the global economic crisis, it
continues to assist other nations in the developing
world, starting with its immediate Caribbean
neighbours. Thousands of CARICOM students have
attended Cuban universities without charge, thousands
have received free surgeries and medical assistance in
Cuba, and thousands more have been treated in their
home countries by Cuban doctors and nurses.
We have benefited from technical expertise,
capacity-building programmes, infrastructure assistance
and the selfless generosity of the Cuban people. The
people of Cuba have threatened no one, and neither the
embargo nor its deleterious side effects have prevented
them from continuing to extend a hand of friendship
and solidarity, even across ideological divides.
Given Cuba’s peaceful, generous and cooperative
international stance, it should not be isolated or
excluded from participation in regional and
hemispheric processes. CARICOM reiterates its
unwavering support for the right of the Cuban people
to self-determination in a manner beneficial to their
social and economic development. We call once again
for the end to an embargo that has preserved a state of
tension between two neighbouring countries and
generated concern, disquiet and discomfort throughout
the Caribbean.
States continue to enjoy friendly relations with
both Cuba and the United States. These two
neighbours — a mere 90 miles apart — have produced
great scholars, scientists and global leaders. The two
countries possess proud and noble histories and are
populated by friendly, open and loving peoples. As
such and in spite of a long history of dashed hopes,
CARICOM continues to believe that a new beginning
is possible in the relationship between the
Governments of Cuba and the United States. However,
we consider the lifting of the embargo to be a
prerequisite of any meaningful rapprochement between
the two countries, not a negotiated end result.
While there have been some recent positive
indications of flexibility, there have also been
reminders of unilateral rigidity. For example,
CARICOM notes with regret that the United States
Trading with the Enemy Act — an Act that lists only
Cuba as its target — was renewed as recently as last
month. Indeed, recent diplomatic activity only serves

09-57988

A/64/PV.27

to highlight the undeniable fact that the embargo
remains firmly in place and that its imposition is a
continued violation of international law and norms.
We are optimistic that the recent recommitment
by the United States to multilateralism will result in an
increased willingness to consider the opinions and
concerns of its global friends and partners. On this
issue, global opinion can hardly be conveyed in a more
convincing or consistent manner. As such, our faith in
the recent pronouncements of the United States
Government carries with it an expectation that these
few remaining historical and unilateral wrongs will be
righted expeditiously. It is within this context that
CARICOM States unstintingly support the draft
resolution on the necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo by the United States
of America against Cuba.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I should like to welcome the presence among us
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba, Mr. Bruno
Rodríguez Parrilla.
For the eighteenth consecutive year, the Mexican
Government is taking the floor to reiterate once again
its rejection of the economic, commercial and financial
embargo against Cuba and to restate its opposition to
the use of coercive actions that have no legal basis in
the United Nations Charter. Mexico underlines that
such national measures, when applied extraterritorially
to third countries, have severe humanitarian
consequences that are contrary to international law and
reflect a repudiation of dialogue and diplomacy as the
proper means to solve disputes among States.
As we have done since 1992, when the Cuban
Government first introduced a draft resolution to the
General Assembly calling for an end to the embargo
imposed by the Government of the United States of
America, Mexico takes the floor to reiterate its
historical principled position that any political,
economic or military sanction imposed upon any State
must derive only from decisions or recommendations
issued by the Security Council or the General
Assembly. Multilateralism, respect for international
law and the rules and principles that govern
coexistence among nations, and respectful dialogue
remain the best way to resolve disputes and to ensure
peaceful coexistence among States and an international
climate of peace.

09-57988

Various United Nations organs and entities
recognize the negative impact the embargo has on the
economic and social development of Cuba, with
significant damage to its economic, commercial and
financial dealings. The embargo has also had a
negative impact on sensitive sectors that touch directly
on the everyday lives of the Cuban people, as well as
indirect consequences on third countries prevented
from interacting with Cuba in many economic and
social activities. The vociferous outcry of the
international community against such action reminds
us that political, economic or military sanctions
imposed on States must not be the result of unilateral
decisions. Rather, they must always result from
measures adopted by the appropriate bodies of this
Organization, in accordance with the United Nations
Charter and international law.
In that respect, on 23 October 1996 the Mexican
Government enacted a law to protect trade and
investments from foreign regulations that contravene
international law. The law prohibits activities that
affect trade or investment when such activities are a
consequence of the extraterritorial effects of foreign
legislation. Mexico has supported all initiatives against
the embargo and unilateral actions here at the United
Nations, in the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development and in other forums, such as the
Organization of American States (OAS), the Latin
American and Caribbean Economic System, the
Ibero-American Summit and the Rio Group. We have
also promoted opportunities for cooperation and
respectful dialogue based on the fact that the United
States embargo against Cuba reflects a policy that has
weighed upon the Cuban population in a silent,
systematic and cumulative way for almost half a
century.
In this context, in addition to opposing the
economic, political and diplomatic isolation of Cuba,
Mexico has supported, at the Cuban Government’s
request, Cuba’s membership in all regional
mechanisms of integration in order to promote
economic and trade exchanges, as well as cooperation
and development. In this regard, I wish to underscore
the support our Government offered for Cuba’s full
membership of the Rio Group in November 2008 in
Zacatecas, Mexico, with the full support of States
members of that organization.
That historic moment contributed to cooperation
and exchanges to promote development and strengthen

5

A/64/PV.27

multilateralism and Latin American unity. It also
prefigured the historic decision of the General
Assembly of the Organization of American States,
adopted by acclamation on 3 June 2009, revoking
resolution VI of 31 January 1962, which excluded the
Government of Cuba from participating in the
inter-American system. The new decision establishes
that Cuba’s participation in the OAS will be the result
of a process of dialogue and in accordance with the
practices, purposes and principles of the OAS.
Mexico considers that the facts we have outlined
demonstrate that exclusion, far from resolving
disputes, amplifies them to negative effect. We
therefore reiterate our support for the inclusion of Cuba
in mechanisms of dialogue and global economic,
commercial and financial activity, pursuant to its own
sovereign will and decisions. In this regard, Mexico
welcomes the measure taken by the United States
Government to allow the flow of remittances and
Cuban-Americans between Cuba and the United States.
While those measures may modestly contribute to
improving the prevailing environment, Mexico feels
that much remains to be done to truly and substantially
mitigate the negative effects of the economic,
commercial and financial embargo against Cuba.
The Mexican Government bases its bilateral and
multilateral relations on the principles of international
law that regulate peaceful and civilized coexistence
among sovereign States in the modern world. Those
principles have preserved solidarity and continuity in
relations between Mexico and Cuba. We have
maintained unbreakable historical ties supported by a
climate of renewed confidence, and consistently
observed the purposes and principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations, in particular peaceful
coexistence, respect for sovereignty and sovereign
equality among States, and non-interference in internal
affairs.
Based on our own experience, we are aware that
societies evolve and change according to their own
circumstances, and not as a result of arbitrary and
coercive measures imposed from the outside. In light
of that, the Government of Mexico reiterates its firm
commitment to actively and decisively contribute to
effective international law in regard to this item on the
agenda of the General Assembly, and will support the
draft resolution on this issue that has been introduced
at the present session.

6

Mr. Zhang Yesui (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes the report submitted
by the Secretary-General on this agenda item (A/64/97)
and supports the statement made by the representative
of the Sudan on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
China pursues an independent foreign policy of
peace and is committed to developing friendly relations
with all countries on the basis of the five principles of
peaceful coexistence. We are of the view that every
sovereign State is entitled to independently choose its
own suitable social system and path of development.
No country has the right to unilaterally impose
military, political, economic or other forms of
sanctions on other countries. Experience shows that
sanctions usually fail to achieve their expected results;
on the contrary, they may end up victimizing civilians,
not least of all the most vulnerable groups, such as
women and children.
For 17 consecutive years, the General Assembly
has adopted resolutions by an overwhelming majority,
urging all countries, in compliance with the United
Nations Charter and the principles of international law,
to repeal or invalidate all laws and measures with
extraterritorial effect that compromise the sovereignty
of other States, undermine the legitimate rights and
interests of entities and individuals under the
jurisdiction of those States, and affect freedom of trade
and navigation.
Regrettably, however, those resolutions have not
been effectively implemented over the years, and the
long-term economic, commercial and financial
embargo against Cuba imposed by the country
concerned is still in place. This not only constitutes a
serious violation of the purposes and principles of the
Charter, but also seriously undermines the Cuban
people’s rights to survival and development.
As the Secretary-General describes in his report,
by December 2008, the embargo had inflicted direct
economic damage on Cuba totalling over $96 billion,
immeasurably constraining the efforts of the Cuban
people to eradicate poverty, promote economic and
social development, and achieve the Millennium
Development Goals.
The international community is now faced with
the serious challenges of the global financial, food, and
energy crises, as well as climate change, which makes
the embargo and sanctions against Cuba all the more
unreasonable. We have noted that, in April this year,

09-57988

A/64/PV.27

the United States Government lifted travel and
remittance restrictions on Cuban-Americans. We
welcome this move and hope that the United States will
continue to improve its relations with Cuba and
promote normal exchanges between the peoples of the
two countries.
In
today’s
world,
multilateralism
and
democratization of international relations strike a chord
in people’s hearts, while openness, cooperation, mutual
respect and win-win progress have become the
consensus of the international community. When
disputes arise, dialogue on equal footing and in the
spirit of friendly consultation is the best way to achieve
progress.
The Chinese Government has always maintained
that countries should develop their relations in
compliance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter. It is always our hope that there will be
dialogue rather than confrontation, and engagement
and exchanges rather than embargo and sanctions in
State-to-State relations. The Chinese Government
therefore demands that the country concerned
terminate as soon as possible its economic, commercial
and financial embargo against Cuba.
In this connection, China supports the draft
resolution submitted by Cuba under the current agenda
item.
Mr. Vyas (India): At the outset I would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his report (A/64/97) on
the agenda item entitled “Necessity of ending the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States of America against Cuba”. My
delegation associates itself with the statement made by
the Chair of the Group of 77.
For the past 17 consecutive years, the General
Assembly, while deliberating this agenda item, has
categorically and overwhelmingly rejected the
imposition of laws and regulations with extraterritorial
impact.
The General Assembly has also called upon all
States, in compliance with their obligations under the
Charter and the principles of international law, to
refrain from promulgating and applying, as well as
repealing and invalidating laws and measures that have
extraterritorial effects on the sovereignty of other
States, the legitimate interests of entities or persons

09-57988

under their jurisdiction and on the freedom of trade and
navigation.
Unfortunately, those repeated resolutions remain
unimplemented. The nearly five-decade-old United
States embargo on Cuba, including its extraterritorial
aspects, continues to remain in force. We share the
views expressed by the international community in its
opposition to the extraterritorial aspect of the embargo.
In the report of the Secretary-General, various
United Nations entities have detailed the impact of the
embargo, particularly its extraterritorial effects. For
example, the United Nations Resident Coordinator in
Havana has noted that humanitarian and development
cooperation implemented by the United Nations system
in Cuba is significantly affected by the embargo. The
embargo also adversely impacts the functioning of
United Nations offices, including travel for United
Nations staff.
The United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) has stated that the effects of the embargo can
be observed in all spheres of Cuba’s social and
economic activities, as well as in its effect on the most
vulnerable groups and on human development in
general. It highlights the negative consequences of the
embargo on UNDP’s development coordination
activities, including an average increase of 15 per cent
in project cost.
The United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development refers to the attendant costs of the
embargo, both for Cuba and for citizens in third
countries, due to its extraterritorial application. The
United Nations Population Fund states that the impact
of the embargo on some of its programmes was felt
especially hard. The Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean has stated that the embargo
adversely affects the standard of living of Cuban
citizens. The health sector has been among those
affected, on account of enhanced costs and restrictions
on equipment and technologies. Thus, the embargo has
also had an indirect extraterritorial impact on Cuba’s
efforts at South-South cooperation in this field.
Moreover, the natural disasters suffered by Cuba last
year and the ongoing financial and economic crisis
have made the impact of the embargo more acute.
Given their geography, Cuba and the United
States of America could be expected to be natural
partners in trade and investment. While the embargo
has not permitted this, the potential for economic and

7

A/64/PV.27

commercial ties between the two countries clearly
exists. For example, by taking advantage of limited
openings under the United States Trade Sanctions
Reform and Export Enhancement Act of 2000, the
United States has become the largest exporter of
agricultural products to Cuba. The United States
International Trade Commission itself estimates that
this would rise sharply if restrictions were lifted, which
underscores the negative impact of the embargo on
United States trade and business opportunities. Various
efforts in the United States to relax or lift the embargo
indicate that there is substantial interest, in particular
in the business sector, in unhindered access to the
Cuban market or in having contact with Cuba.
We are encouraged by the steps announced by the
current United States Administration earlier this year to
reduce restrictions on travel and on the sending of
remittances to Cuba by Cuban-Americans and on
United States telecommunications services. We look
forward to the full lifting of sanctions and embargo
against Cuba.
In conclusion, I reiterate India’s opposition to
countries taking unilateral measures that impinge on
the sovereignty of another country, including attempts
to extend the application of one country’s laws
extraterritorially to other sovereign nations.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): The delegation
of Viet Nam fully aligns itself with the statements
made on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and of
the Group of 77 and China. I welcome the participation
of His Excellency, Mr. Bruno Eduardo Rodríguez
Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba, in this
important meeting of the General Assembly.
For 17 consecutive years, at each and every
session, the General Assembly has demanded an end to
the unilateral economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed by the United States of America
against Cuba. Annual resolutions on the necessity of
ending the economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed by the United States of America
against Cuba have won increasingly broad support and
have been adopted with virtual unanimity.
The embargo unilaterally imposed by the United
States of America against Cuba constitutes a serious
violation of international law, including of
international laws relating to the freedom of trade and
navigation, sovereign equality and non-interference in
the internal affairs of States. This runs counter to the

8

universally recognized norms governing relations
between sovereign countries regardless of their
political systems and their chosen paths of
development, as well as to the fundamental principles,
purposes and spirit of the Charter of the United
Nations.
Apart from causing losses worth billions of
dollars to the Cuban economy, the embargo has, for the
past year, continued to inflict considerable hardships
on the Cuban people, in particular on women and
children, making it extremely difficult for them to fully
recover from a series of destructive natural disasters,
let alone attain success in their efforts towards
socio-economic development, national reconstruction
and implementation of the internationally agreed
development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals. The embargo has also hurt those
wishing to develop legitimate, normal and mutually
beneficial economic, financial and trade relations with
Cuba, including a large number of American
businesses and individuals.
We concur with President Obama of the United
States when he eloquently declared at the opening of
the general debate of the current General Assembly that
“Democracy cannot be imposed on any nation
from the outside. Each society must search for its
own path, and no path is perfect. Each country
will pursue a path rooted in the culture of its
people and in its past traditions”. (A/64/PV.3)
Disputes among States should and can only be
resolved through peaceful dialogue and negotiations on
the basis of equality, mutual respect for each other’s
independence and sovereignty and the principle of the
non-interference in the internal affairs of States.
We join the majority of Member States in
demanding that the Government of the United States of
America put an end to the unilateral economic,
commercial and financial embargo against Cuba in
order to ease the hardships and difficulties unduly
inflicted upon the people of Cuba, reduce tension and
create an atmosphere conducive to constructive efforts
towards a normalization of the relations between the
two countries in the interests of the peace, stability and
development of the whole region.
Viet Nam reaffirms its support for and solidarity
with the Government and people of Cuba and stands
ready, together with the international community, to

09-57988

A/64/PV.27

continue assisting them to overcome the consequences
of this embargo. In that spirit, Viet Nam will vote in
favour of draft resolution A/64/L.4, submitted by Cuba.
Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): For yet another year, we
are assembled here to address the issue of ending the
economic embargo imposed on Cuba since 1962. In
addressing this matter, Indonesia aligns its views with
those expressed by the distinguished representative of
the Sudan, on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, and
by the distinguished representative of Egypt, on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Conventional wisdom dictates that geographic
proximity between the two countries should be a strong
reason for close bilateral relations. Relations among
States — any States — will be constantly tested by
waves of change. States will always face the challenge
of maintaining a delicate balance between cooperation
and competition. Actions by States are naturally guided
by their own national interests, restrained by
international norms and standards.
Thus, differences will always remain between and
among countries, and tensions could always arise
between nations. But that should not prevent any
movement towards creating a space for cooperation, a
space that allows the two States, the two peoples and
the business communities to seek and establish a
common ground where both sides can benefit, grow
and nurture the tree of friendship, mutual respect and
cooperation.
For this reason, it is pertinent to highlight the
spirit of global partnership required for development,
as set out in the Millennium Declaration, the
Monterrey Consensus and the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation. Such commitments, made at the
highest level, urged countries to cooperate, to set aside
differences and to work for the common good of
billions of people.
The current global economic crisis, ongoing
climate change and the energy and food crises have
severely curtailed efforts by Cuba to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals. The United States can
bring much-needed assistance by lifting its policy of
embargo. In that regard we would like to reiterate the
call made by heads of State and Government at the
fifteenth summit of the Non-Aligned Movement, in
Sharm el-Sheik, Egypt, for an immediate end to that
embargo in the name of humanity. That would help
Cuba, a developing country, to continue efforts to

09-57988

eradicate poverty and hunger from its midst and bring
hope of prosperity to millions of Cubans.
Clearly, there is much to gain by cooperation and
less to gain by confrontation. From that perspective,
Indonesia believes that dialogue and negotiation offer
the most viable solution for resolving existing
disagreements. The United Nations Charter clearly
stipulates its preference for that avenue towards peace.
This issue has been on the agenda of the General
Assembly for many years, but tangible results are yet
to be seen. Forty-seven years have passed, yet there
have been only tortoise-like movements without major
positive results. Year after year, through its resolutions
the General Assembly has urged the two countries to
dismantle the barriers that sustain unhealthy relations
between them.
This year we have reason to be optimistic. Steps
are being taken towards normalizing relations, and
there are encouraging signs to confirm that. That is
truly one essential step, and it merits our support. We
stress our hope that the once-icy relations between
these two neighbours will end and a new era of
cooperation and engagement will blossom in the years
to come. The ending of the economic, commercial and
financial blockade cannot come too soon. We support
the draft resolution on this agenda item.
Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French):
Permit me first to welcome among us the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Cuba. We endorse the statements
made by the Sudan and Egypt on behalf of the Group
of 77 and the Non-Aligned Movement respectively.
More than half a century after its unilateral
imposition, the economic, commercial and financial
blockade of the United States of America against Cuba
is still in place. We are meeting today for the
seventeenth consecutive year to restate the appeal of
the General Assembly and the unceasing call of the
international community for an end to that blockade,
which is unjust and contrary to international law and
international legitimacy. At a time when the values of
cooperation, dialogue, solidarity and mutual assistance
are more established than ever as the general trend in
international relations, that blockade is an anomaly and
runs counter to global developments.
Algeria reiterates its appeal for the lifting of the
trade, economic and financial blockade that Cuba is
facing. It violates the principles of the sovereign

9

A/64/PV.27

equality of States and non-interference in the internal
affairs of another State and is an obstacle to the Cuban
people’s right to development.
Extraterritorial legislation by a State that is aimed
at imposing unilateral sanctions is a flagrant violation
of the principles of the Charter and the rules of
international relations. Apart from the fact that it
violates the relevant provisions of the Charter, that
attitude calls into question freedom of trade, navigation
and movement of capital, which substantially hampers
the economic development of Cuba and its people.
Algeria states its profound concern as to the grave
consequences of the blockade, which are as unjust as
they are illegal.
Algeria reiterates its firm support for the position
adopted by the Fifteenth Summit of the Non-Aligned
Movement, the decisions adopted at the Second South
Summit, held in June 2005, and all declarations that
have rejected the coercive economic measures and
extraterritorial laws imposed on developing countries
and demanded that the United States of America lift the
blockade imposed on Cuba.
Algeria reiterates its appeal to the United States
to lift the blockade, which has constantly been rejected
by an increasing number of countries year after year, to
the point where today it is nearly unanimously
denounced.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa
continues to support the resolution before us, entitled
“Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba”. We do so because that
relentless and unilateral action against Cuba has caused
untold suffering to her people.
The unity with which the international
community has reacted in condemnation of the
embargo, with a record vote of 185 to 3 in 2008, is
testimony that the time has come for it to be lifted and
thereby end the suffering of the Cuban civilian
population, who are carrying the brunt of that injustice.
The time to end the embargo is long overdue.
South Africa is guided by the basic norms of
international law and conduct in its principled support
for the need to eliminate coercive economic measures
as a means of political and economic coercion.
We similarly recognize the sovereignty of States
to develop national legislation. However, when such

10

legislation takes on an extraterritorial reach, as is the
case with the legislation that has been directed towards
Cuba, the outcome of such action impacts on the very
raison d’être for the existence of this Organization —
the United Nations.
South Africa views the continued imposition of
an economic, commercial and financial embargo as a
violation of the principles of the sovereign equality of
States. South Africa has thus repeatedly joined the
majority of countries in expressing its disagreement
with and opposition to the embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba.
Throughout the period of this embargo, the
Cuban people have extended a hand of friendship and
solidarity to other peoples around the world. Cuba’s
outstanding work in the areas of health, education and
biotechnology in many developing countries and the
world in general is recognized by the international
community. Cuba’s contributions to supporting
struggles for self-determination, freedom and justice
around the world are also noted. South Africa
continues to recognize Cuba’s contribution to our own
freedom and democracy. The role that Cuba played in
South Africa’s liberation history in solidarity with our
people was celebrated last year during the twentieth
anniversary of the battle of Cuito Cuanavale, which
was a decisive turning point in the struggle against
apartheid and opened the doors for the liberation of
South Africa.
In November this year, Cuba will host the sixth
session of the Joint Bilateral Commission with South
Africa. Through this cooperative mechanism, the
Governments of South Africa and Cuba strive to
expand the already sound relations in various areas of
cooperation. Through the bilateral cooperation projects
in the context of the Joint Bilateral Commission, Cuba
is greatly assisting South Africa to address its skillsshortage problems through the provision of
professional workers and trainers in myriad areas.
The economic, commercial and financial
blockade imposed against Cuba is an obstacle to the
economic and social development of the country. It is
therefore incumbent on all of us, as equal Members of
the United Nations, to urge adherence to the principles
of our Charter. While international best practice nudges
States towards engaging in robust trade and investment
within a globalized economy, it is unacceptable that

09-57988

A/64/PV.27

Cuba is prevented from reintegrating into the world
trading system.
The United Nations prides itself in rendering
much-needed humanitarian assistance to those Member
States that are afflicted by natural disasters or conflicts.
We must continue to ensure that that track record of
being responsive to humanitarian need is not tainted in
any way, especially by denying the Cuban people
access to affordable medical goods and services
because of an embargo that, it is claimed, is enforced
for their own good.
The extremely harsh global economic and
financial climate only worsens the fate of the Cuban
people. The international community should therefore
take steps to free the Cuban people from the embargo.
While we welcome the positive rapprochement
initiated by the current United States Administration
and encourage it to continue on that path, we call on
the United States to end its unilateral isolation of Cuba.
We encourage the United States to engage in a
meaningful dialogue with Cuba in order to accelerate
the dismantling of those unjust sanctions against Cuba
and its people.
South Africa will join the majority in this
Assembly in supporting the draft resolution before us
today. South Africa wishes to associate itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of the Sudan
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
Mr. Kapambwe (Zambia): My delegation is
grateful to you, Mr. President, for providing the
opportunity to participate in this important debate. I
wish to begin by associating myself with the
statements by the representative of the Sudan on behalf
of the Group of 77 and China and by the representative
of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Zambia commends the Secretary-General for the
report contained in document A/64/97, entitled
“Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba”, which provides useful
information.
My Government believes that the continuation of
the embargo is a violation of international law as
contained in international covenants. It is for that
reason that this body has in the past called on the
United States of America to reconsider its position. The
actions of Member States on this resolution have

09-57988

consistently demonstrated the clear conflict of the
embargo with the tenets of the conduct of international
relationships. Accordingly, I wish to reaffirm my
Government’s position that lifting the embargo will be
the best way forward. Against this background, my
delegation continues to regard the extraterritorial
effects of the embargo on third countries as further
worsening the already desperate socio-economic
conditions in Cuba.
It is our conviction that discussions on the agenda
item before us should not end up as mere formalities
but should result in measures that can be implemented.
It is the expectation of the Cuban people on this, the
fiftieth anniversary of the embargo, that through this
Assembly the international community should send
them a strong message that it is concerned by their
plight; that together, the United Nations stands on high
ground to induce the lifting of the embargo.
In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm the continued
support of the Zambian Government for the call to
bring to an end the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba. In the light of the foregoing, my
delegation will vote in favour of draft resolution
A/64/L.4, calling for the lifting of the embargo.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela supports the statements made in
the General Assembly on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and of the Group of 77 and China on the
necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, committed
to the values of humanism and solidarity among
peoples, condemns the application of any unilateral
measure of an extraterritorial nature that violates the
norms and principles of international law. The
blockade against Cuba breaches the principles of selfdetermination and sovereignty of peoples and States. It
is a repeated refusal by a country signatory of the
Charter of the United Nations of another Member
State’s right to development — in this case, the heroic
Republic of Cuba. That policy represents a systematic
violation of the human rights of the Cuban people. It
also violates the constitutional rights of the people of
the United States, including the freedom to travel to
Cuba.

11

A/64/PV.27

The embargo against the heroic Cuban people is
the longest, cruelest and most unfair in the history of
humanity. It is the main obstacle for the economic and
social development of Cuba. The impact on the
economy is astronomical. It is equivalent to double the
expenditures of the United States in implementing the
Marshall Plan in the years after the Second World War.
The embargo against Cuba can be classified as
genocide, given what is set out in paragraph (c) of
Article II of the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. It is also an act
of economic warfare, according to the Declaration
concerning the Laws of Naval War approved by the
London Naval Conference.
There is no historical precedent for the Cuba
embargo. No country, not even those considered sworn
enemies of the United States, has been the object of
such criminal measures. The embargo violates the rules
of the international systems of commerce and
navigation; it has an impact on the legitimate interests
of any sovereign State that wishes to become a partner
of Cuba. The extraterritorial application of United
States laws, together with the hostility to the legitimate
interests of companies and citizens of third-party
countries, is an issue of concern to the entire
international community. It represents a threat to world
peace and an outright attack on the self-determination
and sovereignty of peoples and States.
The embargo against Cuba has also affected the
Venezuelan people and other peoples of the world,
especially those of the Caribbean, as was expressed
here by the delegation of the Caribbean Community. In
the case of Venezuela, we should point out that the
United States Government recently refused to grant
permission to a transnational company to carry out a
business transaction with Cuba involving the sale of
defibrillators to Venezuela to address heart disease, one
of the leading causes of death in our countries.
There are great expectations of President Barack
Obama’s Government, but there is no evidence to
suggest that the Cuba embargo will be lifted, since all
the laws and administrative provisions that underpin it
are still in place. Vice-President Joseph Biden has said,
and no one has denied, that the United States
Government will maintain the blockade against Cuba
as a “pressure tool”. The half-hearted measures
adopted so far do not alter the legal framework on
which the embargo and its continued application rest.
The
political,
administrative
and
repressive

12

mechanisms that guarantee thorough implementation of
the embargo remain intact.
President Barack Obama received this year’s
Nobel Peace Prize. To meet the expectations raised
around the world his Government should pay close
attention, among the most important issues, to the call
of this Assembly, repeated every year, to lift the
blockade against the heroic people of Cuba, the heroic
republic under the leadership of Comandante Fidel
Castro. This is an emblematic issue, and that is why the
President of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
Hugo Chávez Frías, has called on the President of the
United States to end the blockade and prove that, in the
words of President Chávez, he “is worthy of the Nobel
Peace Prize”.
The United States has systematically refused to
comply with the resolutions adopted by the General
Assembly of the United Nations demanding that the
embargo against the Cuban people be lifted. How long
will this inhuman policy, rejected all over the world,
continue? What can the General Assembly — the most
representative body of the United Nations — do in
light of such stubborn non-compliance?
For all of these reasons, the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela again votes in support of the resolution
demanding the lifting of the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba.
Mr. Sin Son Ho (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): The economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed by the United States of America
against the Republic of Cuba has been in place for
50 years, in spite of strong demands by an absolute
majority of Member States of the United Nations. The
embargo, which has been enforced unilaterally by the
United States under the pretext of accelerating a
democratic transition in Cuba, is aimed at
overthrowing the social system selected by the
Government and people of Cuba. That constitutes a
grave violation of principles, such as respect for
sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-interference in
internal affairs that are enshrined in the United Nations
Charter and international law.
Cuba has already suffered losses of hundreds of
billions of dollars in various areas of its economy
because of the cruel embargo imposed by the United
States, which has also had a severe impact on the social
life and well-being of the Cuban people. The embargo,

09-57988

A/64/PV.27

a silent economic war against the people of Cuba, is an
illegal and inhumane act that has no justification at all,
politically, legally or morally. No coercive measure of
a unilateral and extraterritorial nature, devised in order
to pursue sinister political purposes and to impose a
political, economic and social system based on one
country’s own perspective, can ever be justified or
tolerated in any way.
For the last 17 years, therefore, the General
Assembly has adopted resolutions rejecting and calling
for an immediate end to the United States unilateral
embargo against Cuba, with the overwhelming support
of Member States, barring a very few countries,
including the United States. We also remind the
Assembly that the heads of State and Government of
the Non-Aligned Movement reaffirmed their rejection
of, and urged an immediate end to, the United States
embargo against Cuba at the Movement’s fifteenth
Summit Conference, held in July 2009 in Sharm
el-Sheikh, Egypt.
There have been some media reports on probable
change in United States policy towards Cuba since the
Obama Administration took office, but in fact there has
been no change in their policy of maintaining the
embargo as a tool to put pressure on Cuba. If it is
genuinely willing to improve relations and to coexist
with Cuba and every other nation, the United States
should take substantial measures to move away from
the outdated mentality of the cold-war era and conform
with the expectations of people throughout the world.
It is the consistent position of the Government of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to oppose
all forms of interference, threat of the use of force and
sanctions against sovereign States.
The delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic strongly urges the United States Government
to immediately and unconditionally end the unilateral
economic, commercial and financial embargo against
Cuba, comply with all relevant General Assembly
resolutions and compensate Cuba for the economic
losses that have resulted from the embargo.
The delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea fully supports the adoption of the
draft resolution on ending the embargo against Cuba
and extends its firm support to and solidarity with the
just cause of the Government and people of Cuba for
defending their national sovereignty and achieving

09-57988

economic development, social progress and prosperity
of their nation.
Mrs. Waffa-Ogoo (Gambia): Mr. President, I
wish to thank you for convening this debate on agenda
item 19, entitled “Necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba”. The report of
the Secretary-General (A/64/97) amply documents the
devastation caused by the continued imposition of the
embargo against Cuba.
In his remarks to this body at the 2009 general
debate, His Excellency Al Hadji Yahya Jammeh said,
“My delegation … calls on the United
Nations to urge the United States of America to
immediately and unconditionally lift its embargo
on Cuba, in accordance with the wishes of more
than 98 per cent of the membership of this body.
That trade embargo continues to hurt Cuban
women and children. The Cuban children born
into those extreme hardships have committed no
crime. The punishment of women and children
because of political differences is a very serious
violation of their rights.” (A/64/PV.6, pp. 29-30)
UNICEF’s contribution to the Secretary-General’s
report makes it clear that even children with special
needs are not spared the impact of the embargo.
My delegation therefore joins the overwhelming
majority of the Member States in the Assembly in
calling for an immediate end to the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America on Cuba. For 18 consecutive
years, the General Assembly, reflecting the voice and
moral authority of the people of this world, has
rejected the embargo as contrary to international law.
The harm that the embargo has inflicted on the
Cuban people is incalculable in terms of human
suffering and deprivation of essential commodities.
Almost every sector of Cuban society is affected by the
punitive reach of extraterritorial application of the
embargo. The loss and damage to the Cuban economy,
health, education, tourism, culture and many other
areas is well documented in the Secretary-General’s
report.
The Gambia has consistently opposed the
embargo and is of the firm belief that its continued
application serves no other purpose than to punish the
Cuban people and Government for their political

13

A/64/PV.27

stance. Let us remind ourselves once again that we are
in the twenty-first century and that the best way to
solve our problems is through dialogue and
multilateralism.
To paraphrase President Barack Obama, we call
on the United States to embrace a new era of
engagement with Cuba based on mutual interest and
mutual respect, in order to build a new coalition that
bridges all divides. We call on the United States
Government to take a serious look at this year’s draft
resolution (A/64/L.4) and honour its demands. My
delegation believes that the time has come for the
United States to open a new chapter in its bilateral
relations with Cuba, beginning with the immediate
dismantling of the sanctions regime.
It is in the interest of the United States, Cuba and
the international community to see an end to this
extraterritorial regime. It is our hope that this year’s
draft resolution will usher in a new era of cooperation,
dialogue and mutual respect and ultimately lead to the
immediate and unconditional lifting of the embargo.
Mr. Savostianov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation would first and
foremost like to express appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive report contained in
document A/64/97. The report presents the opinions of
the Member States that have unanimously expressed
their disagreement with and objections to the
introduction of the unilateral and extraterritorial
economic, commercial and financial blockade against
Cuba.
Russia’s position of principle in respect of the
resolution on this issue is well known. Our country
wholeheartedly shares the opinion of the overwhelming
majority of members of the international community in
resolutely condemning the American blockade of Cuba
and calling for its swift lifting. We are convinced that
ending the anti-Cuban embargo and normalizing
American-Cuban relations as a whole will contribute to
redressing the situation with respect to Cuba and to its
further reintegration into continent-wide structures.
We consider that the maintenance of the
economic, commercial and financial blockade of Cuba
is counterproductive and anachronistic, inconsistent
with today’s realities. We welcome the April decision
of Barack Obama’s Administration to lift a number of
restrictions on visits to Cuba by United States citizens
who have relatives there and on monetary and postal

14

transfers to Cubans from the United States. We trust
that other actions to improve relations between the two
countries will follow, ultimately leading to the full end
of the long-obsolete economic and commercial
embargo against Cuba.
For the time being, we feel that it is necessary to
continue our policy of supporting the draft resolution
demanding the lifting of the blockade, guided by the
fundamental principles of the Charter of the United
Nations on the inadmissibility of any discriminatory
measures or interference in the internal affairs of
States.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report submitted under agenda item 19, entitled
“Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba” (A/64/97).
My delegation also associates itself with the
statement made by the Permanent Representative of the
Sudan on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
The adoption of resolution 63/7 — the most
recent in a long chain of resolutions that the Assembly
has adopted on this subject with such strong support —
clearly indicates the strong objection of the
international community to unilateral economic
coercive measures in general and to the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed against
Cuba in particular.
Resorting to an embargo as a tool to attain
political objectives seriously undermines the collective
efforts of Member States to achieve economic growth
and sustainable development at the national, regional
and international levels. Therefore, these consecutive
resolutions, which call on all States to refrain from
applying such laws and measures and to take necessary
steps to repeal or invalidate them, are wise and
laudable reactions by the international community to
such unacceptable measures.
Nevertheless, we are deeply concerned that,
despite so many appeals contained in resolutions of the
General Assembly and recommendations adopted by
the Human Rights Council and at several major United
Nations conferences, unilateral coercive measures,
with all their negative implications, continue to be
imposed and implemented.

09-57988

A/64/PV.27

It is worth recalling paragraph 102 of the
Johannesburg Plan of Implementation of the World
Summit on Sustainable Development, which clearly
urges Member States to take steps with a view to avoid
and refrain from any unilateral measure that impedes
the full achievement of economic and social
development by the people of the affected countries.
My delegation reiterates its long-standing
position that the economic, commercial and financial
embargo against Cuba runs counter to the principles of
international law governing relations among States and
contradicts the letter and spirit of the Charter of the
United Nations. Therefore, we strongly reject the
implementation of unilateral economic and trade
measures by one State against another that affect the
free flow of international trade and financial resources.
We further denounce the extraterritorial application of
national legislation to other States.
Indeed, such measures continue to adversely
impact the living conditions and human rights of the
Cuban people and to hamper the efforts of the Cuban
Government in eradicating poverty and hunger,
promoting health and education — indispensable
elements of economic and social development — and
achieving internationally agreed development goals,
including the Millennium Development Goals.
The Islamic Republic of Iran, along with many
other States Members of the United Nations,
emphasizes the urgent need for an immediate end to
such measures and for the full implementation of all
relevant General Assembly resolutions.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I should
like at the outset to welcome the presence among us of
Mr. Bruno Eduardo Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Cuba.
The commercial and financial embargo against
Cuba is an issue that has occupied us for nearly
50 years. Last year saw the most impressive display of
support for the traditional resolution on this subject.
Let us hope that we can celebrate the long-awaited
international consensus that would enable us to settle
this unresolved item on the agenda of our
Organization. Let us hope that we can keep pace with
history, which has already consigned to the grave so
many other anachronisms of the cold war era. Let us
hope that we can overcome one of the last obstacles
preventing us from finally entering the twenty-first
century, free of the constraints of an international order

09-57988

whose elements of conflict we do not wish to pass on
to future generations.
We have grounds for optimism. Last year, the
winds of change finally began to blow. The first
tangible movement was Cuba’s full integration into the
Rio Group as a result of a presidential decision late in
2008. The presence of that brotherly nation in a
mechanism for building political consensus will be
valuable in continuing to build a common destiny. The
next step occurred at the Summit of the Americas held
in Puerto España in April this year, when the
possibility arose of achieving the full reintegration of
the inter-American family of nations in our
hemisphere. In June, the General Assembly of the
Organization of American States (OAS), meeting in the
city of San Pedro Sula, took the historic decision to
declare resolution VI, adopted in 1962, by which the
Government of Cuba had been excluded from the
inter-American system, without effect.
The progress of the past year brought us a little
closer to the ideals of the OAS charter, based on the
principles of solidarity and good-neighbourliness. In
addition, it expressed the aspiration of our peoples to a
tolerant regionalism based on progress and prosperity
for all, independence, the sovereign equality of States
and respect for the law. Those principles assume
universal scope at the United Nations and require firm
commitment to multilateralism.
Some early progress has been made over the past
year in the relaxing of the embargo. We are following
with the greatest interest and welcome the decisions
taken to reduce the restrictions imposed on the travel
of individuals with relatives in Cuba, to raise the caps
on financial remittances and to facilitate the mailing of
parcels. The resumption of bilateral dialogue between
the United States and the Government of Cuba on
migration issues and the more open parameters for the
participation of telecommunications companies in
Cuba are also positive.
Notwithstanding the recent progress, or perhaps
precisely because of it, the commercial and financial
embargo against Cuba seems increasingly irrational
and anachronistic, in addition to being harmful to the
interests of the international community. The truth is
that nothing less than an unequivocal, swift and
decisive end to the embargo will bring us back into line
with the realities of the new century in which we live.

15

A/64/PV.27

From this very rostrum, President Lula has
affirmed that we must exert our political will to
overcome situations that militate against peace,
development and democracy. An end to the embargo
would contribute decisively to that end.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Bruno Eduardo Rodríguez
Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba, to
introduce draft resolution A/64/L.4.
Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): Alexis García Iribar was born in Cuba, in the
province of Guantánamo, with congenital cardiopathy.
At the age of six, after successive deferrals and with
complications, he had to undergo open-heart surgery
on 9 March 2009 because the Government of the
United States prohibits the North American companies
NuMED, AGA Medical Corporation and Boston
Scientific from selling Cuba the Amplatzer and
embolization coil devices for paediatric catheterization
that can replace surgery. I could mention another
12 cases of children between the ages of five months
and 13 years, all of whom have undergone a similar
procedure in the past year and a half, two since
20 January.
Cuban
children
suffering
from
acute
lymphoblastic leukaemia who reject the usual
medicines cannot be treated with the North American
product Elspar, made specifically for cases of
intolerance. Consequently, their life expectancy is
reduced and their suffering increases. The North
American Government prohibits the company Merck
from supplying it to Cuba. Cuba has been unable to
obtain the genetic analyser equipment needed to study
the cause of breast, colon and prostate cancer, which is
manufactured by the North American company Applied
Biosystems. Lactalis USA, a supplier of dairy
products, was fined $20,000 by the North American
Government.
Since President Obama’s election, there has been
no change in the application of the economic,
commercial and financial blockade against Cuba. It
remains intact. It continues to be an absurd policy that
causes scarcities and suffering. It is a mass, flagrant
and systematic violation of human rights. Under the
1948 Geneva Convention, it could be classified as an
act of genocide. It is ethically unacceptable.
The blockade is an arrogant and ignorant act.
Recently, the North American Government prevented

16

the New York Philharmonic Orchestra from performing
in Cuba. Cuban artists cannot be paid for their
performances before the North American public. How
can artistic creation be considered a crime? Microsoft
blocked Cuba’s access to Windows Live because, as
can be read after opening that tool, that is what
happens to users from countries under United States
embargo. The same happens with the web pages of
Cisco Systems, SolidWorks and Symantec. The
blockade limits Cuba’s bandwidth and connectivity. It
prevents our connection to the submarine fibre-optic
cables that pass near our coasts. Why does the United
States Government hinder the free flow of information
and access to new technologies?
However,
such
inhumane
prohibitions,
inappropriate in this age, are applied not only against
Cuba, but also against other countries represented here.
Philips Medical Systems failed to fulfil the contracted
supply of spare parts for medical equipment, bought at
a cost of $72 million and installed in Cuba and in
Venezuela. Moreover, it was fined $200,000. It is a
Netherlands company, against which the United States
Government applied the blockade extraterritorially.
Hitachi stated that it cannot sell Cuba an
electronic transmission microscope, essential for
pathological anatomy studies, while Toshiba said the
same about a gamma chamber and magnetic resonance
and high-precision ultrasound equipment. They are
Japanese companies against which the United States
also applies the blockade. The North American
Government forbade the food company Sensient
Flavors from exporting to Cuba, although it is a
subsidiary registered and based in Canada.
Siemens, a German company, refused to sell us a
125-megawatt transformer owing, it said, to its
obligation to follow certain United States rules. One of
its subsidiaries based in Denmark could not supply
equipment for a cement factory in Cuba under the
North American ban. The Australia & New Zealand
Bank Group, headquartered in Australia, was fined
millions for doing business with Cuba. Some 1,941
vessels that moored in Cuban ports between July 2008
and July 2009 were banned from entering North
American ports for 180 days. There are many other
examples cited in the Secretary-General’s report
(A/64/97), which includes Cuba’s reply.
The United States representatives lie when they
assert that the blockade is a bilateral issue. The

09-57988

A/64/PV.27

extraterritorial application of blockade laws, such as
the Helms-Burton and Torricelli Acts, against States
represented here is a serious violation of international
law, the United Nations Charter and freedom of trade
and navigation. Recently, blockade measures have been
applied against at least 56 countries. It is up to the
General Assembly to deal with this matter.
According to recent polls of institutions of that
country, 76 per cent of North Americans oppose the
blockade. It is antidemocratic to disregard the wish for
change and to maintain the blockade. In a time of
unemployment and economic crisis, United States
businesses are banned from the Cuban market and
prohibited from investing in Cuba. International
companies face no North American competition in
Cuba because the United States Government forbids it.
What harm could there be in North Americans
accessing Cuban products? Who would be hurt by the
creation of new jobs in United States ports as a result
of the development of normal trade relations between
our countries? Why can North Americans not have
access to the latest Cuban medicines for cancer or
diabetes and the technologies to manufacture them,
which are available in only Cuba? Why does the
company Bacardi, which paid for the lobbying that led
to the Helms-Burton Act, avoid competition and force
North Americans to buy a poor imitation of Cuban rum
at a higher price? Why should a Cuban cigar be
inaccessible and exotic in that country?
The United States President seemed stuck in the
past when, on 11 September, he extended the embargo
for another year, citing the national interest of the
United States, based on the Trade with the Enemy Act
of 1917, which is applicable only to situations of war
and enforced solely against Cuba. No serious person
could maintain that Cuba is a threat to the national
security of the only super-Power.
Our strength is that of law, truth and reason. The
inclusion of Cuba on the spurious list of alleged State
sponsors of terrorism — the reason given for some of
the blockade measures — should cease. Our five
anti-terrorist heroes, who have been unjustly
imprisoned in that country, should be freed now.
On 11 September 2001, Cuba opened its skies
and airports so that any American plane could have
somewhere to land. It offered plasma and health-care
workers. Later on, it offered antibiotics and equipment
to combat the anthrax threat and generously offered to

09-57988

send doctors when Hurricane Katrina battered New
Orleans.
Cuba is a hospitable nation that invites American
citizens to visit, American intellectuals, scholars and
scientists to engage in cooperation and fruitful debate,
American artists to build bridges, and American
companies to trade and invest.
A few days ago, we all applauded President
Obama when he said from this rostrum, “international
law is not an empty promise” and “no nation … should
try to dominate another nation” (A/64/PV.3).
The international community cannot and will not
accept that those who govern in Washington, D.C.,
believe they have the authority to implement coercive
economic measures and extraterritorial laws against
sovereign States. President Obama has a historical
opportunity to lead a change of policy towards Cuba
and lift the blockade. He is even vested with executive
powers that would allow him, right now and all by
himself, to substantially modify the implementation of
the blockade measures by granting general licences,
dispensations or waivers, humanitarian exceptions or
measures taken for reasons of national interest, without
even modifying the laws that enforce such
prohibitions.
President Obama righteously defied the egoism
and callous nature of the conservative right when he
told Congress,
“One man from Illinois lost his coverage in the
middle of chemotherapy … and he died because
of it. Another woman from Texas was about to get
a double mastectomy when her insurance
company cancelled her policy”.
Anyone who could be troubled by this could not,
without disregarding the most basic ethical standards,
prevent Cuban children suffering from cancer or a
heart condition from receiving medicine and medical
equipment. To paraphrase Senator Kennedy when he
referred to health reform, the blockade against Cuba is
also a moral issue that puts to the test the character of
the United States of America.
It is true that Cuba purchases significant
quantities of agricultural products from the United
States. However, the United States representatives lie
when they say that the United States is Cuba’s trading
partner but fail to mention that this trade does not
conform to the standards established by the

17

A/64/PV.27

international trade system. Cuba’s payments are to be
made in cash and in advance, without access to private
credit. Cuban vessels are not allowed to transport
cargo. Cuba is submitted to onerous and discriminatory
procedures and endures endless manoeuvres aimed at
confiscating shipments. We cannot call “trade” those
operations that lack even the minimum reciprocity that
would allow Cuba to export its products to the United
States. A country imposing a blockade on another
cannot be its trading partner.
The representatives of the United States
Government lie shamelessly when they assert that the
United States is the main donor of humanitarian
assistance to Cuba. The data they use are false. They
conflate,
through
fictitious
and
intentionally
misleading figures, the value of alleged licences for
transactions that never took place and the assistance
that Cuban immigrants residing in the United States
send, through no effort but their own, to their relatives.
Successive United States administrations have persecuted
and harassed non-governmental organizations that send
humanitarian assistance to Cuba, and as a result, half
of those organizations have stopped doing so.
A year ago, when Cuba was devastated by three
hurricanes, which caused losses equivalent to 20 per
cent of our gross domestic product, the Bush
administration did not even respond to our request that
American companies be allowed to sell to us, on an
exceptional basis, construction material and tarpaulins
to replace damaged roofs, and to grant us private
credit.
At several meetings, United States representatives
have referred to the steps that their Government has
taken to dismantle the most brutal restrictions imposed
by George W. Bush on travel by Cuban émigrés and on
remittances to their relatives, as well as to resume
bilateral talks on migration issues and re-establish
direct postal services.
These actions are positive, but they are extremely
limited and insufficient. The truth is that we have not
even returned to a situation comparable to that which
prevailed until the early days of 2004, when the United
States allowed a certain level of academic, cultural,
scientific and sporting exchange with Cuban
counterparts. Such exchanges continue to be banned
today.
Some
vague
proposals
relating
to
telecommunications will simply be impracticable so

18

long as other restrictions that remain in force are not
eliminated, and so long as the practice of stealing
Cuban funds resulting from such transactions, which
remain frozen in American banks on the basis of
decisions adopted by venal judges in violation of their
own laws, is not discontinued.
Since the right of United States residents of
Cuban origin to travel to the island has been
re-established, the absurdity of preventing American
citizens from travelling to Cuba — the only place in
the world forbidden to them — has been thrown into
starker relief. American citizens, who pay taxes, are
not free to travel to Cuba, despite the fact that the
Constitution of that country allegedly guarantees that
right. American citizens are not allowed to receive
first-hand information about Cuba.
United States representatives have also referred
in several meetings to a supposedly new spirit in their
relations with our country. Cuba’s response has been
fully consistent with its historical readiness to talk
directly with the United States. Just as Commander-inChief Fidel Castro Ruz did in the past, President Raúl
Castro Ruz has reiterated his willingness to establish
dialogue on all issues and to negotiate all bilateral
problems on the basis of respect and sovereign
equality, without prejudice to our national
independence and self-determination. We have clearly
stated that we will not negotiate our internal affairs or
our constitutional order. We await a response from the
United States Government about the proposed agenda
submitted by Cuba this past July to launch a bilateral
dialogue, which I publicly announced in this Hall on
28 September 2006.
The economic blockade has not succeeded and
will not succeed in its purpose of crushing the patriotic
resolve of the Cuban people. However, it generates
shortages, restricts our development potential and
seriously hurts our economy. It is, without doubt, the
fundamental obstacle that hinders the economic
development of our country. Its cost is very difficult to
estimate. A rigorous and conservative record of the
economic damage amounts to hundreds of billions of
dollars, based on the current and decreasing value of
that currency.
Representatives of the United States have said
that our shortages result from the failure of our system.
But they lie, perhaps rather from ignorance than bad
faith. Thanks to our system, we have been able to resist

09-57988

A/64/PV.27

for 50 years and we have developed despite the
blockade. If the United States representatives are
convinced that our system does not work, why do they
need the blockade?
In conditions of true economic warfare and
vicious manipulation of the media, and subject to the
effects of climate change and the global economic
crisis, Cuba is engaged in deeply human and fraternal,
social and cultural work. Our people are determined to
move ahead, in sovereignty, in order to solve our
problems and perfect our political, economic and social
system within socialism. We Cubans have every right
to do so, without blockades or foreign pressure,
without the millions in funds with which the United
States Government finances subversion and without
foreign interference in the decisions that only we
Cubans are entitled to make.
That is the purpose of the draft resolution that we
intend to adopt and that I am honoured to present.
Supporting this draft resolution would be an act against
aggression and the use of force. It would be an act in
favour of peace, justice and hope. It would be an act of
justice towards the heroic people of Cuba who are
today paying tribute to the memory of Camilo
Cienfuegos, a young and cheerful Commander from the
Sierra Maestra Mountains, from whom we learned that
loyalty to our sacred achievements and our profound
convictions is the only way to victory.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We have heard
the last speaker in the debate on this agenda item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/64/L.4.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote before the vote, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote before the vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats. However, in view of the large number of
speakers, I would ask delegations to limit their
explanations of vote to no more than a few minutes so
that we can finish our work on this item in a timely
manner.
I now give the floor to those representatives who
wish to speak in explanation of vote before the voting.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): Here we go
again. I suppose old habits die hard. The hostile
language we have just heard from the Foreign Minister
of Cuba seems straight out of the Cold War era and is

09-57988

not conducive to constructive progress. We will not
respond in kind to the painfully familiar rhetoric that
we have heard in years past. Rather, I am here to
acknowledge that there is a new chapter to this old
story.
In recent months, since the start of the Obama
administration, the United States has undertaken
several steps to reach out to the Cuban people in
support of their desire to freely determine their
country’s future. We have promoted family visits and
the free flow of information to and from the Cuban
people. The United States has lifted restrictions on
family visits and remittances and expanded the amount
of humanitarian items that the American people can
donate to individuals in Cuba. The United States has
enhanced the ability of United States telecommunications
companies to pursue agreements to provide service to
Cuba and has made it easier for United States
agricultural producers to pursue contracts with Cuban
buyers. These are important steps and we hope they
can be the starting point for further changes in the
relationship.
It is equally important to note that the United
States has demonstrated that we are prepared to engage
the Government of Cuba on issues that affect the
security and well-being of both our peoples.
Specifically, we have resumed bilateral discussions on
migration, we have initiated talks to re-establish direct
mail service between the United States and Cuba and
we stand by to provide assistance should Cuba be
ravaged again by hurricanes as it was in 2008.
We believe that any resolution commenting on
the relationship between Cuba and the United States of
America
should
reflect
those
constructive
developments. Sadly, the draft resolution under
discussion fails in that regard and, regrettably, the
Government of Cuba has not yet reciprocated those
important steps taken by my Government.
At the same time, we must point out that the
United States of America, like all Member States, has
the sovereign right to conduct its economic relationship
with another country as it sees fit. The United States
economic relationship with Cuba is a bilateral issue
and part of a broader set of relations. The steps the
United States has taken to improve communications
and exchanges with the Cuban people are undertaken
with a continuing firm commitment to encouraging the
Cuban Government to respect basic norms embodied in

19

A/64/PV.27

the Inter-American Democratic Charter
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

and

the

As we discuss our differences on that subject, we
must remember one important commonality. The
United States, like most Member States, is firmly
committed to supporting the desire of the Cuban people
to determine freely their country’s future. Respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms are part of this
Organization’s core values. We should not lose sight of
that in a stale debate bogged down in rhetorical
arguments of the past. That kind of debate does nothing
to help the people of Cuba.
I must address two significant distortions in the
Cuban position. First, my delegation regrets that the
delegation of Cuba continues inappropriately and
incorrectly to label United States trade restrictions on
Cuba as an act of genocide. Such an egregious misuse
of the term genocide diminishes the real suffering of
victims of genocide elsewhere in the world.
Secondly, it is erroneous to charge that United
States sanctions are the cause of deprivation among the
Cuban people. The United States maintains no
restriction on humanitarian aid to Cuba. In fact, the
United States is a major source of humanitarian
assistance to the Cuban people and the largest provider
of food to Cuba. In 2008, the United States exported
agricultural products, medical devices, medicine, wood
and humanitarian items to Cuba. In agricultural
products alone, the United States sold $700.1 million
of goods to Cuba. Once again, in 2008, the United
States was Cuba’s fifth largest trading partner.
As we have sought to reach out to the Cuban
people, we have called upon the Cuban Government to
take steps to respond to the desire of its citizens to
enjoy political, social, and economic freedoms. There
are many things the Government of Cuba could do to
signal its willingness to engage constructively with its
own people and with the United States. Positive
measures could include liberating the hundreds of
prisoners of conscience in Cuban jails, ratifying the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
reducing the excessive charges on remittances flowing
into the country, demonstrating greater respect for
freedom of speech, ending the practice of arresting
political opponents on vague and arbitrary charges
such as “social dangerousness” and permitting the visit
of United Nations rapporteurs on human rights and
torture. As other delegations consider this draft

20

resolution, we do hope they will not lose sight of the
undeniable fact that the Cuban Government’s airtight
restrictions on internationally recognized social,
political and economic freedoms are the main source of
deprivation and the primary obstacle to development in
Cuba.
Because it does not reflect current realities, my
delegation will vote against this draft resolution. At the
same time, the United States will continue to work to
expand opportunities for the people of Cuba to
empower themselves through access to information and
resources. We will continue to engage the Government
of Cuba on issues of mutual concern and national
security. We await a constructive Cuban response to
our initiatives. In the meantime it is high time for this
body to move beyond the rhetorical posturing of the
past, to recognize the situation in Cuba for what it is
today and to encourage progress towards genuine
change.
Mr. Balé (Congo) (spoke in French): On behalf
of my delegation I would like to thank you, Sir, for
organizing this debate on the need to end the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba.
My delegation, which has consistently voted in
favour of the resolution on the Cuban embargo, wishes
to make the following observations on this issue, on
which we could have spared ourselves a vote. First, the
embargo imposed on Cuba, which causes suffering to
the Cuban population, as well as considerable
economic damages to the nation, does not constitute, in
the opinion of my delegation, an acceptable means of
resolving political differences among States. Secondly,
this embargo, which is a unilateral measure, not only is
a flagrant violation of the provisions of the United
Nations Charter, the principles of international law and
resolutions adopted year after year by this Assembly,
but also flouts the principles of freedom of commerce
and international navigation.
Congo, which keenly wishes to see the lifting of
this measure, has no intention of associating itself with
it in any way whatsoever. That is why it has refrained
from passing or putting into practice any law of the
kind referred to in the draft resolution. In that sprit, the
Congolese delegation will cast a vote in favour of the
draft before us.
I could not conclude my statement without taking
note of the encouraging signs seen recently that give us

09-57988

A/64/PV.27

reasons to hope that a settlement of this question is
possible through constructive dialogue. Congo
encourages any development to that end and expresses
a hope that the parties to this conflict may draw on a
spirit of dialogue in order to put an end to this unjust,
anachronistic measure that is manifestly damaging to
peace and security in the region.
Ms. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): Nicaragua would like to explain the
elements it believes need to be taken into account for
this vote and, specifically, explain why we will vote in
favour of draft resolution A/64/L.4.
Who is Cuba? Cuba is a sister, the inspirational
source of our own struggles, the daughter both of the
American continent and the African continent, an
example of solidarity and generosity. Cuba, all of your
brothers and sisters on this continent are with you. All
our peoples and Governments recognize you and
admire you — all except one. And the Government that
does not recognize you is acting against the will of its
own people. Moreover, that Government not only does
not recognize you but also abuses you, and abuses you
against the will of the international community.
The economic, commercial and financial
blockade imposed by the United States against Cuba
for more than 50 years is the highest expression of a
cruel and inhumane policy that is lacking in legality
and legitimacy and is deliberately designed to provoke
hunger, disease and desperation in the Cuban
population. This blockade has to stop now. It is a
flagrant violation of human rights.
The United States Government cannot continue to
ignore the resolutions of this Assembly. It must
immediately obey them and join in what has been the
will of the international community, which since 1992
has expressed itself in a growing condemnation of the
Member States of this Organization, a condemnation
and rejection that last year reached a total of 185
States, a figure that we have no doubt will continue to
grow.
With every passing day the policies of the United
States will isolate it more and more, until it finds itself
utterly alone, because the call for the elimination of its
blockade against Cuba and for an end to its policy of
aggression against a small and worthy country is
stronger and more determined than ever. Once more,
Nicaragua expresses its fundamental rejection of all
coercive, unilateral, extraterritorial measures that are

09-57988

contrary to international law and the accepted norms of
free trade, because such measures represent a serious
threat to multilateralism. We also condemn the use of
unilateral coercive measures, such as illegal sanctions
against developing countries, for the purpose of
thwarting those countries’ exercise of their right to
determine their own political, economic and social
system.
The cold war has been left behind. Dialogue and
negotiation should replace blockades, aggression and
hostility. It is now time that the United States set aside
its imperialist policy and resolve its differences with
Cuba and other States in a civilized manner, through
dialogue and negotiation. In the specific case of Cuba,
such dialogue should take place without preconditions
and under terms of full equality, as our sister country
has requested.
Why does the United States continue this
criminal policy when it knows very well that the
people and Government of Cuba will never give in?
Cuba is a giant in dignity and resistance in the face of a
powerful empire and an example for all our peoples.
Cuba, despite the blockade, shares its political,
economic and social accomplishments with all of us.
Cuba is life and it gives life to our peoples. While
others prescribe destabilization, hostility, aggression
and death to us, since they only know to respond to
challenges with military force and ever more bases in
our region, Cuba shares with us education, health,
housing, scientific and technological knowledge,
sports, friendship and its values. In sum, it shares all
the necessary components of complementary solidarity
to assist in the development of our peoples and to build
a better world.
The people and Government of Cuba do not
merely hand out their leftovers; they share what they
have. It is because of this example that the United
States has persisted with its aggressive policy against
Cuba for 50 years. We urge the United States instead to
follow Cuba’s example and to focus its energies and
resources on cooperation based on solidarity and
impartiality in favour of the development of our region
and of the peoples of the world.
Nicaragua is living proof of the benefits of the
initiatives and solidarity of this generous people and
Government. As our President and Commander Daniel
Ortega Saavedra says, in this new history, which
includes new forms of thinking and living better, you,

21

A/64/PV.27

brothers and sisters in Cuba, are a permanent source of
inspiration for the new victories of our nations.
We would like to take this opportunity to restate
our profound gratitude to the thousands of Cuban
doctors, teachers, construction workers, technicians
and specialists who have devoted all their efforts and
knowledge in favour of the development of my
country. Nicaragua, in unfailing solidarity, reiterates its
unconditional support for the heroic people and
Government of Cuba in their enormous struggle in the
face of the constant aggressions of the empire, as well
as its support for the ending of the blockade, the return
of Cuba’s legitimate territory in Guantánamo and the
liberation of the five Cuban heroes. We reiterate our
defence of Cuba’s achievements, sovereignty, selfdetermination and socialist homeland. We will always
defend the right of the Cuban Revolution to exist and
to continue to illuminate us with its light and its
wisdom.
For the justice of the Cuban cause, we will vote
in favour of the draft resolution. And we hope there
will be a genuine change in the policy of the United
States towards Cuba — that is to say, that it will bring
the blockade to an end.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We have heard
the last speaker in explanation of vote before the vote.
The General Assembly shall now proceed to take a
decision on draft resolution A/64/L.4. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape
Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia,

22

Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao
Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania,
Uruguay,
Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Palau, United States of America
Abstaining:
Marshall
States of)

Islands,

Micronesia

(Federated

Draft resolution A/64/L.4 was adopted by 187
votes to 3, with 2 abstentions (resolution 64/6).
The President (spoke in Arabic): We shall now
hear speakers in explanation of vote after the vote. I
hope that speakers will be very brief so that we may
finish our work on this item on time.
Mr. Lidén (Sweden): I have the honour to deliver
this explanation of vote on behalf of the European
Union. Turkey, Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,

09-57988

A/64/PV.27

Montenegro, Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova
align themselves with this statement.
The European Union believes that the United
States trade policy towards Cuba is fundamentally a
bilateral issue. However, American legislation such as
the Cuban Democracy Act of 1992 and the HelmsBurton Act of 1996 has extended the effects of the
United States embargo to third-party countries. As a
matter of principle, the European Union has firmly and
continuously opposed such extraterritorial measures.
We welcome the recent decision by the United
States Government to lift restrictions on remittances
and family travel to Cuba, but we cannot accept that
unilaterally imposed measures impede our economic
and commercial relations with Cuba. To address this
problem, the European Union’s Council of Ministers
adopted, in November 1996, a regulation and a joint
action to protect the interests of natural or legal
persons residing in Europe against the consequences of
these Acts. Furthermore, at the May 1998 European
Union-United States Summit in London, a package was
agreed that also sought to alleviate the problems with
extraterritorial legislation. It covered waivers to titles
III and IV of the Helms-Burton Act, a commitment by
the United States Government to resist future
extraterritorial legislation of that kind, and an
understanding
regarding
disciplines
for
the
strengthening of investment protection. The European
Union reiterates its call on the United States to
implement this agreement.
The European Union’s policy towards Cuba is
clear and was set out in a Common Position in 1996.
The objective of the European Union in its relations
with Cuba is to encourage a peaceful process of
transition, led by the Cuban people, to a pluralist
democracy and respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms, as well as a sustainable
economic recovery and an improvement in the living
standards of the Cuban people.
Reaffirming the validity of this Common
Position, the European Union in June 2008 lifted the
political measures imposed on Cuba in 2003. The
dialogue with the authorities in Havana was resumed
without preconditions and on the basis of reciprocity
and non-discrimination.
Ministerial sessions were held with the Cuban
Government in Paris in October 2008 and in Brussels
in May 2009. The dialogue addressed issues of

09-57988

common interest, including human rights, an area in
which the European Union expects concrete actions
from Havana. Additionally, the European Union
intends to continue its dialogue with the democratic
opposition and civil society on Cuba.
While it has signed the United Nations
International Covenants on Civil and Political Rights
and Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, Cuba has
not yet ratified them. Havana has undertaken to invite
the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the right to
food and has mentioned the possibility of visits from
other rapporteurs.
The Cuban Government continues to deny its
citizens internationally recognized civil, political and
economic rights and freedoms. The European Union
remains seriously concerned at the continuation of
human rights violations in Cuba despite a decrease in
the number of political prisoners. The European Union
once again urges the Cuban Government to
unconditionally release all political prisoners and, in
particular, expresses utmost concern at the
deteriorating health of several of them and of members
of the group of 75 who were detained in March 2003.
The European Union also reiterates its call on the
Cuban Government to grant freedom of expression and
free access to information.
These restrictions on rights and freedoms
undermine the Cuban achievements in health care and
education. Similarly, domestic Cuban economic policy
seriously hampers the country’s own economic
development. The economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed by the United States contributes to
these problems, negatively affecting the living
standards of the Cuban people.
The European Union clearly believes, therefore,
that the lifting of the United States embargo would
open up the Cuban economy, to the benefit of the
Cuban people. We again express our rejection of all
unilateral measures directed against Cuba that are
contrary to commonly accepted rules of international
trade. With regard to Cuba, the European Union urges
the Cuban authorities to bring about real improvements
in all areas mentioned.
For all those reasons, and in spite of serious
criticism of Cuba’s human rights record, the European
Union voted unanimously in favour of resolution 64/6.

23

A/64/PV.27

Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the States
members of the Common Market of the South
(MERCOSUR) and its associated States: Argentina, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia,
Ecuador, Paraguay, Peru, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela and my country, Uruguay.
As in previous years, the States members of
MERCOSUR and its associated States voted in favour
of the resolution submitted by the delegation of Cuba,
because we understand that the embargo against that
country contradicts the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and contravenes rules of international
law, in particular the norms regulating international
trade that are binding on members of the World Trade
Organization.
The position of MERCOSUR and its associated
States falls within the broader framework of the
defence of multilateralism, non-intervention and the
peaceful settlement of disputes, which are fundamental
principles of the diplomacy of our continent.
This embargo has been condemned before here at
the United Nations and in other international forums
and bodies, including the Organization of American
States, the Latin American and Caribbean Economic
System, and the Ibero-American and Rio Group
summits.
The States members of MERCOSUR and its
associated States reject unilateral and extraterritorial
measures out of principle. In that connection, we
condemn the implementation of coercive unilateral
measures contrary to free trade, which cause
irreparable harm to the well-being of peoples and
obstruct regional integration processes.
By voting in favour of resolution 64/6,
MERCOSUR and its associated States have reaffirmed
their commitment to multilateralism as a legitimate
instrument for the peaceful settlement of disputes
between States and an effective tool in promoting
international cooperation, human rights, security and
understanding among peoples.
Mrs. Phommachanh (Lao People’s Democratic
Republic) (spoke in French): My delegation subscribes
to the statements made by the representative of the
Sudan on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and by
the representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

24

The Lao People’s Democratic Republic wishes to
express once again its opposition to the continuation of
the economic, commercial and financial embargo
unilaterally imposed by the United States of America
against Cuba for half a century. We believe that the
ongoing imposition of that economic, commercial and
financial embargo is a violation of the principles of the
sovereign equality of States, non-intervention and
non-interference in the internal affairs of another State,
and that it constitutes an attack on the sovereignty of
the Cuban people and their right to development. The
extraterritorial application of legislation by one State
aimed at imposing unilateral sanctions against another
runs counter to the fundamental principles of
international law and the Charter of the United
Nations.
Because of its harmful effects on the livelihoods
of the Cuban people, as well as its exterritorial nature,
the embargo imposed on Cuba by the United States of
America has, since 1992, been systematically
condemned by the international community in
17 identical resolutions, adopted by an overwhelming
majority every year by the General Assembly.
However, despite the requests of the General Assembly
and many other intergovernmental organs and forums,
the embargo remains in place. Its perpetuation will
only create further tension in the bilateral relations
between the United States and Cuba and lead to new
suffering and difficulties for the people of Cuba, in
particular its most vulnerable citizens, such as women
and children.
I should like to conclude by reaffirming our
tireless support for and solidarity with the Cuban
people. We join other Member States in insistently
requesting the United States of America to put an end
to the economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed on Cuba. It is in that spirit that the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic voted in favour of
resolution 64/6.
Mr. Loayza Barea (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of Bolivia, I
should like to endorse the statements made by the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement, by the representative of the Sudan on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China, and by the
representative of Uruguay on behalf of the Common
Market of the South. I also wish to welcome Minister
Rodríguez Parilla.

09-57988

A/64/PV.27

Resolution 64/6, just adopted by the General
Assembly — the eighteenth such resolution to have
been consecutively adopted — unequivocally reflects
the international community’s explicit rejection of the
embargo imposed by the United States of America and,
above all, fully reaffirms the purposes and principles of
the
Charter,
such
as
sovereign
equality,
non-intervention and, especially, non-interference in
States’ internal affairs.
Once again, it is clear that there is a need to put
an end to the economic, commercial and financial
embargo, which results from a persistent unilateral
attitude that has no place in the twenty-first century. It
lacks all legitimacy, and its adverse consequences
continue to affect the Cuban people, who, with great
dignity, are growing much stronger in opposing an
obsolete measure that has proved to be a resounding
failure year after year.
The report of the Secretary-General (A/64/97)
sets out the actual and irrefutable facts of this reality. It
cites examples of the economic and social effects of
this aggressive embargo, whose extraterritoriality —
which blatantly subverts international norms — is
supported in laws such as the Helms-Burton Act, which
imposes sanctions on companies maintaining relations
with Cuba. That concept, which is absolutely null and
void, also entails a flagrant violation of human rights,
as well as a breach of the fundamental principles of
relations among sovereign States because it seeks to
control their political life.
That is why one cannot defend the assumption by
one State of the extraterritorial right to implement a
legal norm against another without its consent. The 18
resolutions adopted by the General Assembly rejecting
the blockade eliminate any possible doubt about that
fact, which has once again been resoundingly
reaffirmed by the international community today.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia believes that
the time has come to reverse this situation and that, in
the twenty-first century, we need a change in attitude
and behaviour that are contrary to and incompatible
with the principles of the United Nations Charter. In
that regard, we need to give sway to reason and
dialogue based on full respect for the economic and
political model that works best for the interests of the
Cuban people, in accordance with their identity and
unique characteristics. They should not have to bend to

09-57988

the external pressure or irregular policies that are
implemented against Cuba.
Why persist with such mistaken policies? If we
consider the regional context, the argument against
such conduct is powerful. The beginning of a new era
of commitment, interest and mutual respect invoked by
President Barack Obama is in line with the Nobel
Peace Prize that he was awarded. Why not, in the name
of peace, unconditionally revoke the blockade so that
we can overcome once and for all a vast humanitarian
crisis that contravenes international law? Why continue
to buck a trend recognized in numerous regional,
subregional and global forums, which seek cooperation
towards the optimal mutual benefit among peoples
through coordination, not subordination? For the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, that herald of change has
been ratified today. Cuba is forging onward. That is
why we voted in favour of resolution 64/6.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I would like to
remind speakers of time constraints and ask them to be
brief in their statements.
Mr. Christian (Ghana): Ghana aligns itself with
the statements delivered by the Permanent
Representative of the Sudan on behalf of the Group of
77 and China and by the Permanent Representative of
Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed by the United States on Cuba nearly 50 years
ago remains in place and has had negative
repercussions on the people of Cuba. That situation is
now exacerbated by the global financial, energy and
food crises. Despite the fact that the General Assembly
demanded an end to that embargo and extraterritorial
domination, the unilateral measures imposed 17 years
ago are still being implemented.
Ghana, in fulfilment of its commitment to the
purposes and principles enshrined in the United
Nations Charter and international law, has steadfastly
refrained from promulgating and applying those laws
whose extraterritorial effects adversely affect the
sovereignty of States, the legitimate interests of entities
or persons under their jurisdiction, and the freedom of
trade and navigation.
We welcome the decision of the current United
States Administration to reduce restrictions on travel to
Cuba and remittances by Cuban-Americans. It is our
considered view that such measures, constructive

25

A/64/PV.27

engagement and peaceful negotiations will eventually
promote
cooperation
and
good-neighbourliness
between the United States and Cuba. We commend the
Cuban people for their resilience and sense of unity
and purpose under difficult economic and social
conditions.
Mrs. Beck (Solomon Islands): At the outset, my
delegation acknowledges the presence of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Cuba. We take the floor to speak
in explanation of vote on resolution 64/6, just adopted
to end the economic, commercial and financial
embargo against Cuba.
The reason is simple: We all live in an
interrelated and interdependent global system. We need
each other — big countries and small, rich and poor —
to tackle our global problems. Against this backdrop,
my delegation is saddened to see the remnants of the
cold war continuing to this day. The decades-old
blockade is one of the longest-running campaigns,
spilling over into a new century and a new generation.
Today, there are now more than 100 Pacific
islands students studying medicine in Cuba. Despite
the economic, commercial and financial embargo, the
Cuban people in their hardship have sheltered, fed and
clothed our young people. Solomon Islands remains
thankful for that and commends the resilience of the
Cuban people. We also know that, without the
embargo, Cuba could do more for the developing
world.
The reference to those young people is to
underscore the argument that the United Nations
Charter is centred on its peoples and begins with “We
the peoples”. We, States Members of the United
Nations, must continue to give humanity a chance and
to work together to build bridges over the embargo. We
must do so in the name of peace, security and the
Cuban people’s right to development.
Solomon Islands calls for the unconditional
lifting of the blockade against the Cuban people and its
replacement with genuine dialogue and cooperation.
We make this call in conformity with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter and
international law, and as an opportunity for a new
beginning between Cuba and the United States.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): May I begin by expressing Syria’s support for
the statements delivered by the Permanent

26

Representative of the Sudan on behalf of the Group of
77 and China and by the Permanent Representative of
Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The right of States to exercise sovereignty over
their territory and to non-interference in their own
internal affairs is enshrined in the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter. Those
principles and their inviolability have been part of the
United Nations since its founding in 1945.
As the host country, the United States contributed
to the drafting of the United Nations Charter following
the Second World War, in which many States had had
the bitter experience of outside interference in their
internal affairs and of their sovereignty being
threatened both before and during the hostilities. The
United States, more than any other State, is therefore
supposed to respect the United Nations Charter.
The unilateral embargo imposed by the United
States against Cuba and new measures to tighten the
grip of the embargo run counter to the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter and of
international and international humanitarian law, and to
the rules and principles governing relations between
States, in particular the equal sovereignty of States,
non-interference in their internal affairs, and the
freedom of international trade and navigation.
The embargo is thus illegal and does not conform
to international standards of intergovernmental
relations. It poses an unprecedented challenge to
international law, as well as to the credibility of the
legality of United States policy. The 49-year-old
embargo is unprecedented in bilateral relations and
extraneous to international law. It has subjected Cuba
to numerous economic, social and political hardships
and increased the suffering of the Cuban people. It has
also placed the United States in direct confrontation
with the international community.
My delegation commends Cuba’s stated
commitment to constructive dialogue with the United
States with a view to resolving all the issues between
the two parties on the basis of the equal sovereignty of
States, mutual respect, non-interference in their
internal affairs, and respect for the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter and for the
principles of good-neighbourliness.
We believe that relations between countries,
especially between the United States and Cuba, should

09-57988

A/64/PV.27

be normalized to take the interests of the peoples of
both countries into account. We assert the right of
peoples to freely choose their own economic, political,
social and cultural systems.
The 187 votes in favour of resolution 64/6 at this
meeting reaffirm the fact that the overwhelming
majority of countries believe that the time has come to
lift the illegal embargo imposed on Cuba and underline
the need to respect national, political, economic and
social systems freely chosen by States in the light of
their own interests.
Coercive, unwarranted economic measures
imposed against other countries because of their
political orientation are unacceptable to the
international community. The international community
has repeatedly denounced the pursuit of unilateral
measures against Cuba, as well as efforts to broaden
the sanctions through the so-called Helms-Burton Act.
Pursuant to its mandate, the General Assembly
must take the necessary steps to put an end to the
embargo policies and sanctions imposed by the United
States on its neighbours and countries further afield.
We hope that the embargoes imposed on Cuba and
several other countries, including my own, Syria, will
come to an end. We hope that the voice of the
international
community
and
international
organizations and institutions will be heeded and
respected by the United States and its legislative
bodies.
In the light of the foregoing, Syria voted in
favour of resolution 64/6. Israel’s aberrant vote against
the resolution, which was adopted by the
overwhelming majority, was most revealing. It was
also an acknowledgment of the fact that Israel flouts
international law and the voice of the international
community, and that it represents an isolated minority.
Its position exacerbates the situation and makes it even
more difficult for the United States to revert to the
logic of dialogue in seeking to resolve disputes
between countries and to apply international law while
respecting the differing opinions.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I beseech
delegations to be brief.
Mr. Sinoussi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): The people of Cuba continue to suffer under
an unfair blockade that has lasted for more than four
decades and had serious impacts on all levels of

09-57988

society, including the most vulnerable, such as
children, women and the elderly. The blockade has also
sharply reduced Cuba’s capacity to import food and
goods that meet its medical and agricultural needs, and
has certainly hampered the country’s development
efforts.
The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya expresses great
concern and asserts that the imposition of such
unilateral and abusive economic measures by some
countries is extraterritorial in nature and explicitly
violates international law. We reiterate our rejection of
such measures and stress that embargoes are not the
way to resolve disputes between countries, but that, on
the contrary, they further complicate them.
As civilized nations, we repudiate violence in all
its forms and manifestations, including the imposition
of sanctions and blockades. Therefore, we must choose
the path of wisdom, rationality and constructive
dialogue to resolve our disputes. That is not difficult if
there is enough political will.
We believe that the United States Government’s
decision to ease its unilateral measures is cause for
optimism. We hope that it will introduce further
measures that take into account the humanitarian needs
of the Cuban people and international law and that it
will eventually lift the blockade once and for all.
Mr. Wetland (Norway): Norway considers the
United States embargo against Cuba to be a bilateral
issue. We support sanctions when they are adopted by
the international community through the United
Nations, but cannot support the exterritorial extension
of unilateral measures against another country.
Therefore, we cannot accept that unilateral measures
imposed by the United States should determine
Norway’s relations with Cuba.
Norway welcomes the recent decision of the
United States Government to lift restrictions on
remittances and family travel to Cuba and encourages
both the United States and Cuba to make further efforts
to improve their bilateral relationship.
While Norway is encouraged by some positive
developments in the area of human rights in Cuba, we
nevertheless remain concerned about their protection
and promotion. We reiterate our call on the
Government of Cuba to release all political prisoners
unconditionally. We also reiterate our call on the Cuban

27

A/64/PV.27

Government to grant freedom of expression and free
access to information.
Norway does not consider isolation to be an
appropriate response to the developments in Cuba.
More can be achieved through a constructive dialogue
with the Government of Cuba. Moving forward,
Norway intends to contribute to such a dialogue. For
these reasons, Norway voted in favour of today’s
resolution, as it has in previous years.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): Uganda aligns itself
with the statements made by the representative of the
Sudan on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and by
the representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
Uganda voted in favour of today’s resolution, as
it has consistently done in the past, as it opposes the
economic, commercial and financial embargo against
Cuba. The embargo is unjustified. It has had an adverse
impact on the people of Cuba for too long.
Furthermore, we do not support unilateral measures
with extraterritorial applications, which we believe are
inconsistent with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, international law and humanitarian
law.
Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): Benin
voted in favour of the resolution that has just been
adopted, because we believe in friendly relations
between States.
By their extraterritorial nature, the measures
imposed on Cuba 50 years ago in the context of the
cold war continue to hamper the country’s exercise of
its rights as a sovereign State on the international
stage. This Assembly is the right place to recall that
relations between States Members of the United
Nations are ruled by the Charter. The Cuban people ask
only that they be allowed to live in an atmosphere of
respect for their rights as a sovereign State and a
country of peace and justice, and that they be accorded
reciprocal advantages.
The current situation is a historic opportunity that
must be exploited to ensure that the blockade is lifted
in an amicable manner. The profound changes that
have taken place in the lives of the two nations should
lead to improved relations in line with the provisions
of the United Nations Charter. Benin appeals urgently
to the Governments of the United States and Cuba to
launch without delay a frank dialogue towards

28

normalizing relations between the two countries. We
welcome the measures taken by the Administration of
President Obama to ease restrictions on travel and
remittances from Cuban-Americans to their country of
origin. This is an important step towards the full
rapprochement desired by all.
The more there are among us demanding a
closure to this painful chapter of international
relations, the more our voices will be heard and the
more powerful our call for reconciliation between two
nations that are both friends of Benin. The people of
Benin truly hope to see the two countries shake hands,
repudiate the illogic of coercion and restart their
relationship on a healthier basis.
Mr. Yaroshevich (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
Today, the General Assembly has adopted its
eighteenth resolution on the necessity of ending the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States of America against Cuba. Once
again, some 99 per cent of Member States, including
the closest political partners of the United States, have
appealed to that country to lift the blockade, which has
been in place for half a century. We hope that this time
the voice of the international community will be
heeded in Washington, D.C.
The Belarusian delegation would like to quote
from the Special Declaration of the Heads of State and
Government of the Non-Aligned Countries, adopted at
their fifteenth summit conference in Sharm el-Sheik,
Egypt, in July 2009, on the issue of the United States
blockade against Cuba, which stresses that “under no
circumstances people should be deprived of their own
means of subsistence and development”.
The practice of imposing measures to apply
economic pressure on a country creates serious
obstacles to its achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals and contributes to international
instability. Speaking at the general debate of the
General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session (see
A/64/PV.10), the Foreign Minister of the Republic of
Belarus noted that it appears that, after a long hiatus,
the international community is starting to think in
terms of a single system of references, while political
leaders are beginning to speak in the same language of
common sense. In particular, this year the United
States declared its readiness to build partnerships and
resolve problems that no country can resolve in
isolation.

09-57988

A/64/PV.27

We call on the United States to act in keeping
with the constructive foreign policy course it itself has
outlined, to end the embargo and to lift restrictions that
impair the vital interests of the people of Cuba. We are
certain that, in the light of the global financial and
economic crisis, the arsenal of unilateral sanctions and
coercive measures is especially inappropriate.
Mr. Hamza (United Republic of Tanzania): I
thank you, Sir, for granting me this opportunity to
speak after the voting. My delegation aligns itself with
the statements made by the representatives of the
Sudan on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and of
Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The United Republic of Tanzania voted in favour
of the resolution to end the economic and financial
embargo on Cuba because we believe that current
political and economic realities in the world, and in
particular between Cuba and the United States, warrant
an end to the embargo. Both sides wish to enhance
democracy and good governance in order to promote
the economic and financial prosperity of their
countries. The embargo does not promote such goals.
Furthermore, Tanzania is convinced that if the
peoples of the two countries are to continue working
towards economic growth and prosperity, there must be
increased and varied contacts between them. This is
crucial, particularly in the areas of trade and people-topeople communication.
We also welcome the lifting of the restriction on
family travel imposed by the United States. This indeed
reflects a positive trend and an improved beginning of
the end of the embargo. We urge both sides to develop
confidence-building measures to set the ground for
future cooperation between Cuba and the United States
after the lifting of the embargo.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I call on the
representative of Cuba in exercise of the right of reply.
Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): I feel obliged to respond to the statements of
the United States, the European Union and Norway.
I must tell the European Union that Cuba in no
way recognizes its moral authority to dictate models or
give advice on democracy. I would like to remind the
Union of its complicity with the acts of torture that
took place in Guantánamo and Abu Ghraib, and I
reiterate that so long as it resorts to double standards
and hypocrisy, it will have no credibility whatsoever.

09-57988

Ms. Susan Rice, who unfortunately is not present
in the Hall right now, began by saying: “Here we go
again”. With those words, she acknowledged that she
was here to do what 17 United States representatives
have done in the past. I respect her opinions and I
acknowledge that her career is different from that of a
neo-conservative such as John Bolton, but she had the
sad task here of defending a blockade policy that
began, according to a classified memorandum of
6 April 1960, with the declared aim of causing the
hunger, despair and hopelessness of the Cuban people.
The only remains of the cold war, as has been
mentioned here, is the blockade itself. If the blockade
is lifted, that relic will disappear.
Cuba is a democracy that is closer to Lincoln’s
principles of a Government of the people, by the
people and for the people than the plutocracy or
Government of the rich currently running that country.
The United States Ambassador identified as dissidents
or political prisoners people who are in fact agents of a
foreign Power — mercenaries paid by the Government
of the United States. If she wants to talk about political
prisoners, the United States should release the five
anti-terrorist Cuban heroes subject to cruel, inhumane
and degrading treatment in American prisons.
Ambassador Rice said that we are abusing the
word “genocide” when we talk of the blockade. I quote
paragraphs (b) and (c) of article 2 of the 1948
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide. Paragraph (b) notes that genocide
is an act “[c]ausing serious bodily or mental harm to
members of the group”, referring to a group of human
beings, and paragraph (c) notes that genocide is an act
of “deliberately inflicting on the group conditions of
life calculated to bring about its physical destruction in
whole or in part”. I invite the United States Department
of State to study that Convention more closely.
The embargo against Cuba is a unilateral and
criminal policy and as such must be lifted unilaterally.
It is neither reasonable nor fair nor possible to expect
Cuba to move to make this criminal action against its
people, including its children and elderly, stop, with
the examples mentioned previously.
The United States should lift the embargo and lift
it now; first of all, because Cuba has no embargo
against the United States, nor does it occupy any part
of its territory with a military base, nor do we
discriminate against its citizens or companies.

29

A/64/PV.27

Secondly, it should lift the blockade because it is in the
best interests of the United States itself and it is the
will of the people of the United States.
There has been mention of the free movement of
information. Lift the prohibition of United States
citizens to travel freely to Cuba. Respect their right to
freedom of movement. Lift the embargo against Cuba
in the area of technology and information. Permit
better connectivity for our country. Export software
and technology to Cuba and there will be progress in
that field.
Ms. Rice mentioned constructive progress. It is
true that there have been some steps in the right
direction, but they have been strictly limited to
relations between Cubans living in the United States
with their country of origin, and they have nothing to
do with nor do they signify any flexibility with regard
to the embargo. They are steps in the right direction but
are very limited and insufficient.
The embargo is not a bilateral issue. That has
been clearly demonstrated by the many examples of its
extraterritorial application. Ms. Rice has reiterated the
proposal to continue with exchanges or dialogue
between the two countries. That idea was presented
many years ago by Commander-in-Chief Fidel Castro
and reiterated several times in public by President Raúl
Castro. If the United States wants to enter into a
dialogue, it should respond to the proposal of a
bilateral agenda presented by Cuba to that Government
on 17 July 2009.
At New York University in August, Ms. Susan
Rice said that the United States leads by example,
acknowledges mistakes, corrects course when
necessary, treats others with respect, and forges
strategies in partnership. In the same speech, she also
said that we are proving that the United States is
willing to listen, respect differences and consider new
ideas. I am very surprised that Ambassador Rice had to
say the complete opposite this morning.
The President (spoke in Arabic): As in previous
years, the General Assembly has just expressed its
opinion on the agenda item by adopting a resolution —
resolution 64/6 — that enjoys the support of the
overwhelming majority of Member States. In
proceeding in this fashion, the international community
has expressed its insistence on strict compliance with
the principles and purposes expressed in the Charter. I
therefore cherish the hope that the appeals addressed

30

here for implementation of this resolution will be heard
by all of us.
At a time when we see a will to spurn
confrontation and unilateralism, we see great support
for dialogue and multilateralism. We need to see the
positive aspects of that approach and put an end to
sanctions and embargoes and open up the way to peace,
development and cooperation. We hope that all parties
will find a solution to conflicts through cooperation
and dialogue.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 19?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President (spoke in Arabic): Before
adjourning, I invite the Assembly to take a decision on
an issue as follows. In a letter dated 27 October 2009
to all Permanent Representatives and Permanent
Observers to the United Nations, I forwarded a letter
dated 16 October 2009 from the President of the
Human Rights Council transmitting Council resolution
S-12/1 for the consideration of the Assembly at its
sixty-fourth session. I also attached two letters dated
26 and 27 October 2009 from the chargé d’affaires ad
interim of the Sudan, in his capacity as the Chairman
of the Group of Arab States, and the Permanent
Representative of Egypt, in his capacity as the
Chairman of the Coordinating Bureau of the
Non-Aligned Movement, with a request that the report
of the Human Rights Council on its twelfth special
session be considered directly in plenary meeting under
agenda item 64, entitled “Report of the Human Rights
Council”, during the first week of November.
Members will recall that at its 2nd plenary
meeting, on 18 September 2009, the Assembly decided,
inter alia, to allocate agenda item 64 to the plenary and
the Third Committee. If there is no objection, may I
take it that the Assembly decides to consider the report
of the Human Rights Council on its twelfth special
session, as contained in document A/64/53/Add.1, at a
plenary meeting, without setting a precedent?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 1.35 p.m.

09-57988
