General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

146

5. Urges Governments and international, regional and
interregional organizations and other intergovernmental
organizations to extend and intensify substantially their
assistance for the early implementation of the programme
of assistance to Cape Verde;
6. Invites the international community, in particular
donor countries, to take appropriate and urgent measures
to support the effective completion of the First National
Development Plan (I 982-1985) of Cape Verde;
7. Requests the organs, organizations, and bodies of
the United Nations system to continue and increase their
assistance to Cape Verde, to co-operate with the SecretaryGeneral in his efforts to mobilize resources for the implementation of the programme of assistance and to report
periodically to him on the measures they have taken and
the resources they have made available to help that country;
8. Calls upon the international community to continue
to contribute generously to all appeals for food and fodder
assistance made by the Government of Cape Verde, or on
its behalf by the specialized agencies and other competent
organizations of the United Nations system, to help it cope
with the critical situation in the country;
9. Once again draws the attention of the international
community to the special account established at United
Nations Headquarters by the Secretary-General, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 32/99, for the purpose of facilitating the channelling of contributions to
Cape Verde;
10. Invites the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, the United Nations Children's Fund, the
World Food Programme, the World Health Organization,
the United Nations Industrial Development Organization,
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the World Bank and the International Fund for
Agricultural Development to continue to consider,
through their governing bodies, the special needs of Cape
Verde and to report the decisions of those bodies to the
Secretary-General by 15 July 1985;
11. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for implementing the programme of development assistance to Cape Verde;
(b) To keep the situation in Cape Verde under constant
review, to apprise the Economic and Social Council, at its
second regular session of 1985, of the progress made in the
implementation of the present resolution and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its fortieth session;
(c) To arrange for a review of the economic situation in
Cape Verde and, in consultation with the Government of
Cape Verde, to make a substantive report on the implementation of the special programme of economic assistance for Cape Verde to be considered by the General
Assembly at its forty-first session.
IOJrd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/190. Assistance to Yemen
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 37/ 166 of I 7 December 1982
and 38/204 of 20 December 1983 and resolution 150 (VI)
98 A/39/380.
99 A/39/404.

of 2 July 1983 of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, 45
Fully aware of the grave devastation and substantial loss
of life and property caused by the earthquake that struck
large areas of Yemen on 12 December 1982,
( ·oncerned about the damage caused to infrastructure,
which has a far-reaching effect on the implementation of
the national development plan in that country,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 98
which outlines the reconstruction programme of the Government of Yemen. the cost of which is estimated at $620
million,
raking into account that the various phases of reconstruction have placed a strain on the Government of Yemen. largely exhausted the resources available and hindered
development plans,
Recognizing that Yemen, as one of the least developed
countries, is unable to bear the mounting burden of the
relief efforts and the reconstruction of the affected areas,
I. Appeals to all countries, especially the developed
countries, to continue to contribute generously to the relief
efforts and the reconstruction of the affected areas through
financial contributions and the provision of the construction materials and equipment necessary to restore infrastructure and basic services in the affected areas;
2. Requests the appropriate organizations and programmes of the United Nations system to maintain and
expand their programmes of assistance to Yemen;
3. Expresses its gratitude to the States, the international and regional organizations and the non-governmental organizations that have participated in the ongoing
efforts undertaken for the reconstruction of the affected
areas in Yemen;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to apprise the Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session of
1985, and the General Assembly, at its fortieth session, of
the progress made in the implementation of the present
resolution.
IOJrd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/191. Assistance to Madagascar
The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1984/
3 of 11 May 1984 on measures to be taken following the
cyclones and floods in Madagascar in December 1983 and
January and April 1984,
Recognizing that these climatic phenomena have
resulted in loss of life and the destruction of several towns
and have inflicted serious damage on the economic and
social infrastructures and on the agricultural, stock-farming. transport and industrial sectors,
( ·oncerned by the fact that the damage caused by these
natural disasters is hampering the development efforts of
Madagascar,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
assistance to Madagascar, 99 prepared pursuant to Economic and Social Council resolution 1984/3,
Having considered the special economic assistance programme prepared by the inter-agency mission which visited Madagascar from 24 May to 5 June I 984, 100
1IIO Ibid .. annex.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committf•e_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _1_47

Noting the efforts of the people and Government of
Madagascar to deal with the emergency situation and to
initiate a reconstruction and rehabilitation programme,
Noting also the emergency assistance provided by several States, international and regional organizations, specialized agencies and voluntary agencies,
Affirming the need for prompt and concerted international action to assist the people and Government of Madagascar in carrying out the reconstruction and rehabilitation of the stricken regions and sectors,
1. Expresses its gratitude to the States, programmes
and organizations of the United Nations system and intergovernmental, non-governmental and voluntary organizations which provided assistance to Madagascar during the
emergency;
2. Urges all States to participate generously through
bilateral or multilateral channels in projects and programmes for the reconstruction and rehabilitation of Madagascar;
3. Requests the international and regional organizations, the specialized agencies and voluntary agencies to
continue and increase their assistance in response to the
reconstruction, rehabilitation and development needs of
Madagascar;
4. Requests the programmes and organizations of the
United Nations system, in particular the United Nations
Development Programme, the World Bank, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural Development and the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization,
and all other international and regional financial institutions concerned, to give sympathetic and urgent consideration to requests for assistance submitted by the Government of Madagascar under its reconstruction, rehabilitation and development programmes;
5. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To take the necessary steps, in collaboration with
the programmes and organizations of the United Nations
system, to mobilize the resources needed for implementing
the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development programmes of Madagascar;
(b) To keep the question of assistance for the reconstruction and rehabilitation of Madagascar under constant
review;
6. Further requests the Secretary-General to apprise
the Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session of 1985, of the progress made in the implementation
of the present resolution and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/192. Assistance to Sierra Leone
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 37/158 of 17 December 1982
and 38/205 of 20 December 1983, in which it appealed to
all States, the specialized agencies and international development and financial institutions to provide all possible
assistance for the development of Sierra Leone,
Further recalling its resolution 3 7/ 133 of I 7 December
1982, in which it decided to include Sierra Leone in the
list of the least developed countries,
IOI A/39/392, sect. VIII.

Having considered the summary report of the SecretaryGeneral, 1° 1
Noting with concern that the economy of Sierra Leone is
being undermined by srvere scarcities of imported raw
materials and spare parts for industry, a drying-up of trade
and commercial credits, large commercial payment arrears
and unmitigated strains on government finances,
Concerned that unusually low rainfall in 1984 has seriously affected the food production of the country and considerably worsened its balance-of-payments position,
Noting that the Government of Sierra Leone, in co-operation with the United Nations Development Programme,
has initiated preparatory activities for a round-table of
partners in development of Sierra Leone, to be organized
with the assistance of the Programme early in 1985,
Reiterating the need for effective mobilization of international assistance, in order to implement fully the programme of development outlined in the report of the multi-agency mission, 102
I. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the steps he has taken to mobilize assistance for Sierra
Leone:
2. Urgently reiterates its appeal to the international
community, including the specialized agencies and other
organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, to
contribute generously, through bilateral or multilateral
channels. to the economic and social development of
Sierra Leone;
3. Urges all States and relevant United Nations
bodies - in particular the United Nations Development
Programme, the World Food Programme, the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization, the United
Nations Children's Fund, the World Health Organization,
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities - to provide all possible assistance to help the
Government of Sierra Leone meet the critical humanitarian needs of the population and to provide, as appropriate, food, medicines and essential equipment for hospitals
and schools;
4. Invites the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the World
Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
the World Bank and the International Fund for
Agricultural Development to bring to the attention of their
governing bodies, for their consideration, the special needs
of Sierra Leone and to report the decisions of those bodies
to the Secretary-General by 15 July 1985;
5. Appeals to all States and international organizations
to participate at a high level in the round-table of partners
in development of Sierra Leone to be held early in 1985,
and to contribute generously to the programme of action
that will be presented by the Government of Sierra Leone;
6. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to Sierra Leone;
(b) To apprise the Economic and Social Council, at its
second regular session of 1985, of the assistance granted to
Sierra Leone:
(c) To keep the situation regarding assistance to Sierra
Leone under review and 10 report to the General Assembly
IO.' ,\ .18 :i I I. annex
