S/2021/881

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 October 2021
Original: English

Situation in Abyei
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 8 of Security Council
resolution 2575 (2021), in which the Council requested to be informed of progress in
implementing the mandate of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA) as set out in paragraph 33 of resolution 2550 (2020). It covers the period
since the issuance of the previous report (S/2021/383) of the Secretary-General, from
16 April 2021 to 15 October 2021. The report provides updates on, inter alia, political
developments and intercommunal dynamics, the security and humanitarian situation;
developments affecting UNISFA support for the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism; and interactions with the Governments of the Sudan and
South Sudan in relation to the implementation of the mission’s mandate.

II. Abyei
Political developments
2.
During the reporting period, the Sudan and South Sudan continued to deepen
and strengthen their relations, as evidenced by the summit between the Prime Minister
of the Sudan, Abdalla Hamdok, and the President of South Sudan, Salva Kiir
Mayardit, which was held in Juba from 19 to 21 August 2021. The two leaders agreed,
inter alia, on the temporary reopening of border crossing corridors on 1 October 2021
and on the establishment of free trade zones along the border.
3.
On 8 and 9 September 2021, a meeting of the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism was held in Juba, with the Ministers of Defence of the Sudan and South
Sudan as Co-Chairs. It was the first meeting of the Mechanism since October 2020. In
its outcome document, the Joint Political and Security Mechanism requested South
Sudan to urgently address the restrictions to freedom of movement of the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism imposed by the local communities of Aweil
North County, and to reoperationalize team sites 11 and 12, from which the
UNISFA/Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism had been forced to
temporarily relocate in August 2021 (see sect. III below). The Joint Political and Security
Mechanism welcomed and adopted the recommendations contained in the UNISFA/Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism presentation and reiterated the need to
act on previous decisions, including the request that the respective presidencies consider
the matters referred to them following the meetings of the Joint Political a nd Security
Mechanism held in February and October 2020. Furthermore, the Joint Political and

21-14384 (E)

201021

*2114384*

S/2021/881

Security Mechanism urged the parties to resume the meetings of the Abyei Joint
Oversight Committee, which had not convened since late 2017.
4.
The mission leadership continued to engage with the Sudanese and South
Sudanese authorities. On 20 May 2021, the acting Head of Mission met, in Khartoum,
with the Assistant Undersecretary of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to discuss
operational challenges faced by the mission as well as the need to resume the meetings
of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee. In Juba, from 26 to 29 July 2021, he met
with the Minister of Defence, the Presidential Adviser for National Security, the
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation and the Co-Chair
of the Committee. He returned to Khartoum from 1 to 5 August 2021 and met with
the Sudanese Co-Chair of the Committee, but was unable to meet with other
interlocutors, despite earlier assurances by the Sudanese authoriti es that meetings
would be arranged. In both capitals, the acting Head of Mission discussed a series of
key measures that were required to support mandate implementation. In Khartoum,
the appointment of a civilian Deputy Head of Mission, the operationalizat ion of the
Athony airstrip, the issuance of visas for the three formed police units and the full
complement of individual police officers were discussed. No progress was made.
5.
From 16 to 21 September, the acting Head of Mission returned to Juba to seek
support from Government authorities to dissuade local community representatives in
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism Sector 1 from demanding the
withdrawal of UNISFA/Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism from
Gok Machar or impeding its freedom of movement. In spite of reassurances by the
authorities, there was no improvement and on 25 September 2021, the acting Head of
Mission informed the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan, and the
community of northern Aweil, that the Mechanism would be temporarily withdrawing
from Gok Machar.
6.
From 8 to 9 September 2021, the Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations, together with the Special Envoy for the Horn of Africa, visited Abyei to
appraise the situation on the ground. The Under-Secretary-General also visited Addis
Ababa, Khartoum and Juba. In Juba, he expressed concern about the situation in Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism Sector 1 (Gok Machar).
7.
From 9 to 15 August 2021, UNISFA provided logistical sup port for a field visit
to Abyei by the South Sudanese national committee on the final status of Abyei, which
was established by the President of South Sudan in May 2021. In a related
development, on 12 August 2021, the Chair of the Sovereign Council of the Sudan
appointed a 19-member national committee on Abyei, to be led by his deputy, General
Mohamed Hamdan Dagalo.
8.
On 9 August 2021, the Juba-appointed Chief Administrator in Abyei town
replaced the deputy Chief Administrator before the end of his term. A spokesperson
of the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-Army in Opposition (SPLM/A-IO)
criticized the decision to replace the deputy Chief Administrator, labelling it an act of
“unilateral and illegal formation of the Abyei government”. The Juba-appointed Chief
Administrator also replaced one of the traditional chiefs on 5 August 2021.
Conflict dynamics and the security situation
9.
The security situation in the Abyei Area was generally calm. The main threats
to security and the protection of civilians were the continued presence of armed
elements who contributed to the proliferation of arms and weapons inside the Abyei
Area. Those elements were responsible for most of the violent incidents.
10. A total of 46 arms-related incidents were recorded by the mission, of which 9
were direct attacks on civilians. The attacks resulted in 17 civilians being killed and
2/16

21-14384

S/2021/881

27 being seriously wounded. The worst attack against civilians during the reporting
period occurred on 16 May 2021 in Doungop, a Ngok Dinka village, allegedly
perpetrated by a Misseriya armed group. The attack resulted in 11 Ngok Dinka killed
and 8 seriously wounded. The armed group fled before the arrival of UNISFA troops.
Following a subsequent investigation, it appeared the attack was carried out in
revenge for the rustling of Misseriya cattle by Ngok Dinka community members
suspected of residing in Doungop. The attack exacerbated distrust between the two
communities in the Doungop area, as well as fear of future reprisal. In view of the
situation, UNISFA established a temporary operating base at Doungop to intensify
operations and deter potential further violence or attacks on civilians in the area.
11. The mission also recorded a violent intercommunity clash at the Amiet common
market on 30 May 2021, when an unidentified armed group attacked a public vehicle
travelling along the Abyei-Amiet main supply road. UNISFA troops immediately
responded, capturing three Misseriya armed men. A UNISFA joint investigation team
was established, which questioned the three suspects and handed them over to the
Joint Protection Committee at Amiet for detention.
12. Ngok Dinka representatives expressed dissatisfaction that the three suspects had
been handed over to the Joint Protection Committee at Amiet rather than to the
Community Protection Committee at Abyei town. Subsequently, on 5 June 2021,
during a hearing of the three suspects at the traditional court at the Amiet detention
centre, an unidentified armed group attacked the court, resulting in the escape of 14
prisoners and injuries to 7 Ngok Dinka and 10 Misseriya. Four UNISFA troops were
injured in the ensuing altercation between the two communities following the attack.
The three suspects were apprehended anew by UNISFA troops and handed over to the
Diffra Oil Police in the presence of the Executive Secretary of the Office of the
Khartoum-appointed Chief Administrator for the Abyei Area, a Sudanese national
monitor and Sudanese staff of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee.
13. In August and September 2021, three cattle rustling incidents resulted in the
death of two civilians. Most acts of cattle rustling have occurred in Rumamier,
Aweluum and Mabok in Sector South and are allegedly perpetrated by armed elements
who enter the Abyei Area from neighbouring Unity State, South Sudan. The latest
incident occurred on 3 September 2021, when a group of unidentified armed men
opened fire on the residence of the chief of Mabok village, killing his brother and
another man, allegedly to steal his cattle. The chief survived the attack.
14. Several measures have been put in place by UNISFA to improve security in the
Abyei Area and protect civilians. These include long-range patrols, which run
simultaneously with aerial patrols to monitor the situation in areas that are otherw ise
inaccessible; weekly Joint Security Committee meetings at the grass-roots level
between battalion commanders and community elders and youth; and routine
operational activities, such as aerial patrols and static checkpoints, which enable
improved situational awareness in Abyei. During the reporting period, some 54 snap
checkpoints were mounted. The gradual roll-out of the early-warning system designed
to improve information-gathering and response to early warning signs of tensions and
threats to civilians is under way.
15. Eight protests by youth in both communities, generally related to employment
opportunities with UNISFA and contractors, took place during the reporting period.
The protests have largely been peaceful but were accompanied by threats of a ttacks
or denial of movement of the contractors.
Freedom of movement violations
16. During the reporting period, UNISFA was denied freedom of movement on 20
occasions, 5 of which affected UNISFA personnel within the Abyei Area and 15 the
21-14384

3/16

S/2021/881

UNISFA military component in support of the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism. In three of the five occasions within the Abyei Area the main
gates of two UNISFA camps were blocked by former employees of UNISFA
contractors protesting salaries. Of the 15 occasions that affected the UNISFA/Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, 5 had to do with protestors blocking
the main entrance to the UNISFA/Mechanism headquarters in Kadugli over
recruitment practices and other employment issues. On five occasions,
UNISFA/Mechanism personnel en route to fetch water were denied passage to the
water source by persons blocking the access road. The incidents involved team site
21 (Tishwin) on 2 June and 7 July, headquarters in Kadugli on 13 June, and team sites
11 (Safahah/Kiir Adem) and 12 (Sumayah/War Abar) on 11 August. Demonstrations
blocked access to team sites 11 and 12 on 13 August. Patrols from team site 12 were
denied passage twice on 31 May and 3 June and a relocation convoy from the same
team site was temporarily blocked and delayed on 31 August 2021.
17. On 17 September, Misseriya members of the defunct Joint Community Peace
Committee blocked northbound UNISFA contractor trucks at the Amiet common
market, requesting that tolls be paid. On 19 September southbound contractor trucks
carrying rations were also blocked at the market, for the s ame reason.
Intercommunity dialogue
18. Developments during the reporting period were affected by the aftermath of the
peace conference held in Aweil in February 2021 between representatives of the
Misseriya and Ngok Dinka communities, during which div ergences of views could
not be bridged, as evidenced by their reluctance to sign a peace agreement. One of
the main disagreements revolved around the use of the term “Ajaira” to designate the
Misseriya. At present, as both parties are unwilling to shift po sitions on the issue of
Ajaira, UNISFA is preparing to host two-day talks with both communities separately
on 13 and 14 October for the Misseriya and on 18 and 19 October for the Ngok Dinka.
The separate talks are aimed at preparing the ground for a joint peace conference in
late October.
19. The agreement by the communities during the conference to reconvene a
restructured Joint Community Peace Committee and to engage in localized
premigration meetings in the three transhumance corridors was not kept. Tens ions
therefore rose in Abyei during the latter stages of the dry season, as herders were
desperate to reach pasture and water for their cattle. UNISFA regularly engaged with
the communities, urging them to allow transhumance to take place. It held separate
discussions with the traditional leaders on both sides and engaged the respective local
administrations urging their support in restarting the local peace process. The
engagements, as well as UNISFA efforts to facilitate access to water in some key
locations, resulted in limited migration activities and helped to de -escalate tensions.
UNISFA also engaged with Government representatives in Khartoum and Juba on the
issue of access to water during the dry season, requesting that they impress on their
respective communities the need for coordination.
20. On the wider grass-roots peace process, UNISFA continued to provide good
offices, through regular exchanges of views with representatives of both
administrations and communities, for the resumption of dialogue on the contentious
issues that pertain to the following and that have stalled the signing of an agreement
allowing for the resumption of peaceful coexistence between the communities: the
investigation into the assassination of the Ngok Dinka Paramount Chie f in May 2013;
joint investigations into the attacks in Kollom and Mabok in 2020; and the Misseriya
Ajaira clan identity.

4/16

21-14384

S/2021/881

Law and order issues
21. Efforts to support rule of law continued to be hampered by the absence of the
Abyei Police Service, and United Nations police remained the only entity providing
law and order in Abyei. Demonstrations, public disorder and other incidents were on
the rise, requiring an appropriate response by a police capacity. In Juba in July, and in
Khartoum in August, the UNISFA Police Commissioner reminded interlocutors of past
invitations to attend the road map exercise for the establishment of the Abyei Police
Service, of the need to agree on a memorandum of understanding on the handling and
handover of suspects and on delays in the issuance of visas for United Nations police.
22. The increase in population and commercial and housing construction in the three
main economic activity centres of Amiet, Abyei and Agok further exposed the area to
crime and related hazards, including outbreaks of fire. In addition, community
protection committees have been organized to cover Noong, Tajalei and Marial
Achack where new United Nations police team sites have been established.
Community protection committee operations will also soon cover Athony and Goli
once a United Nations police presence has been established there.
23. Despite the constraints stemming from the coronavirus disease (COVID -19)
pandemic, United Nations police continued to build and strengthen the law -and-order
maintenance capacity of the community protection committees and the Joint
Protection Committee at the Amiet common market. Training and workshops
continued to enhance the capacity of local traditional institutions and conflict resolution mechanisms.
24. A total of 1,395 general crimes were recorded, representing a decreas e of 286
cases compared with the previous reporting period. The decrease is attributable to an
enhanced community-oriented crime prevention strategy, including mentoring,
capacity-building and awareness campaigns implemented by United Nations police.
25. United Nations police conducted a total of 349 activities related to raising
awareness about crime. These included meetings with community protection committees
and campaigns against drug abuse, on environmental issues, on the prevention of fire
outbreaks and on raising awareness about sexual and gender-based violence. Eighty-four
of the campaigns were focused on crime prevention and reduction, and on road safety,
and 113 on raising awareness about sexual and gender-based violence, in order to
prevent and address abuse of the human rights of women and children.
26. Campaigns were conducted in Agok, Diffra, Abyei and Amiet, and two
workshops, comprising traditional leaders, community protection committees,
religious leaders, youth and local authorities to enhance local participation in matters
of law and order matters and to strengthen the capacities of the community protection
committees and Joint Protection Committee. Corrections officers serving with United
Nations police conducted 103 visits to the three detention facilities in Abyei, Agok
and the Amiet common market to provide advice on best practices and on compliance
with international human rights standards. The lack of modern detention facilities,
especially for women and juveniles, remained problematic for human rights
compliance.
27. United Nations police conducted 1,620 community interactive patrols to
mobilize members of the public to participate actively in peacebuilding initiatives. It
also conducted 509 joint patrols, 292 independent security observation patrols and
four air reconnaissance patrols in tandem with military observers and national
monitors from both the Sudan and South Sudan.

21-14384

5/16

S/2021/881

28. United Nations police trained 360 members of community protection
committees (279 men and 81 women) in basic policing and respect for human rights,
from the 31 community protection committees stations operating in Abyei.
29. United Nations police currently comprises 49 officers, of which 32 are men and
17 women. Entry visas were granted to 19 officers during the reporting period. Visas
for an additional 77 individual police officers are awaiting approval, with a view to
reaching the full complement of 148. No progress was made on the deployment of the
three formed police units. The Police Commissioner assumed her office in UNISFA
on 1 July and the Deputy Police Commissioner has started his onboarding process.
Humanitarian situation and recovery activities
30. The Abyei Area continued to face significant humanitarian challenges caused
by frequent outbreaks of violence, the presence of armed elements and population
displacements, coupled with economic difficulties in the Sudan and South Sudan.
Both countries continued to be affected by high rates of inflation, fiscal deficits,
undiversified economies dependent on the oil sector, reduced remittance flows and
the impact of climate change on the agricultural sector. The living conditions in the
communities were also impacted by limited or non-existing government services,
including inadequate provision of and access to basic public health, water sanitation
and hygiene, education, protection services, and farming and livestock technical
assistance. The COVID-19 pandemic added a further burden, having a significant
impacting on existing humanitarian operations. The limited presence of humanitarian
agencies, along with logistical hurdles, security concerns and political sensitivities,
were major challenges.
31. There continued to be inequality in the provision of humanitarian assistance
between the northern and southern parts of Abyei. Most of the estimated 92,000
vulnerable people, including seasonal migrants in the northern part of the Abyei Area,
have received limited or no lifesaving assistance. Recovery support, including
midterm and long-term economic opportunities also continued to be lacking in the
area. The activities of international non-governmental organizations (NGOs) – funded
directly by donors or through United Nations funds, programmes and specialized
agencies and covering all sectors, including education, health, nutrition, water,
sanitation and hygiene, protection, food security and livelihoods, shelter and non-food
items – continued to be conducted almost entirely in the central and southern parts of
Abyei. The aid community continued to support the ongoing peacebuilding and
livelihood programmes aimed at increasing access to basic services and the capacity
of government entities to maintain services and at improving livelihood opportunities.
32. Donors are looking for United Nations leadership in providing humanitarian
assistance in the entire Abyei Area. Humanitarian partners from the Sudan and South
Sudan are working closely to increase the resilience of affected agro -pastoralist,
nomadic communities, returnees and displaced people through tailored approaches
based on their specific humanitarian needs and vulnerabilities.
33. The main objective of humanitarian programming in the Abyei Area has been to
alleviate human suffering and decrease dependency on humanitarian assistance
among displaced people, returnees, seasonal migrants and local communities. The
wider humanitarian response in the area continued to make use of community -based
approaches to enhancing community integration and to implementing activities
related to health, nutrition, water, sanitation and hygiene, food security and
livelihoods, protection and education. Intercommunal conflict sensitivities were also
taken into consideration in the humanitarian response plan, as were flooding and
drought, the most significant natural hazards focused on in the plan.

6/16

21-14384

S/2021/881

34. Lack of solid baseline data for planning purposes remained a key challenge in
the area. The humanitarian community still relies on estimated planning figures in
providing humanitarian life-saving assistance to 220,000 vulnerable people in the
area, of whom 92,000 are living in or passing through the northern part of Abyei,
including Misseriya seasonal migrants and Falata nomads who had left the area in
early May 2021 and were expected to return towards the end of the reporting period.
35. During the reporting period, 103,000 vulnerable people benefited from food
assistance-related interventions, including the supplementary feeding programme in
the central and southern sectors of Abyei. Efforts to support community livelihood
activities continued and more than 60,000 livestock were vaccinated, a nd 15,000
treated, benefiting more than 5,000 households. Furthermore, some 3,000 households
were supported with livelihood kits, including agricultural and fishing kits. In
coordination with the local authorities and communities, training activities,
equipment, livelihoods, income generation, small-scale infrastructures and basic
animal health services and activities were provided to the targeted communities.
36. A total of 18 primary and 2 secondary health-care facilities throughout the Abyei
Area remained operational. Humanitarian organizations provided routine
immunizations and essential medicines, benefiting more than 205,000 people. Mobile
health clinics provided primary health services to the communities in remote areas.
The Ameth-Bek referral hospital in Abyei town continued to be used primarily for
activities related to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Abyei community, humanitarian
organizations and UNISFA coordinated their COVID-19 activities in the Abyei Area,
including on COVID-19 vaccinations. Nutrition screening and support for patients
with moderate and acute malnutrition reached a monthly average of 10,500 children
under 5 years of age, as well as pregnant and lactating women in the Abyei Area.
37. A total of 18,000 vulnerable people benefited from 17 sanitation, water supply
and multipurpose solar-powered water infrastructure projects for domestic users and
farmers, and livestock projects throughout the area. A food-for-education programme
supported meals for 22,000 schoolchildren in 30 primary and secondary schools in
southern and central Abyei. The Education on Air activity, initiated in response to the
pandemic, continued to be broadcast through Abyei FM radio for pupils. Protection, in
particular of children, and against gender-based violence, remained the key challenge
because of limited resources and capacities on the ground. The aid community
reactivated the protection working group and its subgroups concerning sexual and
gender-based violence, child protection and mine action, in order to addr ess protection
needs in a more coordinated manner jointly with the community and UNISFA.
38. UNISFA successfully completed six out of seven quick-impact projects for
fiscal year 2020/21 in the southern part of Abyei, while completion of the majority of
such projects (9 out of 10) in northern Abyei were still pending. Work is expected to
start on the partially completed quick-impact projects as soon as their locations
become accessible at the end of the rainy season. Concurrently, requisite planning and
preparations in consultation with local authorities, traditional leaders, United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes and NGOs are under way for the quick -impact
projects planned for fiscal year 2021/22.
Women and peace and security
39. UNISFA continued its efforts to promote women’s rights to equal participation,
especially in decision-making spaces, which is known to contribute to longer lasting
peace. It conducted advocacy with local administrations in both the Misseriya and
Ngok Dinka communities. Other engagements involved strengthening collaboration
with women civil society groups and their networks as well as local non -governmental
organizations working on women’s rights, including for women with disabilities.
21-14384

7/16

S/2021/881

40. In southern Abyei, the local authorities continued to demonstrate a willingness
to strengthen women’s participation in the community. After consultations with the
Deputy Chief Administrator, the Gender Adviser for the local administration and the
Paramount Chief of the Ngok Dinka, the authorities reinforced their willingness to
expand women’s political space on peace and security in Abyei (see para. 42 below).
41. During the reporting period, the Juba-appointed Administrator of the Abyei Area
made changes in his ministerial and advisory teams, appointing only 3 women out of
13 ministers and advisers and none in his team of commissioners. Compared with the
previous administration, even though the number of women has not been reduced, the
fact that a man was favoured over the woman serving as Min ister of Health meant
that there was only one woman at the ministerial level since the other two had
advisory positions. UNISFA engaged the local administrators, including the Gender
Adviser for the local administration, to ensure that political gains for women in Abyei
were not reversed and advocated for the inclusion of more women in the local
administration.
42. At a meeting with UNISFA on 14 September 2021, the Paramount Chief
commended the mission for its collaboration with community-based organizations
and civil society organizations on gender issues and pledged his support to ensure
that women were incorporated into all the structures of the local traditional
leadership. The chieftaincy is in the process of revising the traditional laws of the
Ngok Dinka and has pledged to outlaw harmful practices such as early marriages and
gender-based violence. The Deputy Chief Administrator and Head of the Department
of Local Government and Law Enforcement Agencies for the Abyei Area, who was
appointed in August, is receptive to participating in the mission’s planned activities
on women and peace and security.
43. The mission continued to support for local communities to prevent and respond
to sexual and gender-based violence through awareness-raising activities, advocacy,
training and capacity-building, as well as engagement with local leaders on the
eradication of harmful traditional practices such as child marriage.
44. During the period under review, 13 cases of sexual and gender-based violence and
one case of trafficking entailing sexual and gender-based violence were reported
involving 14 survivors, eight of whom are minors: five aged 7, 11, 13, 14 and 15 years
and three aged 17 years. One of the cases involved the gang rape of a 15-year-old girl
by three men. Two of the alleged perpetrators were arrested and charged in court. The
general profile of the perpetrators in all the reported cases was of unarmed adult men,
except for one incident, involving the rape of a 26-year-old woman by an identified
armed man. The incident followed an attack on a village in Agok area of Abyei.
45. A total of 164 awareness-raising activities on the prevention of and response to
sexual and gender-based violence, including in the context of COVID-19, as well as
the rights of women and children, and on HIV/AIDS were conducted across the Abyei
Area. Furthermore, a total of seven training courses on the prevention of sexual and
gender-based violence, on promoting the rights of women and children, and on
income-generation activities for widows were conducted by UNISFA for communities
in Agok, Tajalei and Abyei. A total of 248 participants attended, of whom 132 were
women, 71 men, 39 girls and 6 boys.
Operations of the Mine Action Service
46. The Mine Action Service initially continued its full deployment to the
headquarters of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, sect or
headquarters and all active team sites, fulfilling all requests for support from the
mission and enabling 59 ground monitoring mechanism missions. Following the
forced relocation of UNISFA on 19 August 2021 from the two team sites in Kiir Adem
8/16

21-14384

S/2021/881

and War Abar to Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism Sector 1
headquarters in Gok Machar, the Mine Action Service removed all equipment from
the two team sites by 1 September 2021.
47. The Mine Action Service assessed 445,108 m 2 of land in the Abyei Area as safe
for use by UNISFA, humanitarian actors and the local population. Areas assessed
included UNISFA temporary operating bases and patrol routes to enhance Force
mobility in accordance with the dry season activity plan, one suspected landmine contaminated area and a new graveyard site in Abyei town as requested by the local
authorities. As a result of those activities, seven explosive remnants of war and two
mines (one anti-personnel and one anti-tank) were recovered and subsequently
destroyed in controlled demolitions.
48. As part of weapons and ammunition management, the Mine Action Service
destroyed 13 weapons and 656 rounds of small arms ammunition confiscated by
UNISFA troops.
49. The Mine Action Service intensified its activities related to e xplosive ordnance
risk education, aimed primarily at children and pastoralists, following two accidents
in Agok and Diffra areas that had resulted in injuries and fatalities. A total of 397
sessions were delivered, reaching 12,193 men, women, boys and girl s living in the
Abyei Area. The activities were conducted through short, customized dramatizations.
The children and pastoralists were also provided related comic books and masks to
create awareness of explosive remnants of war as well as COVID -19 mitigation
measures. In addition, the Mine Action Service recruited six community liaison
officers in Agok, Abyei and Diffra in order to improve community interaction and
prepared a radio drama in three languages (English, Dinka and Arabic), which was
broadcast on the local radio in Agok in June. The majority (89.2 per cent) of the
beneficiaries of the activities managed to distinguish between safe and unsafe
behaviour. Eighteen awareness-raising sessions on explosive remnants of war were
also delivered as part of UNISFA induction training sessions, enhancing the
awareness of 206 UNISFA military and civilian personnel (183 men and 23 women).

III. Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism:
progress on benchmarks
50. The situation in the area of responsibility of the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism was generally calm except in Sector 1. On 12 June 2021,
chiefs and youth of Aweil North County demanded the closure of team sites 11
(Safahah/Kiir Adem) and 12 (Sumayah/War Abar), alleging in security, lack of social
amenities, damage to local roads and biased patrolling (undertaken on the South
Sudanese side only). Based on those claims, security clearances for ground
monitoring missions were denied and patrols were stopped. On 28 and 29 June 2021,
the Chief of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism visited the
communities to engage with them on the UNISFA/Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism mandate, to listen to their concerns and assure them of
UNISFA/Mechanism support. The communities again submitted letters to the Chief
in which they demanded that team sites 11 and 12 be closed. Thereafter, clearances
for both ground monitoring missions and aerial monitoring missions were rejected
and the operations stopped. The mission formally requested the intervention of the
Government of South Sudan on the matter.
51. A delegation led by the acting Head of Mission visited Juba from 26 to 29 July
2021 to discuss the challenges in UNISFA/Joint Border Verification and Monitor ing
Mechanism Sector 1, among other issues. During the reporting period, those
challenges included increased pressure by local communities for the closure of team
21-14384

9/16

S/2021/881

sites 11 and 12 by refusing the resupply of life-saving supplies and logistics, including
rations, water, fuel and medicines. From 9 to 12 August 2021, the Chief of the
Mechanism visited Juba to impress upon the Government the need to intervene and
calm the tensions in Sector 1. However, he was asked to return and engage directly
with the Governor of Bahr el-Ghazal State. On 11 August 2021, while the Chief was
still in Juba, local chiefs and youth staged demonstrations at the Sector 1 headquarters
in Gok Machar and at team site 11. The demonstrations at the Sector 1 headquarters,
which included women and children, turned violent. The protesters breached the
perimeter fence at four locations, forcibly entering the camp, and vandalized and
looted United Nations equipment. Fortunately, there were no fatalities. Following that
violent attack, all civilian staff, staff officers and United Nations military observers
were evacuated to Abyei later in the day and during the next day. All national monitors
were also evacuated to Abyei. On 13 August 2021, community members of War Abar
staged a peaceful demonstration in front of team site 12, demanding the removal of
the team site. A total of seven notes verbales have been addressed to the Government
of South Sudan, with no response. Similarly, the Government of the Sudan has also
been kept abreast of the situation through notes verbales, again with no response.
52. With the increased threat to life and United Nations property, and in the absence
of clear support from the Government of South Sudan, UNISFA relocated troops from
team sites to Gok Machar on 26 and 31 August 2021, respectively. On 31 August
2021, the UNISFA/Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism received a
letter from local chiefs and youth of Aweil North County in which they demanded the
closure of Sector 1 headquarters (Gok Machar) within 48 hours. In the following days,
the local government repeatedly refused to grant landing clearance for an urgently
required medical evacuation by helicopter of five Force Protection Unit personnel
from Gok Machar to Abyei, as well as for delivery of foo d rations and essential
medical supplies to Gok Machar.
53. On 8 September 2021, the issue was brought to the attention of the Joint Political
and Security Mechanism, which was convening in Juba. UNISFA urged the
Government of South Sudan to engage the local government and community in the area
to resolve the issue of the medical evacuation of peacekeeping personnel and of
resupplies to Sector 1 headquarters, as well as to ensure the redeployment of personnel
to team sites 11 and 12. Despite assurances made at the meeting, and later to the Special
Envoy for the Horn of Africa, flight landings continued to be denied, and a member of
the Force Protection Unit, for whom Medevac had been denied, died on 14 September
in Gok Machar without having received access to appropriate medical care. Despite
political engagement by the Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations in Juba on
10 September, and by others, the situation did not improve. On 25 September, UNISFA
informed the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan that it would temporarily
relocate its troops from Gok Machar to Abyei until the threats were reduced. On
27 September, UNISFA finally received clearance to land for the limited purpose of
allowing technicians to prepare the Gok Machar site for closure and for the temporary
relocation of all troops and equipment. On 7 October, the first convoy departed Gok
Machar for Abyei, with 221 troops remaining as at 10 October 2021.
54. With regard to team site 21 in Tishwin, the decision taken in October 2020 by
the Joint Political and Security Mechanism to relocate the team site from its current
temporary location to a permanent site remains unimplemented. A request by the
UNISFA/Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism for the national
monitors of the Sudanese Armed Forces and the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces
to carry out reconnaissance of a new location for the team site alongside military
observers from the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism remains
unanswered by the Government of South Sudan. The Chief of the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism has reported to the Co -Chairs of the Joint
10/16

21-14384

S/2021/881

Political and Security Mechanism about the lack of commitment on the part of the
South Sudan People’s Defence Forces to the relocation.
55. Despite these challenges, most of the planned ground and aerial monitoring
missions were conducted at the various team sites as planned except in Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism Sector 1. There were no border demarcation
activities during the reporting period except for a meeting of the Joint Border
Commission held in Khartoum from 14 to 17 June 2021. Since January 2021, the 14
Mile Area ad hoc Committee has not convened.
56. All requested aerial and ground monitoring missions were appro ved by the
Government of the Sudan. However, approvals for the security clearance of those
missions were met with challenges from South Sudan. Clearances were completely
stopped in June 2021 and responsibility for approvals was transferred to the local
communities in Sector 1. Freedom of movement within the Safe Demilitarized Border
Zone was guaranteed for the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
except in Sector 1. The general area of team site 22, Abu Qussa/Wunkur, was still
under the control of elements of SPLM/A-IO, despite a call by the Joint Political and
Security Mechanism for its immediate withdrawal. As a result, South Sudan national
monitors have not yet been deployed to Abu Qussa/Wunkur.
57. Concerning the seven benchmarks set out in Security Council resolutions 2550
(2020) and 2575 (2021), progress has been modest. Standing clearance for all air and
ground patrols was granted except in Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism Sector 1 where security clearances for aerial and ground monitoring
missions and for logistics and/or administrative movements were denied. Regarding
the operationalization of team site 22 in Abu Qussa/Wunkur, the team site is
established but not yet operational, as South Sudan has yet to deploy national
monitors owing to the presence of SPLM/A-IO in the area.
58. According to benchmark 3, the Joint Political and Security Mechanism was
required to meet twice during the reporting period. A meeting was held in Juba on
8 and 9 September 2021, at which the parties committed to redeploying forces outside
of the Abyei Area immediately and asked UNISFA to report compliance to the Abyei
Joint Oversight Committee on a monthly basis. The Mechanism also directed the
14 Mile Area ad hoc Committee to continue its work until the completion of its
mission and to facilitate resumption of Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism activities in Sector 1. The Joint Political and Security Mechanism agreed
to ensure the withdrawal of SPLA/M-IO from the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone by
engaging the parties. The two countries agreed on a fourth commitment, which was
to open border crossing corridors starting from 1 October 2021, without prejudice to
existing agreements, mutual understanding, relevant international law principles and
the work of the Joint Border Commission and the Joint Demarcation Committee. The
Joint Political and Security Mechanism also urged the Government of South Sudan to
address the situation in team sites 11, 12 and Gok Machar, and to make all necessary
efforts to deploy national monitors in team site 22 (Abu Qussa/Wunkur).
59. A 14 Mile Area ad hoc Committee meeting was not conducted during the
reporting period. However, in its most recent report, the Committee recommended
that the Chief of Defence Force of the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces issue the
necessary orders for the withdrawal of their units from within the 14 Mil e Area. So
far, UNISFA has not been notified by the parties of any withdrawals of their elements
and equipment.
60. The reopening of border crossing corridors (benchmark 5) has been achieved,
including the reopening of the Meiram-Aweil crossing, which was temporarily closed
owing to the COVID-19 pandemic. Of the 10 corridors, 4 are currently open and
functioning: Buram-El Murra, Higlig-Bentiu, Kosti-Renk and Meiram-Aweil. Only
21-14384

11/16

S/2021/881

the Meiram-Aweil crossing is manned. With regard to the border demarcation
(benchmark 6), no border demarcation activities were conducted during the reporting
period except for the meeting of the Joint Border Commission held in Khartoum from
14 to 17 June 2021.
61. In accordance with benchmark 7, except at team Site 22 (Abu Qussa/Wunku r),
the parties have deployed national monitors to participate in Joint Border Verification
and Monitoring Mechanism operational activities. However, the attack of 11 August
and the repeated protests at team sites 11 and 12 necessitated the withdrawal of a ll
national monitors from Sector 1 to Abyei and the subsequent closure of the team sites.

IV. Administrative aspects and mission support
62. As at 1 September 2021, the number of civilian staff stood at 152 international
staff, 34 United Nations Volunteers and 83 national staff, against an authorized total
of 174 international staff, 36 United Nations Volunteers and 90 national staff. The
vacancy rate stood at 12.64 per cent for international staff and 6.02 per cent for
national staff.
63. UNISFA continued to take steps to increase the number of women in the
mission, reaching out to female candidates to apply for all vacancies; all qualified
female applicants were shortlisted and interviewed. Living conditions, opportunities
for promotion, training and welfare concerns were rigorously addressed in order to
attract and retain female staff.
64. As at 15 September 2021, the UNISFA military component stood at 3,515
personnel, comprising 3,105 men and 410 women (3,238 troops, 152 military observers
and 125 staff officers). With regard to the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism, the UNISFA military component stood at 571 personnel, comprising 475
men and 96 women (537 troops, 23 military observers and 11 staff officers).
65. The police component strength stood at 49 officers – 32 men (65.3 per cent) and
17 women (34.7 per cent) – against an authorized total of 640 police personnel (148
individual police officers and 492 formed police unit personnel). This low rate of
deployment is attributed to the non-issuance of visas, in particular for the formed
police unit personnel. Female individual police officers represent 34.7 per cent of all
individual police officers, roughly the same figure as on 1 March 2021, when they
represented 34 per cent. Women account for 22 per cent of the civilian component
and, in the military component, represent 11.7 per cent of all military peacekeepers.
66. During the reporting period, from 1 May to 10 October 2021, the Government of
the Sudan issued 316 visas for UNISFA personnel, while 128 visas remained pending (77
for police personnel, 26 for contractors, 8 for visitors, 6 for international staff, 5 for
military personnel, 4 for consultants and 2 for Mine Action Service staff and contractors).
67. Company operating bases remained deployed at Farouk, Diffra, Goli and Todach
(Sector North); Dokura/Rumajak, Nong and Abyei (Sector Centre); and Marial
Achak, Athony, Banton, Tejalei and Agok (Sector South). Temporary operating bases
for the dry season deployment were established at Dokura 2 (Sector Centre);
Rumamier and Leu (Sector South); and Um Khariet (North Sector).
68. UNISFA supported four of the Mechanism’s team sites until it had to forcibly
relocate team site 11 (Kiir Adem/Safahah) and team site 12 (Sumayah/War Abar ) in
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism Sector 1 (Gok Machar)
following demonstrations by local community representatives and pressure from local
authorities to vacate the area. UNISFA retrieved most of the items from the two team
sites and they are therefore currently no longer operational. In Sector 2 (Kadugli),
team site 21 (Tishwin) and team site 22 in Abu Qussa/Wunkur continued to be
12/16

21-14384

S/2021/881

operational. The mission has, however, faced local opposition at both of these sites,
resulting in contractor trucks and drivers being blocked from accessing team site 21,
and drivers being detained with their trucks at a military camp while attempting to
access team site 22.
69. Infrastructure and environmental installations continued to be upgraded at all
UNISFA camps, with a view to improving troop accommodations that were no longer fit
for purpose, putting in place flood mitigation measures and constructing a new heliport,
which became operational on 3 June 2021. The new level II hospital was completed.
70. The mission continued to face shortages of laterite, gravel and other materials,
and its contractors were often subjected to delayed road clearances from the Sudan,
leading to the suspension of essential infrastructure works, including those in support
of Force mobility.
71. A process is currently under way for UNISFA to source a third fixed -wing longterm air charter supporting medical evacuations, passenger operations and cargo on the
northern route to Khartoum. In accordance with the previous report o f the SecretaryGeneral, the aircraft is expected to be operational by January 2022. Following the two
military helicopter accidents in February and May 2019 and the subsequent suspension
of their operations and repatriation of the associated contingent, t he mission continued
to operate with civilian helicopters only. However, a military aviation unit, including
two helicopters, has now been redeployed from the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur to Abyei. Efforts remain under way to mak e the unit
operational, and an update will be provided in the next report.
Culture of performance
72. UNISFA piloted a project on field remote infrastructure management, which
provides remote monitoring of and data-gathering on mission resources such as power
generators and wastewater treatment plants. It also involves installing power and
water meters in individual accommodations to incentivize responsible user behaviour.
The system is a key enabler for introducing the “smart camp” concept through the
wide use of automation and remote control. To fully implement this concept, UNISFA
is finalizing its work in the following main areas: (a) automation of reporting,
allowing for the real-time verification of assets, power and water usage, and waste
management; (b) predictive analysis, generating alerts to prevent the failure of critical
infrastructure such as generators or the wastewater treatment plant; (c) automation of
generator refuelling and the refilling of main feeder tanks, and the automation of
irrigation using recycled wastewater, which improves the survival rate of saplings for
carbon offsetting; and (d) monitoring and metering of well-water abstraction. The
smart camp concept is to be fully rolled out in a military camp in the vicinity of
UNISFA Headquarters in the coming months, to be used as a model for all UNISFA
camps. Managers are increasing their use of productivity data from various systems
to devise workplans and improve performance.
Response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
73. Since the UNISFA COVID-19 task force charted a contingency plan and a medical
plan to respond to the pandemic, UNISFA leadership has been strictly overseeing
implementation of preventive measures. After a period of six weeks without any new
cases between early August and mid-September, 15 new cases of COVID-19 were
detected over a two-week period beginning 20 September, which, as at 4 October,
brought to 140 the total number of positive cases detected since the beginning of 2021.
The mission carried out four medical evacuations of severe/critical cases of COVID -19
for treatment outside the mission (three civilians were taken to Nairobi and a member
of a contingent was taken to Addis Ababa). Fortunately, all survived.
21-14384

13/16

S/2021/881

74. During the reporting period, the focus of the mission shifted towards
vaccination, while maintaining strict compliance with preventive measures. A
vaccination deployment plan was developed and UNISFA established a total of 20
vaccination centres, including 12 fixed and 8 outreach centres. A total of 9,000 doses
of COVID-19 vaccine were received in two batches: the first batch of 6,000 do ses
arrived at the mission on 29 April 2021; the second consignment of 3,000 doses was
received on 23 June 2021. The vaccination campaign was triggered on 6 May and
formally closed on 23 August 2021. A total of 4,951 individuals were fully vaccinated.
Conduct and discipline
75. One allegation of fraud and no new allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse
were recorded during the reporting period. The mission’s Conduct and Discipline Team
continued to implement its three-pronged strategy of prevention, enforcement and
remedial action to prevent misconduct. Efforts to prevent sexual exploitation and abuse
continued through induction training and online and refresher training for all categories
of UNISFA personnel. Risk assessments and mitigation measures were also updated in
UNISFA areas of operation with the relevant stakeholders. The Conduct and Discipline
Team continued its outreach activities and information campaigns on the prevention of
sexual exploitation and abuse and on assistance to victims through the COVID-19 task
force, United Nations funds, programmes and specialized agencies, protection from
sexual abuse and exploitation focal points and other platforms, with a view to
conducting awareness-raising for the local population and UNISFA.

V. Financial aspects
76. By its resolution 2575 (2021) of 11 May 2021, the Security Council extended
the mandate of UNISFA until 15 November 2021. The General Assembly, by its
resolution 75/297 of 30 June 2021, appropriated the amount of $260.4 million for the
maintenance of the Force for the period from 1 July 2021 to 30 June 2022. As at
20 September 2021, unpaid assessed contributions to the special acc ount for UNISFA
amounted to $95.7 million. The total outstanding assessed contributions for all
peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to $3,273.1 million. Reimbursement
of troop costs and of the costs of contingent-owned equipment and self-sustainment
has been made for the period up to 30 June 2021, in accordance with the quarterly
payment schedule. Should the Security Council decide to extend the mandate of
UNISFA beyond 15 November 2021, the cost of maintaining the mission would be
limited to the amounts approved by the General Assembly.

VI. Observations and recommendations
77. The warming of relations between the Sudan and South Sudan and the
establishment by both countries of national committees on the Abyei issue constitute
positive steps towards the possible identification of sustainable options for the final
status of Abyei and the demarcation of the border. There is renewed interest in seeking
a political settlement for the area among various stakeholders.
78. While I welcome the meeting of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism in
Juba on 8 and 9 September 2021, I regret to note that the implementation of previous
decisions of that body remains pending, and I urge the parties to ensure follow -up,
including on the decisions referred to the respective presidencies. Those previous
decisions include not only the issue of protection of the Diffra oilfields, but also the
formation of a joint team to investigate the attacks that occurred in Nainai and Kolom
on 19 and 22 January 2020, respectively. I am concerned that, despite the clear
14/16

21-14384

S/2021/881

direction expressed by the Mechanism, the parties were not able to organize a meeting
of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee during the reporting period. The Committee
has not convened since November 2017.
79. I regret that, during the reporting period, UNISFA and its component in support
of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism faced new challenges in
the implementation of their mandate, in particular in the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism Sector 1 in South Sudan. The repeated refusal by local
government representatives of Aweil North County to authorize UNISFA to operate
an urgent medical evacuation out of Gok Machar is unacceptable. I am deeply
dismayed by the loss of a UNISFA peacekeeper on 14 September 2021 in Gok Machar
and I express my deepest condolences to the Government of Ethiopia and to the family
of the deceased. The repeated refusal to allow landing rights constitutes a serious
violation of the status-of-forces agreement between UNISFA and the Government of
South Sudan. I appeal to South Sudan to address the situation as a matter of urgency
and to allow the immediate re-operationalization of team sites 11 and 12 of the
Mechanism. As the improved relations between Sudan and South Sudan create a
conducive environment for the start of the border demarcation process, any
impediments to the implementation of the Mechanism mandate should be avoided.
80. I remain deeply concerned that no progress has been ma de regarding the
operationalization of the Athony airstrip and the issuance of visas for the three formed
police units and additional 98 individual police officers. I also urge the Sudanese and
South Sudanese authorities to permit the deployment of human r ights expertise to
UNISFA, in accordance with the relevant Security Council resolutions.
81. The rapprochement between the two Governments has yet to be felt in Abyei, where
the relations between the Misseriya and Ngok Dinka communities remain tense. The
acceptance by both communities of a UNISFA initiative to hold separate meetings with
each community, to be followed by a meeting of Misseriya and Ngok Dinka in late
October, is encouraging. To further the intercommunity dialogue, I call for enhanced
engagement between the parties in the local peace process, including on the issue of the
grazing entitlements of the pastoralists and other issues of mutual concern. I also
encourage the continuation of efforts to advocate for right of women to equal participation
as well as progress in the inclusion of youth and women in local peace dialogues.
82. I encourage the African Union to enhance its efforts to promote political
mediation, including through possible support to the parties in resuming the meeti ngs
of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee. UNISFA has requested the support of the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel in the holding of an Abyei Joint
Oversight Committee meeting at the end of October 2021. I wish to reiterate that the
United Nations stands ready to support the organization of such meetings. I further
echo an earlier request of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union that
the African Union Commission and the African Union High -level Implementation
Panel develop modalities for releasing the report on the killing of Chief Kuol Deng
Kuol of the Ngok Dinka.
83. As the Security Council considers the renewal of the mandate of UNISFA, together
with the recommendations of the strategic review I submitted to the Council on
17 September 2021, I recommend an extension of the mission’s mandate by six months.
84. In conclusion, I wish to extend my gratitude and appreciation to the acting Head
of Mission/Force Commander of UNISFA, Major General Kefyalew Amde Te ssema,
and all UNISFA personnel for their tireless efforts to maintain peace and security,
often under very difficult conditions. I also commend my Special Envoy for the Horn
of Africa, Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, the African Union, including the African Union
High-level Implementation Panel, and the Government of Ethiopia for their active
engagement in support of the stabilization of the Abyei Area.
21-14384

15/16

S/2021/881

16/16

21-14384
