S/PRST/2001/35

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 November 2001
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4417th meeting of the Security Council, held on 15 November 2001, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Burundi”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council expresses its deep gratitude to Madiba Nelson
Mandela of South Africa for his dedicated service to the people of Burundi and
the cause of peace in Central Africa. Building on the work of his predecessor,
the late Mwalimu Julius Nyerere of Tanzania, Madiba has helped to give
Burundi a chance for lasting peace, democracy, economic development and
national reconciliation.
“The Security Council had in the statement of its President on 8
November 2001 (S/PRST/2001/33), welcomed the 1 November 2001
inauguration of Burundi’s Transitional Government and expressed its
appreciation for the instrumental role played by Madiba towards the creation
of the Transitional Government. The Security Council had also expressed the
hope that the region and the international community could continue to rely on
his moral leadership and ingenious spirit that are essential for progress towards
peace in Burundi.
“The Security Council acknowledges the sterling contribution of Madiba
as Facilitator of the Arusha Peace Process in bringing together all the Parties,
including the armed groups to engage in dialogue in order to facilitate an early
cessation of hostilities in accordance with the Arusha Agreement. The Security
Council commends Madiba for his tenacity and unwavering commitment
towards political reconciliation in Burundi.
“The Security Council expresses its appreciation to Madiba and the South
African Government for initiating the deployment of the first elements of the
multinational security presence tasked with the protection of returning political
leaders, without which the conditions would not have been conducive for the
inauguration of the Burundi Transitional Government. These key successes
have confirmed the trust and confidence which the Security Council and the
international community have always had in Madiba.

01-63982 (E) 151101

*0163982*

S/PRST/2001/35

“The Security Council expresses its concern about the recent increase in
violence and reiterates its call for an immediate cessation of hostilities in
Burundi. The Security Council calls on all Burundians to reject violence and to
pursue their objectives through the institutions and mechanisms of the
transition process. The Security Council appeals to all Burundians and United
Nations Member States to build on the momentum created through the efforts
of Madiba and to support the Regional Peace Initiative and the Transitional
Government and the Implementation Monitoring Committee.”

2
