S/PV.7792

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7792th meeting

Wednesday, 19 October 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin/Mr. Safronkov/Mr. Iliichev. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Seck
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-33267 (E)
*1633267*

S/PV.7792

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Argentina,
Bangladesh, Brazil, Costa Rica, Cuba, Ecuador,
Guatemala, Iceland, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Kazakhstan, Lebanon,
Maldives, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua, Norway,
Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
the Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey to participate in
this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations, to participate in the meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General; and Mr. Stephen O’Brien, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.
Mr. Mladenov is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Jerusalem.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following to participate in this meeting: Her Excellency
Ms. Joanne Adamson, Chargé d’affaires ad interim of
the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations; and His Excellency Mr. Mahmoud Saikal,
Vice-Chair of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
2/64

19/10/2016

There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Mladenov.
Mr. Mladenov: I would like to begin by thanking
the Council for its support, expressed during the
previous briefing, for the work of the Office of the
United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process on the ground under challenging
circumstances, particularly as the situation in Israel
and Palestine, unfortunately, continues to deteriorate.
International focus on the question of Palestine
may have been overtaken by the tragedy in Syria and
events elsewhere in the Middle East, but it cannot be
allowed to be relegated to a secondary problem. Sadly,
settlement announcements, outbreaks of violence and
terror, and the absence of visionary leadership continue
to define the conflict. The inability to see beyond the
horizon and grasp the benefits of resolving the ArabIsraeli conflict, ending the occupation and establishing
a two-State solution that meets the national aspirations
of Israelis and Palestinians alike is a historic loss to the
region as a whole.
The absence of progress has led to growing anger
and frustration among Palestinians and profound
disillusionment among Israelis. It has strengthened
radicals and weakened moderates on both sides. On
9 October, a Palestinian opened fire, killing two
Israelis and injuring six others in a terror attack in
occupied East Jerusalem. Our thoughts and prayers go
out to the families of the victims. Deplorably, Hamas
and many others chose to justify and glorify the attack
and its perpetrator. This tragic incident once again
underscores an undeniable truth — if Palestinians
genuinely hope to reach the long-overdue goal of
Palestinian statehood and an end to the occupation,
that will not be achieved through violence but must be
reached through negotiations.
In separate incidents during the recent clashes in
East Jerusalem, a 20-year-old Palestinian civilian died
after being shot by Israeli security forces. In a separate
incident, an unarmed 12-year-old girl was shot in the
legs by security guards while approaching a checkpoint.
During the reporting period, Israel has continued
with settlement planning, including the recent
promotion of an initial 98 out of 300 housing units
in Shilo, located deep in the occupied West Bank. If
16-33267

19/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

implemented, that plan will drive a wedge between
north and south in the West Bank and jeopardize the
contiguity of a future Palestinian State. Israeli officials
have defined that move as an attempt to relocate settlers
from the illegal Amona outpost, which has been slated
for demolition by the Israeli Supreme Court. I once
again reiterate the position of the Secretary-General
that settlements are illegal under international law and
undermine the two-State solution.
Adding to that troubling overall picture,
Palestinians have again been unable to exercise their
democratic rights after local council elections in the
West Bank and Gaza were postponed. The political
bickering, mutual accusations, legal challenges and
counter-challenges that followed have left the people
of Gaza and the West Bank feeling more apart. I am
concerned by recent calls by Hamas legislators in Gaza
for the Hamas-led Government to resume its work
in Gaza. Such a step would seriously undermine the
Palestinian Government of National Consensus, and
would also make the reconciliation almost impossible.
In August I raised United Nations and international
concerns about the steady continuation of Israel’s
policy of expanding its presence in the occupied West
Bank (see S/PV.7762). Today I wish to discuss another
impediment to a negotiated solution — the security,
humanitarian and political situation in Gaza.
Three deadly conflicts in the past eight years have
eroded both Palestinian belief that Israel wants anything
more than Gaza’s destruction and Israeli conviction
that their Palestinian neighbours desire peace. Fuelling
Israeli fears is that Gaza is controlled by a de facto
authority whose overtly anti-Semitic charter equates
resistance with violence, rejects peaceful solutions and
aspires to the obliteration of Israel.
Israel accuses Gaza militants of continuously
seeking to obtain money and military materiel, including
by smuggling in civilian boats, concealing components
for the production of rockets inside commercial
shipments and diverting construction materials from
needy beneficiaries. The United Nations has been
informed by Israel of at least 41 serious smuggling
attempts that have been intercepted since the beginning
of 2016. Although the United Nations lacks the capacity
to independently confirm the smuggling accusations,
if accurate, they show the intention to continue attacks
against Israel.

S/PV.7792

Last week I travelled to Gaza, where I witnessed
warehouses empty of construction materials, as the
reconstruction process is significantly slowing down
due to limitations of imports. No new residential
reconstruction projects have been approved since
March. In the recent days the approval of some 80
projects, some of which had already been started, has
been revoked by Israel. I saw residential buildings
half built. I met with families whose projects had been
cleared for reconstruction, yet had not received any
cement for months. I heard from those who had tried
to navigate the web of rules governing the import of
materials considered dual-use, with no luck or response.
I stand with the people in Gaza who have suffered
through conflicts and closures and who continue to
face unimaginable suffering.
At current rates, it will take more than one year
to catch up with the backlog of approved projects, and
years to address the full housing and reconstruction
shortage in Gaza. Those trends are worrying, and I call
on the parties to the Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism to
recommit once again to ensuring its smooth operation.
Failing to do that will put in question the viability of
the mechanism and undermine the precarious calm
in Gaza.
According to some estimates, in the past decade
militants in Gaza have fired nearly 16,000 rockets and
mortars at Israel. Approximately 200 projectiles have
been fired since the end of the last conflict. While since
2014 there has been little damage or injury, there is an
ever-present risk of a potentially catastrophic escalation
that neither wants nor needs.
During the 2014 conflict, Israel discovered and
destroyed 14 tunnels crossing into its territory, and
in May of this year detected and destroyed two more.
Allow me to reiterate the joint position of Russia, the
United States, the European Union and the SecretaryGeneral as stated in the Quartet report (S/2016/595,
annex). The illicit arms build-up and militant activity
in Gaza must be terminated. Such actions increase the
risk of a new escalation of hostilities, keep thousands of
people on both sides of the border under constant threat
of attack, and undermine the reconstruction process.
The militant threat, however, should not serve as an
excuse for Israel to indiscriminately harm civilians in
Gaza. In addition to the continuing severely restrictive
closures, I am concerned by persistent incursions and

16-332673/64

S/PV.7792

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the almost daily firing and shelling by Israeli forces
into Gaza along the fence and at sea.
The vicious cycles of conflict in Gaza must end.
To do so control of Gaza must return to a Palestinian
Government of National Unity, committed to the
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) principles.
The closures on Gaza must also be lifted in line with
resolution 1860 (2009). Palestinians and Israelis both
deserve the right to lead normal lives in freedom and
security, with their human rights respected.
Since the takeover of Gaza by Hamas in 2007,
40 per cent of Palestinians living in the occupied
territory are beyond the control of the legitimate
Palestinian Government. Israel’s closure policy and
severe restrictions have brought social, cultural and
economic interaction between Palestinians in Gaza and
the West Bank to a virtual standstill. The widening
chasm that has emerged between both parts of the
occupied Palestinian territory undermines the national
State-building enterprise and threatens the very
viability of establishing a united Palestinian State as
part of a two-State solution. Unity is therefore critical.
I encourage Hamas to pursue reconciliation with Fatah
in line with PLO principles and to consider redefining
its political stance.
Turning briefly to the Golan, I remain concerned
by the volatile situation which undermines the 1974
Disengagement of Forces Agreement and jeopardizes
the ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab
Republic. It remains critical that the parties to the
Disengagement Agreement maintain liaison with the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force, in the
first instance, and exercise maximum restraint and
refrain from any action that could escalate the situation
across the ceasefire line and the already volatile
regional environment.
Turning back to the question of Palestine, let me
conclude my briefing by issuing two warnings. First,
to those who believe that the people of Gaza can be
punished by closures or by imposing restrictions on
the entry of construction materials that are vital for
the economy, they should know that the temperature in
Gaza is rising. Allow me to also be abundantly clear to
those who build tunnels, fire rockets, smuggle military
materiel, profit from the black market or seek to
create confrontation. Their actions are dangerous and
irresponsible. They are stealing from their own people
and risk the lives of Palestinians and Israelis alike.
4/64

19/10/2016

We must all avoid the risk of sleep-walking into
another violent conflict, at a time when the region as a
whole needs moderate forces to unite and stand up to
the radicalization that we see in the Middle East.
Gaza’s future is inextricably linked to the future
of the Palestinian people and their goal of establishing
an independent State. But the longer its population
continues to suffer under the intolerable weight of
Gaza’s current dynamics, the further Palestinians are
from realizing that objective, and the closer we are,
unfortunately, to the next major escalation.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Mladenov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr.O’Brien.
Mr. O’Brien: I would like to start by thanking
Special Coordinator Mladenov for his insightful
monthly briefings, which incorporate the humaninatiran
situation in a coordinated and comprehensive manner.
The humanitarian needs continue to be far too
high. Nearly every resident in the occupied Palestinian
territory is recognized as being affected by the
protection crisis. Poverty and unemployment have
driven more than a quarter of all households to food
insecurity. Half a million school children require
humanitarian assistance to access quality education.
And an estimated 1 million people are in need of
humanitarian, health and nutrition interventions.
Overall, nearly half of all Palestinians in the occupied
Palestinian territories — some 2.3 million out of a
total population of 4.8 million — are in urgent need of
humanitarian assistance.
In Gaza, humanitarian needs stem from nearly 10
years of closures and restrictions imposed by Israel
following the military takeover by Hamas, citing
security concerns, and exacerbated by successive
rounds of hostilities between Hamas and Israel,
internal Palestinian political divisions and Egypt’s
near-complete closure of its border crossing with Gaza.
These events have left half of Gaza’s households foodinsecure — twice the average rate across the occupied
Palestinian territories — with only sporadic access to
clean water and regular, reliable electricity.
Seventy per cent of the Gaza population has
running water — most of which is not drinkable — for
only a few hours every two to four days, while energy
deficits leave households with only six to eight hours
of power daily. This lack of reliable power places lives
16-33267

19/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

at risk in medical facilities already struggling with a
lack of equipment, medicines and skilled staff, reduces
the operation of wastewater facilities and undermines
the key to breaking Gaza’s aid dependency: revitalizing
its economy.
In all of this, Gaza’s children have suffered the
most. A 10-year-old child today has already experienced
three rounds of conflict in her short life. Nearly 230,000
children continue to be in need of psychosocial support,
and an estimated 250,000 children require mine-risk
awareness owing to the prevalence of explosive
remnants of war. Israeli children along the Gaza border
have been impacted as well and continue to live in fear.
While there has been an increase in the absolute
number of exit permit approvals from Gaza since
2012, the acceptance rate for exit permits for medical
treatment has reached a seven-year low; of the 2,394
applications made in August, only 60 per cent are
approved, compared with some 76 per cent, which was
the monthly average in 2015.
Humanitarian
organizations
provide
food
assistance to some 1 million people in Gaza each year,
while donor-funded emergency fuel, distributed by the
United Nations, is keeping critical water, sanitation and
health facilities going uninterrupted. I welcome Israel’s
recent decision to sell an additional 10 million cubic
metres of water to Gaza, but we must work towards a
sustainable, long-term solution. It is critical that this
happen quickly.

S/PV.7792

houses, hospitals, schools and critical infrastructure, as
well as allowing the highest import levels to Gaza since
2007. However, some 60,000 people remain displaced
and have been reliant upon transitional shelter since
2014. Their living conditions raise a range of concerns,
including protection risks and gender-based violence.
A continued lack of funding to rebuild more than
one third of completely destroyed houses leaves over
4,000 families without the prospect of a home in the
near future.
If humanitarian needs in Gaza are to decrease,
we need development activity and economic recovery.
We need tangible improvements to counter the rising
tide of hopelessness sweeping Gaza’s youth. It also
stands to reason from our collective experiences that
left unaddressed, this hopelessness of youth will drive
more local insecurity and contribute to even more
radicalization and exported insecurity. As stated in the
Quartet report, the full lifting of the closures is crucial
to lasting progress in Gaza, in line with international
law and resolution 1860 (2009).
The operating environment for humanitarian action
in Gaza has also deteriorated. Access for humanitarian
staff in Gaza, for example, has become increasingly
problematic. The rate of permits denied to United
Nations national personnel based in Gaza rose from
3 per cent in January to 41 per cent in September.

The economic reality in Gaza is such that chronic
humanitarian needs persist. Gaza’s gross domestic
product stands at approximately half that of the West
Bank, and its unemployment rate is double, at 42 per
cent and nearly 60 per cent for youth, one of the highest
in the world. Movement and access restrictions on
goods and people, albeit variable, not only literally bind
most people to an untenable reality in Gaza, but also
impede economic activity. More than 1,500 traders and
160 businesspeople in Gaza have lost travel permits in
recent months, reversing the trend of increased permit
approvals witnessed post-2014. Without the capacity to
develop the local economy, a sustainable solution to the
humanitarian needs in Gaza will not be possible.

Low-level hostilities between Israeli security
forces and Palestinian armed groups in Gaza persist,
and concerns remain that insufficient measures have
been taken to minimize civilian casualties; patently
that is the case when rockets are fired from Gaza into
urban settings within range across the border into
southern Israel. Chronic concerns remain over the lack
of accountability for alleged violations of international
law by all parties. The Israeli authorities have opened
31 criminal investigations, but only one indictment has
been issued, for a case of looting, out of more than 500
complaints relating to the conduct of hostilities during
the 2014 escalation. No meaningful investigations
have been announced by Palestinian authorities, and
Hamas still holds two Israeli citizens and two bodies of
soldiers. I call for their swift return.

Rebuilding local housing and infrastructure is
essential. International support and some relaxation of
import restrictions by the Israeli authorities, including
through the Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism, have
resulted in notable progress in repairing damage to

Turning to the West Bank, the past year has been
the most deadly for Israelis and Palestinians since the
end of the second intifada. I continue to be alarmed
by Palestinian attacks on Israeli civilians and by the
numerous responses to such attacks or alleged attacks

16-332675/64

S/PV.7792

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

by Israeli forces, many of which have raised allegations
about excessive use of force. Recent months have also
marked an increase in the use of live ammunition by
Israeli security forces, in particular against Palestinian
stone-throwers during confrontations. Prosecutions
in such cases are rare. In addition, the bodies of 18
Palestinians are still being withheld by the Israeli
authorities; I call on the Government of Israel to return
them without delay as well.
In the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, this
year, the number of structures demolished was already
958 as of 13 October, 75 per cent higher than in all of
2015, with most demolished due to lack of permits.
Demolition of donor-funded humanitarian assistance
has also spiked, at 271, 150 per cent higher than last
year, and there have been more demolitions in occupied
East Jerusalem — 147 — than in any year since the
United Nations began systematically recording such
demolitions in 2008. Overall, 1,447 Palestinians have
been displaced, including 719 women and 690 children,
with another 5,919 affected, including 1,571 women and
1,763 children, owing to the demolition of livelihood
structures. Such demolitions violate international law
and must cease immediately; the Secretary-General has
called on the Government of Israel to revoke policies
and halt practices that may lead to the forcible transfer
of Bedouin and herder communities.
In February, I stood before the Council with a clear
message: to give this issue the attention it deserves. We
need collectively to reverse the core drivers of these
humanitarian needs. We must move towards decisive
action that will reduce humanitarian needs, secure
respect for international law and bring to Palestinians
and Israelis alike the hope and reality of a stable,
peaceful and prosperous future.
I take this opportunity to briefly update the Council
on the humanitarian situation in Iraq, in the context
of the military operation to recapture Mosul, which
commenced in the early hours of Monday morning. On
the third day of operations, reports indicate that military
activities remain concentrated in less-populated areas,
with no large-scale civilian displacement recorded at
this stage.
As hostilities intensify and progress towards
densely populated areas, I am extremely concerned for
the safety of up to 1.5 million people living in the city.
We believe that families in Mosul will be at great risk
during the operation of getting caught in cross-fire or
6/64

19/10/2016

being directly targeted by snipers, as they forage for
food. We are concerned that civilians may be used
as human shields or forcibly expelled and become
trapped between front lines. The elderly, the disabled
and pregnant women may be unable to move to safety
without assistance, and, based on past evidence, the
so called Islamic State’s practices caused the greatest
concern for protection issues.
Finally, nothing is more important than ensuring that
civilians are protected and have access to the assistance
to which they are entitled during the operation. As the
crisis unfolds, I call on all parties involved to uphold
their obligations under international humanitarian and
human rights law. As humanitarians, even though we
wish to see the worst case averted, we are obliged to
plan for the worst. We anticipate a displacement wave
of approximately 200,000 people over the coming
weeks, with up to 1 million people displaced during
the course of the operation in a worse-case scenario.
Of these people, we anticipate that 700,000 will require
shelter and emergency assistance.
Thus far, shelter has been prepared for 60,000 people
in camps and emergency sites, and preparation for sites
for an additional 25,000 is accelerating. Emergency
supplies are being prepositioned close to displacement
sites. Mobile clinics and health and protection teams
are prepared. Food trucks are on standby. As the
winterization of displacement sites becomes a priority
and temperatures drop over the coming weeks, needs
are expected to rise. In short, as needs rise, so too must
the international response.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. O’Brien for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): At the outset, I extend
Palestine’s congratulations to the Russian Federation on
its ascension to the presidency of the Security Council
and our appreciation for convening of this important
debate today. I thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his briefing and ongoing efforts including to draw
the Council’s attention to the critical issues before
us. I would also like to thank Mr. Stephen O’Brien,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his briefing.
16-33267

19/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I reiterate our deep appreciation to the five
Security Council members that co-chaired last week’s
Arria Formula meeting on Israeli settlement activities,
allowing the Council to hear expert presentations on
the stark reality and dangers of the ongoing illegal
colonization of Palestine on the ground and their effect
on the prospects for peace. We thank Malaysia, Egypt,
Angola, Senegal and Venezuela for that timely and
important initiative.
Reflecting on that meeting and the firm positions
reaffirmed by all Council members, along with many
recent Government statements made in response to
Israeli settlement announcements, it is clear that the
settlement issue is not, as cynically claimed by some,
a “one-sided” Palestinian issue. As affirmed in every
statement, the illegality of settlement activities and
the threats posed to the two-State solution and peace
prospects are matters of international law and involve
all States concerned with a peaceful solution to the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict and peace and security in
the Middle East.
It is about the law, established by the Member
States, and respect for that law. Otherwise, its
denigration renders it meaningless and ineffective.
That law — namely, the Fourth Geneva Convention,
applicable to all States as customary law — was created
in the aftermath of the horrors of the Second World War
specifically to avert the colonization, oppression and
persecution of peoples by foreign Powers occupying
their lands. The same law clearly stipulates that
occupation is to be a temporary situation, not indefinite
or perpetual. That is not a matter of Palestinian opinion,
narrative or perspective. It is simply the law.
Yet, as we approach the 50-year mark of Israel’s
occupation of the Palestinian people and land, the
laws governing it have been turned upside down,
twisted and exploited by Israel, which has used every
pretext — even the most implausible and disrespectful
ones — to justify its occupation and all of the human
rights violations and war crimes flowing from it and
sustaining it for five decades. We must therefore, for
the record, reaffirm article 49 of the Fourth Geneva
Convention, which strictly prohibits the colonization,
construction of settlements, transfer of settlers,
forced displacement and transfer of the Palestinian
civilian population and all other measures carried
out by Israel intended to facilitate and support such
actions, including its construction of the wall directly
contravening this prohibition.

S/PV.7792

Under Protocol Additional to the Geneva
Conventions of 12 August 1949, relating to the Protection
of Victims of International Armed Conflicts, known
as Protocol I, these actions constitute grave breaches,
which all high-contracting parties are obligated to
suppress. Moreover, article 8 of the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court deems as war crimes,
“[t]he transfer, directly or indirectly, by the
Occupying Power of parts of its own civilian
population into the territory it occupies, or the
deportation or transfer of all or parts of the
population of the occupied territory within or
outside this territory”.
The 2004 advisory opinion of the International Court
of Justice was equally clear about these prohibitions,
affirming the illegality of Israel’s settlements, wall and
all related measures aimed at altering the demographic
composition, character and status of the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. Such
measures also constitute violations of the Charter of
the United Nations.
The international consensus is also clear, as evident
in the determination made individually and collectively
by States, including in Security Council resolutions, that
settlement activities are illegal and constitute a major
obstacle to peace. It is also evident in the global calls
on Israel to cease all settlement activities and end its
nearly half-century occupation. Both are imperative for
realizing a just, lasting and comprehensive PalestinianIsraeli peace and an Arab-Israeli peace, in general, and
we recall here the Arab Peace Initiative, the importance
and centrality of which we underscore.
There can be no question about the clear legal
dimensions of the issue, its standing as a peace and
security issue, and the international community’s duty
to act, including, at the forefront, the Security Council
according to its Charter mandate. It is therefore quite
astounding to hear Israeli claims that any attempts to
redress this illegal situation are one-sided Palestinian or
Arab attempts and Israeli arguments that the settlements
are not an issue. And it is equally disturbing to hear
claims that the Security Council has no duty or role
on this issue and witness Israel bully States, including
permanent members of the Council, warning them not
to adopt any resolutions on the matter — in essence
demanding of them to ignore and, worse yet, breach
their own legal obligations.

16-332677/64

S/PV.7792

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Even more appalling is that Israel, which bullies
and boasts that peace will not come by resolutions, is the
very same Israel that was actually created by a United
Nations resolution — General Assembly resolution 181
(II) of 1947, to be precise. That begs the question: How
can a State be created on the basis of a resolution while
peace cannot? We believe that peace — the central
purpose of the Organization — is more than worthy
of international legislation and action, and Israel’s
constant attempts to diminish and divert the United
Nations work, in that regard, should be denounced and
halted, not rewarded.
Considering the realities of the situation and the
dangers of inaction, so starkly highlighted at the recent
Arria Formula meeting, we must ask what could possibly
justify the continued paralysis of the Security Council in
the face of such systematic, aggressive Israeli violations
and blatant defiance of the will of the international
community. And what could excuse Israel’s further
appeasement, when its actions are threatening peace
and security — the exact purview of the Council — and
destroying the two-State solution based on the 1967
borders that have been internationally conceived and
endorsed for decades? In addition to defying the law,
the premise and arguments presented by Israel defy
logic, reason and decency and must be rejected. The
Security Council has clear responsibilities, and, once
again, we therefore call for urgent action to address the
ongoing crisis and injustice.
The 1 July Quartet report (S/2016/595, annex)
concluded that Israel’s continuing policy of settlement
construction and expansion, designation of Palestinian
land for exclusive Israeli use and denial of Palestinian
development, including the high rate of demolitions, are
steadily eroding the two-State solution and entrenching
a one-State reality — a reality that any objective observer
could only describe as apartheid. In the report and in
recent statements, the Quartet deemed the situation
unsustainable and called for a reversal of the negative
trends on the ground to salvage the two-State solution
and create the conditions for meaningful negotiations
on all final status issues — refugees, Jerusalem,
settlements, borders, water and security — and for
tangibly advancing that solution.
The Israeli response to the report, despite the
lip-service paid, came in the form of more settlement
activities and provocations. Since the report’s issuance,
plans have been approved for the construction of
over 2,000 units in Israeli settlements in Occupied
8/64

19/10/2016

East Jerusalem, the Bethlehem and Nablus areas and
elsewhere in occupied Palestine. Plans were also
revealed for a new settlement, east of the settlement
of Shiloh, on lands of the Palestinian village of Jalud,
along with other illegal schemes concerning so-called
settlement outposts, further damaging the contiguity
and integrity of our land. The recent period has
also seen measures aimed at the forcible transfer of
Palestinian Bedouin communities from in and around
occupied East Jerusalem, including in the sensitive E-1
area, such as the community in Khan Al-Ahmar, along
with ongoing threats to demolish Palestinian homes,
schools and other civilian structures in Susiya village
and to forcibly displace the population.
Those are just a few examples from a year during
which we witnessed the unprecedented demolition of
Palestinian homes, as mentioned by Mr. O’Brien, the
non-stop confiscation of Palestinian land, expansion of
Israeli settlements, threats by Israeli officials to annex
our land, and constant settler violence and terror, all
committed with impunity. At the same time, we witness
ongoing provocations and extremist incitement against
holy sites in occupied East Jerusalem and Al-Khalil,
especially at Al-Haram Al-Sharif, daily military raids in
our cities and towns, villages and refugee camps, where
Palestinian civilians are assaulted and traumatized by
the occupying forces, often resulting in the death or
injury; arrest and detention of our civilians, particularly
young men and even children, and the beginning of the
tenth year of Israel’s blockade of the Gaza Strip, where
2 million Palestinians are being collectively punished
and besieged, threatened repeatedly by Israeli forces and
enduring extreme deprivation and isolation, which has
imposed a dire humanitarian crisis and socioeconomic
conditions that are at their lowest point since 1967.
In that regard, I must take a moment to appeal for
urgent support to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which
is leading the efforts of humanitarian organizations to
alleviate the plight of the Palestine refugees in Gaza and
throughout the region, providing them with sustenance,
stability and a measure of hope in the midst of intense
turmoil and conflict. The Agency needs immediate
support to help it to overcome the debilitating funding
crisis it faces, which if unresolved will have farreaching negative consequences.
As our people suffer the endless horrors of such
an unlawful, inhumane occupation every day, how
can we believe Israel’s claimed commitment to peace?
16-33267

19/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

How can we not question Israel’s intentions when every
policy and measure fragments our land and undermines
our State’s viability, taking us farther away from the
two-State solution, and when its policies and measures
violate every human right of our people and deny
them any semblance of human dignity, intensifying
hopelessness and despair and shaking their convictions
in the law and in the possibility of peace?
Faced with continued defiance by the occupying
Power, words are no longer enough. Let me
repeat — words are no longer enough. The global calls
for the cessation of Israeli settlement activities and
crimes against the Palestinian people must be backed
with serious, practical measures to compel Israeli
compliance with the law. There must be consequences if
Israel continues to violate international law. Moreover,
the international community must determine what
actions can stop the downward spiral, stabilize the
situation and revive peace prospects. While we echo the
Quartet’s calls to reverse negative trends and promote
confidence-building measures, we must also emphasize
the need to restore the political horizon that has been
perilously absent for too long.
Efforts to foster conditions conducive to meaningful
negotiations will fall short, yet again, without a credible
political horizon to move us forward. We must learn
the lessons of the past. The political horizon must be
firmly based on the long-standing terms of reference
based on the relevant United Nations resolutions,
including resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 194
(III), among others, the Madrid land-for-peace principle
and the Arab Peace Initiative, and must be undertaken
within clear parameters and a defined time frame for
the conclusion of an agreement. Again, we say in the
Chamber, the conflict is not intractable. The solution
has long been known; what is missing is the political
will that we need.
In truth, the Council’s paralysis, coupled with the
maliciousness of Israeli actions, its contempt for the law
and obstruction of any initiative to resolve the conflict
are not only regrettable and frustrating, but would test
anyone’s resolve and conviction in the rule of law. But
we will not be deterred. After all this time, we remain
convinced of the primacy of international law and its
role in resolving the conflict and ending the injustice.
We remain committed to peace and the achievement of
a just solution that will ensure the rights of our people,
including the right to freedom and self-determination
in their State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its

S/PV.7792

capital, and secure lasting peace and coexistence
between Palestine and Israel and mutual security for
our peoples.
We therefore continue to seek Security Council
action that is consistent with its pledge to use all
applicable diplomatic, political and legal tools to
advance those goals. Our current efforts are focused
on the Israeli settlement regime, which is something
that everyone recognizes as the central pillar of their
illegal occupation. Settlement activities make up the
main means by which Israel willfully, wantonly and
systematically — it involves almost every branch of the
Israeli Government — continues to forcibly expandd
its presence and entrench its illegal occupation of
Palestine. Those are among the means by which it is
able to control and oppress the Palestinian population.
They are directly endangering the two-State solution
based on the pre-1967 borders. How can anyone speak
of preserving the two-State solution and progressing
towards peace without addressing that matter?
It is for that reason that, with our Arab partners,
based on a decision by the Arab Ministerial
Committee, we have launched consultations with all
Security Council members. The consultations aim at
determining a clear course of action to confront the
main obstacle to peace and open a political horizon
in which a genuine political process can be sustained
and expedited for the achievement of a just, peaceful
and durable solution. We are doing that responsibly,
being guided by international law and the necessities of
peace, and are acting in full cooperation with regional
and international partners.
Recognizing the dangers of a continuing stalemate
and the explosive situation on the ground, we reaffirm
our support for the French initiative to mobilize
international action for Palestinian-Israeli peace. We
concur fully with the urgency of the political horizon
and the calls for an international peace conference.
We also reaffirm our support and cooperation with
efforts by the Arab States to advance the Arab Peace
Initiative, including in cooperation with the Quartet
members, whose efforts over the recent period are
fully recognized, along with the Russian and Egyptian
efforts to promote dialogue and help parties overcome
the deadlock.
However, none of the efforts can absolve the
Security Council from its responsibility. On the
contrary, it is imperative that the Council play its role

16-332679/64

S/PV.7792

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

in order to reaffirm international law, thread together
these collective efforts and chart a way forward. In
the years of the Council’s silence — it has been 22
years — Israeli settlement activities have quadrupled.
That is coupled with an intensification of all other
violations, which gravely undermines the situation on
the ground and deepens the suffering of our people,
who continue to be denied their rights and freedom by
the illegal occupation, and ushering in of the impending
destruction of the two-State solution. The Council must
act and should adopt a draft resolution forthwith. That
is a minimal expectation. And we appeal to the Council
to shoulder its political, legal and moral responsibilities
in order to revive the prospects for peace.
Let us not be deterred by the cynics or by the
bullying, including those who have the audacity to
call our legitimate, diplomatic efforts “terror” — it is
a ludicrous argument that we reject, and the Council
should do so as well. Such arguments must be rebuked
and flatly rejected. The Security Council has a duty to
act in line with the law and the urgency of peace and
security. It must do so now.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): Once again, we meet as we
continue to hear calls for a one-sided draft resolution
against Israel. We have been hearing those calls all year.
In fact, we have been hearing calls to act against Israel
since we joined the United Nations, 62 years ago. There
was a time when Israel could look to this institution
with a sense of hope — hope that, after the evils of the
Holocaust, the nations of the world could come together
to bring about an era of peace, and the Jewish people
would finally be free from hatred and prejudice.
But this institution has betrayed those hopes — day
after day, month after month, year after year — by
funding bodies that promote anti-Israel activism at
the United Nations. We see that in the endless stream
of biased reports and the one-sided resolutions whose
only purpose is to score political points, and not solve
pressing problems. When it comes to Israel, the record
of hypocrisy and dishonesty goes on and on.
Just last week, UNESCO had the nerve to adopt a
resolution denying the connection between the Jewish
people and the Holy City of Jerusalem.
“If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand
forget her cunning.”
10/64

19/10/2016

That verse from Psalm 137, written by our King
David almost 3,000 years ago, was uttered by the Jewish
people as they were exiled from Jerusalem following the
destruction of their temple. It is also recited by every
Jewish groom on his wedding day. UNESCO’s decision
is an embarrassing stain on the pages of the history of
the United Nations. But the Jewish people will endure.
The attempts to cut us off from our homeland and our
heritage will not succeed. We will remain in our capital,
Jerusalem, forever.
As we open the seventy-first session, it is time for
the United Nations to answer for the slander and the
defamation of the Jewish State by so many here in this
building. Let us take a look at that record together.
Just last Friday, this body was witness to a farce.
Israeli organizations were called to provide their expert
opinions on the latest developments in Judea and
Samaria. Let me be clear: Israel is a proud and thriving
democracy, and we cherish the freedom of speech. We
do not respect those who spread lies and deceit about
Israel. In 2016, three United Nations agencies provided
funding for B’Tselem. That is no coincidence. It is part
of a cynical cycle in which the United Nations funds
B’Tselem and similar organizations that have a particular
political agenda. They are then invited to provide socalled expert testimony. That is direct interference in
our democratic process by anti-Israel elements here
at the United Nations. I call on the Council to put an
end to funding from the United Nations of extremist
organizations that seek to harm Israel.
Last May, at the meeting of the World Health
Organization, the General Assembly singled out Israel
as the only violator of health rights in the entire world.
Apparently, the innocent men, women and children who
have been burned and choked to death by al-Assad’s
chemical weapons are of no concern to the World Health
Organization. Last July I visited the hospital in Safed,
in the north of Israel. I met with the Syrian people
injured in the ongoing civil war who were being treated
by Israeli doctors. The World Health Organization did
not mention those lifesaving efforts — not even once.
That absurd resolution does not stand alone. The
United Nations Commission on the Status of Women
concluded its annual session by condemning only one
country for violating women’s rights anywhere on the
planet. The Commission had nothing to say about Iran,
where women can face execution by stoning for the socalled crime of adultery. They were silent about places
16-33267

19/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

where forced child marriage, official discrimination
against women and so-called honour killings are
widespread. Instead, the Organization condemned
Israel, where a woman is President of the Supreme
Court, where a woman sits as Governor of the Bank of
Israel, and where a woman serves as Minister of Justice.
To make matters worse, a Commission on the
Status of Women report (E/2016/27) blamed Israel for
domestic violence committed by Palestinian men against
Palestinian women. Instead of making it absolutely
clear that there is never an excuse for violence against
women, the report followed the shameful United
Nations practice of giving excuses for violence and
blaming Israel for every ill in Palestinian society.
The anti-Israel bias is systematic and runs through
the organs and bodies of this institution. The Special
Information Programme on the Question of Palestine
and the Division for Palestinian Rights are the only
Secretariat bodies that are dedicated to a specific
conflict. And let no one be fooled — they are dedicated
to promoting only one side, one narrative and one
unequivocal message of anti-Israel propaganda.
The United Nations Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People has
also disgraced itself with its anti-Israel activity.
Non-governmental organizations, accredited to the
Committee, regularly post vile images on social media,
such as cartoons comparing Israeli soldiers to Nazis.
That is pure hatred from official United Nations bodies.
At a time when so many are in need of humanitarian
assistance, it is a disgrace that millions of dollars in
United Nations funds — money collected from taxpayers
around the world — fund bodies whose only purpose
is to spread lies, incitement and hateful propaganda
against Israel. Yet year after year, the United Nations
renews the mandates of those bodies. Year after year
the propaganda machine continues.
Just last month, the Department of Public
Information organized a United Nations International
Media Seminar on Peace in the Middle East in South
Africa. The seminar was completely one-sided. Almost
all of the speakers were well-known for their anti-Israel
positions. The current Palestinian representative to the
United Nations, the former Palestinian representative
to the European Union and other United Nations
representatives and officials were all invited to speak
at the seminar. But not a single Israeli official was
there to represent Israel, to tell our story. The speakers

S/PV.7792

expressed open support for the notorious Boycott,
Divestment, Sanctions movement, which is conducting
a global campaign of misinformation and outright
slander against my country.
And let us not forget about the United Nations hall
of shame, the Human Rights Council in Geneva. Let us
call it what it really is, with some of the world’s worst
human rights abusers condemning the only democracy
in the Middle East. The only standard that it follows is
the United Nations double standard — one set of rules
for Israel, another set of rules for every other country.
The Human Rights Council has a special agenda item
dealing only with Israel. No other country — neither
Iran, Yemen, Syria nor North Korea — none of them is
singled out.
As we the General Assembly begins its seventy-first
session, we can count on the United Nations to continue
that systematic hostility towards Israel. In fact, the bias
in United Nations resolutions can actually be counted.
General Assembly resolutions have use the term “grave”
513 times to describe Israel’s actions — 513 times. And
for the rest of the world, for the countries that engage in
systematic human rights abuses, in torture and ethnic
cleansing — only 14 times. Who will speak out against
that moral absurdity? More people have been killed in
Syria in the past few months than in the entire history
of the Arab-Israeli conflict, yet the United Nations has
adopted six times as many resolutions against Israel
as it has against all other countries. Not just more
than against Syria, but six times as many resolutions
against Israel than all other countries on the face of the
planet combined.
The box by my side contains piles and piles of
United Nations documents — an endless number of
pages, United Nations resolutions, reports, declarations,
decisions and statements, all denouncing Israel. And
that is just from the previous session, from October 2015
until today. Year after year, this institution produces
the same documents, filled with the same outrageous
accusations and absurd demands. When people speak
about the United Nations obsession with Israel, that is
what they are talking about. That box is proof of that
obsession. It is a monument to the deep-rooted bias
against Israel. It makes a mockery of what the United
Nations should stand for, and all those who stand by
and let it happen year after year should be ashamed.
Let me ask the representatives in this Chamber,
let me ask the Palestinian representative, if they really

16-3326711/64

S/PV.7792

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

believe that the ongoing campaign to demonize Israel is
doing anything to help the Palestinian people. Do any
of those decisions create opportunities for Palestinian
women? Do any of those endless resolutions do anything
to help a single Palestinian child? Of course they do not.
Enough — enough with the incitement, enough with the
show. Let the Palestinian leadership start caring about
their people. Yes, the Palestinian leadership knows
how to mount shows, but it is not helping even one
Palestinian. Those thousands of debates and documents
do not help the Palestinian people.
Now that we have seen and understood the United
Nations shameful record, let us take a look at the real
Israel — the Israel that is left out of those reports. For
68 years, the people of Israel have woken up every
morning with the threat of war and terror hanging over
their heads. Yet, despite all the challenges, we have
built a vibrant democracy and a thriving economy. In
the twenty-first century, Israel is a place of equality and
opportunity. Thanks to the creative spirit and energy
of our people, Israeli innovation is helping to improve
lives and create opportunities around the world, in
agricultural technology, in cybersecurity, solar energy
and so many other fields. We are always looking to
share what we have learned with others, to build strong
and mutually beneficial partnerships with nations
around the world.
Now, let us take a look at the countries that are
leading the disgraceful campaign of discrimination
against Israel. When was the last time we heard of Iran,
Libya, Tunisia or Venezuela making any advances in
medicine or in water technology that could help the
world? Those are some of the nations that are leading
the efforts to demonize Israel. Standing back and
allowing them to use the United Nations as a platform
for their blatant hypocrisy undermines the integrity of
this institution.

19/10/2016

not give up. We will continue to fight back against the
slander and the lies. The founding vision of the United
Nations is still a symbol of hope for the Jewish people,
for the State of Israel and for all humankind.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the members of the Council.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we would
like to express our gratitude to the Russian delegation
in its capacity as President of the Security Council for
convening this very important debate so that we can
address the very critical situation of the Palestinian
people and the Middle East. We would also like to
express our gratitude to Mr. Nickolay Mladenov and
Mr. Stephen O’Brien for their briefings.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM) in our capacity as
Chair of that group of 120 countries, Member States of
the United Nations that make up nearly two thirds of
the United Nations membership.
During the seventeenth NAM Summit, held on
Margarita Island, Venezuela, the Heads of State and
of Government stressed, inter alia, the urgency of
achieving a just, lasting, comprehensive and peaceful
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which is at
the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict. The Summit called
for a concerted effort by all the parties concerned to
achieve that long-overdue objective. The Heads of State
and of Government stressed that a peaceful solution to
the question of Palestine remained a priority on the
Movement’s agenda and reaffirmed their principled
support for efforts to resolve the conflict, while stressing
their readiness to contribute to the achievement of a
peaceful solution.

“The sooner the United Nations obsession with
Israel ends, the better — the better for Israel, the
better for other countries, the better for the United
Nations itself” (A/71/PV.14, p. 30).

It is on the basis of that clear and comprehensive
position, which is in keeping with long-standing
principles, that the Non-Aligned Movement has
consistently come before the Security Council to urge it
to uphold its Charter responsibilities and its numerous
resolutions with regard to the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict, which, all agree, continues to pose a threat to
international peace and security and which requires the
Council to act with urgency and responsibility.

There is a way forward. It is time for the United
Nations to start thinking outside the box. Those acts of
political theatre do not help the Palestinian people, nor
do they help to bring the two sides together. But we will

NAM reiterates its deep regret that the question
of Palestine remains unresolved after the passage
of more than 68 years since the 1948 Al-Nakba
that befell the Palestinian people. The Movement

Anti-Israel bias here at the United Nations is not a
law of nature. As Prime Minister Netanyahu said when
he came to the United Nations last month,

12/64

16-33267

19/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

also expresses its deep regret that, since 1967 — for
49 years, in other words — the Palestinian people
have suffered continuously under the brutal Israeli
military occupation of their territory and continue to
be denied their fundamental human rights, including
the right to self-determination. Incredibly, that brutal
military occupation has entered its fiftieth year,
and the world stands witness to its entrenchment, in
complete violation of international law, including the
Fourth Geneva Convention. It also bears witness to the
countless violations and crimes being perpetrated by
Israel, the occupying Power, in order to impose and
maintain its illegal occupation in a belligerent manner.
Each time the Council holds an open debate
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
question of Palestine, the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries appeals for international attention and for
urgent action to address the question of the illegal
and brutal Israeli occupation that is causing so much
anguish to the Palestinian people and provoking deep
anger and frustration and inflaming tensions. The
breaches of international law, including humanitarian
and human rights law, that are being committed by
Israel, the occupying Power, are inflicting widespread
human suffering and are deliberately destabilizing the
situation, with far-reaching negative consequences for
the prospects for a peaceful solution to the PalestinianIsraeli conflict and for peace and security in the Middle
East and other regions — goals that everyone in the
Chamber professes a commitment to seek.
At every opportunity, we repeat our call to the
international community, first and foremost to the
Security Council, to act in such a way as to ensure
respect for international law, to prevent further
deterioration of the situation, including through the the
adoption of the measures needed to compel Israel to
end its war crimes and human rights violations against
the Palestinian people, and to put an end to the illegal
foreign occupation of another people’s land. We also
believe that the Security Council must play its rightful
role in advancing a peaceful solution to the conflict and
maintaining international peace and security.
It is against the backdrop of those calls, which
continue to run up against the paralysis of the Council,
that Israel persists with impunity in its disregard of any
and all provisions of international law. That includes its
illegal settlement activities, whereby Israel continues
to confiscate Palestinian land and to build and expand
colonial settlements, and erecting its wall on Palestinian

S/PV.7792

land, which continues to reveal the intentions of the
occupying Power to continue the illegal seizure and de
facto annexation of Palestinian land and to continue
undermining its contiguity and the viability of a twoState solution based on the pre-1967 borders. The
latest Israeli settlement announcements have further
highlighted such ill-intentioned schemes and plans.
Regrettably, the Security Council has failed to
uphold its obligations, despite a clear global consensus
on both the illegal nature of Israel’s policies and
practices in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, and the urgency of ending the decadeslong conflict so that the Palestinian people can finally
enjoy the freedom, rights and justice they have been
unjustly denied for too long. Israel, the occupying
Power, has been clearly emboldened by that inaction
on the part of the international community and the lack
of accountability.
Consequently, Israel has intensified its illegal,
oppressive measures against the defenceless Palestinian
civilian population, including, inter alia, by using
excessive force against civilians, including women and
children, and causing death and injury. Israel continues
with its illegal, repressive and punitive measures
against the Palestinian people. Examples include home
demolitions, the forced displacement of civilians, mass
arrests and the detention of civilians, and the inhumane
blockade of the Gaza Strip, all of which constitute
flagrant forms of collective punishment and cause
extreme isolation and suffering for the Palestinian
population in the area. The destructive impact of
such Israeli violations is immense, as reflected
in the enormous tensions and the deterioration of
socioeconomic conditions and the intensification of
frustrations and despair.
The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries calls for
a cessation of all of those illegal Israeli policies and
practices against the Palestinian people and calls for
respect for international law, including humanitarian
and human rights law, and for all the relevant
United Nations resolutions. It is unconscionable and
unjustifiable to continue to permit such grave and
systematic breaches of the law without consequences.
The law must be respected and implemented; it is
obligatory upon all States. It is not voluntary, and Israel
should not be the exception.
The Security Council must act in accordance with
its resolutions and the clear provisions of international

16-3326713/64

S/PV.7792

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

humanitarian law so as to address the ongoing crisis,
rectify the injustice and ensure the protection of the
Palestinian civilian population under Israeli occupation
until a peaceful, just and lasting solution is found.
The Council must address, on a priority basis,
Israel’s violations of international law, in particular
the Fourth Geneva Convention and the Council’s own
resolutions, in order to bring a halt to Israel’s ongoing
illegal colonization of the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, which constitutes the source
of innumerable other violations, including flagrant
human rights violations, by the occupying Power and
which are destroying the possibility of the two-State
solution approved by the Council’s own resolutions,
beginning with resolution 242 (1967). That is a minimal
and fundamental request to the Security Council that
is not beyond the realm of reason or its obligation in
this matter.
Finally, at a time when the Palestinian people
are facing increasing Israeli aggression and when
their hopes for realizing peace and justice are rapidly
diminishing, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
takes this opportunity to reaffirm its long-standing
solidarity with the Palestinian people and to recognize
their decades of resilience despite so much suffering
and injustice. NAM reiterates its support for the
realization of their national aspirations and inalienable
rights, including their right to self-determination and
freedom in an independent and viable Palestinian State,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, as well as for a just
solution to ease the plight of the Palestinian refugees,
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 194
(III). NAM will also continue to offer its support for
international and regional efforts aimed at achieving
those noble objectives.
Furthermore, Lebanon continues to suffer
from continuous Israeli violations of its borders
and incursions into its territory, following years of
occupation and aggression. Unfortunately, Israel has
heightened its incursions into Lebanon by continuing to
violate Lebanese airspace. Such activities are a blatant
violation of Lebanese sovereignty and the relevant
international resolutions, in particular resolution 1701
(2006). The provisions of that resolution should be
implemented in a manner that ensures that Lebanon’s
foundations for stability and security are strengthened,
and that prevents Israel from undertaking its daily
violations of Lebanese sovereignty.
14/64

19/10/2016

With regard to the occupied Syrian Golan and
especially in view of the recent blatant defiance exhibited
against the will of the international community, the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries condemns all
the measures taken by Israel, the occupying Power, to
alter the legal, physical and demographic status of the
occupied Syrian Golan, measures that have intensified
since the outbreak of the Syrian crisis. NAM demands
once again that Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981) and
withdraw fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the
borders established on 4 June 1967, in implementation
of resolution 242 (1967) and resolution 338 (1973).
In my national capacity, I wish to highlight the
informal meeting on 14 October, which was jointly
sponsored by Angola, Egypt, Malaysia, Senegal
and Venezuela, on the serious problem posed by the
construction and expansion of Israeli settlements in
the occupied territories of the State of Palestine. That
meeting — considered by the Israeli Government to
constitute diplomatic terrorism — was attended by
members of the Security Council and the United Nations,
and its speakers included the following representatives
from civil society: Lara Friedman, Hagai El-Ad and
François Dubuisson. It should be noted that, following
the meeting, the Israeli Government threatened civil
society organizations from Israel and the United States
of America.
In their presentations, both the briefers and the
members of the Council overwhelmingly agreed that the
occupation is the main cause of the precarious situation
of the Palestinian people, and that the settlement policy
is not only one of the most notorious expressions of
the injustice of that reality, but is the main obstacle to
peace and thereby to the two-State solution. A relevant
remark made by the speakers in the meeting was that the
Israeli political establishment does not recognize that
its illegal activities have international consequences
and they continue to carry them out, without adhering
to international legal principles and without paying any
attention to United Nations resolutions.
In that context, Venezuela therefore reiterates that
the Security Council has a primary and inescapable
responsibility to take decisions regarding the prolonged
occupation, including the issue of illegal settlements.
It is therefore also necessary to overcome the inaction
of the Council and take steps to demand an end to the
occupation and its related policies. We encourage,
and will support, any initiative to adopt a resolution
demanding that Israel end its illegal settlement policy.
16-33267

19/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Likewise, we support all diplomatic proposals aimed
at achieving a political and peaceful solution to the
Palestinian issue, such as the Arab Peace Initiative and
the efforts of the Quartet and the Security Council, and
we decidedly support the French initiative to hold an
international conference on the Israel/Palestine issue at
the end of the year. Moreover, we emphasize the need
for the international protection of Palestinian civilians,
as called for by the President of the Palestinian National
Authority, and demand that Israel put an end to its
imprisonment of Palestinian children. More than 400
Palestinian children have been imprisoned by Israel,
and we demand that those children be freed.
Finally, our country reaffirms its support for the
request of the State of Palestine to be admitted as a full
Member of the United Nations. We therefore call on the
Security Council to assume its responsibilities in that
matter, so that the General Assembly may proceed in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I wish
to begin by thanking Mr. Nikolay Mladenov and
Mr. Stephen O’Brien for their statements, as well as
their commitments.
France has long been aware of the alarming fact
that the so-called status quo in the Middle East is
deteriorating and is doing so on a daily basis, affecting
both populations and peace prospects. With each day
that passes, the two-State solution — which, now more
than ever, should be our collective guide — is further
threatened. Clarity is our first joint responsibility.
If nothing is done, the fragile horizon of the twoState solution will simply disappear, giving way to
a fait accompli in which Israeli security will not be
guaranteed and the legitimate rights of the Palestinians
will not be exercised. I wish to reiterate that, for France,
the one-State solution is not in anyone’s interest.
At the Arria Formula meeting last Friday, the
findings of Council members were unanimous
regarding trends that conspire to threaten the twoState solution. The first of those trends is obviously
the continuing settlement policy. What is clear is that
settlement is the result of a deliberate and structured
policy of the Israeli State. Israel is not just approving
building plans, but is also ensuring that settlements
are viable, sustainable and part of a tightly woven
territorial, road, communication and socioeconomic
network that over the years, will lead to a fait accompli
and erode the territory of the future Palestinian State.

S/PV.7792

Despite calls from the international community and
despite the recommendations of the latest Quartet
report (S/2016/595, annex) earlier this month, Israel
announced the construction of 98 new housing units near
the Shilo settlement, thus building a new settlement.
The international community has been unanimous in
condemning the decision, which contributes to fuelling
tensions and makes the prospects of a viable Palestinian
State increasingly unlikely.
Furthermore, acts of violence and the incitement
to violence and hatred also jeopardize the ability of the
Israeli and Palestinian peoples to sustainably coexist in
peace and security, without even mentioning the regular
rocket fire on Israel from Gaza. France condemned the
fatal attack in Jerusalem on 13 October and is aware
that high levels of tension continue, which can erupt in
the blink of an eye, as evidenced last year, and can lead
to a rapid escalation of violence.
Finally, it is essential to encourage progress in
inter-Palestinian reconciliation in order to end the
division of the Palestinian territories, on which the twoState solution also depends. Without Palestinian unity
there will be no viable peace agreement. In the light
of that unchangeable fact and in order to prevent the
cycle of violence that Israel and Palestine experienced
in autumn 2015 from happening again, our message in
recent months has been constant – political dialogue
must be reinitiatedand the two-State solution saved.
We are convinced that it is the only way of breaking the
current deadlock and recreating positive momentum.
This is the thrust of France’s initiative. We must
first launch a political mobilization. While the peace
process has been partially eclipsed by the serious
crises shaking the Middle East, our primary objective
is to re-establish the conflict at the heart of the
diplomatic agenda.
Our second goal is to collectively and
unambiguously reaffirm support for the two-State
solution, as it is the only solution that will ensure
security for Israel and fulfil the legitimate aspirations
of the Palestinian people.
The third goal of the French initiative is to promote
international support for the parties through a renewed
and collective approach, based on a coherent support
and incentive mechanism.
It is obvious that peace cannot be imposed on
the parties. But we all must recognize that, under the

16-3326715/64

S/PV.7792

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

current conditions, an immediate resumption of direct
negotiations is not yet possible, owing to the great
mistrust between the parties. Our initiative aims to bring
about the conditions, especially political conditions,
that will enable a resumption of negotiations, to build
consensus around the path to a two-State solution and
to promote the convergence of all existing proposals in
one direction.
The ministerial meeting held in Paris on 3 June
marked the first and essential stage of an international
mobilization to save the two-State solution. We will
continue efforts, in close coordination with the Quartet
and all partners, notably through several working
groups that are being established, in order to lay the
groundwork for the international conference that
France hopes to organize by the end of the year. Our
objective is to help the parties understand how peace
is in their best interest and how the active support of
the international community can assist them, and to get
them involved in the next phase of the process. France’s
approach is resolutely inclusive, and all goodwill efforts
are welcome in this joint effort.
France is committed to ensuring the success
of the initiative and to bring the parties to resume
negotiations for a peace agreement, on the basis
of renewed international support and concrete and
encouraging proposals. We call particularly for the
support of Security Council members. Let us together
shoulder our historic responsibility to bringing peace to
the Middle East.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank this morning’s briefers,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, from Jerusalem, and
Mr. Stephen O’Brien, for the clarity of their briefings,
which highlight once again the alarming situation
on the ground. It continues to be characterized by
the pursuit of settlements and violence in one of the
most difficult humanitarian situations, particularly in
Gaza, all against the backdrop of the deadlock in the
political process.
Just one month ago, in this Chamber, the SecretaryGeneral indicated (see S/PV.7774) that, unfortunately,
23 years after the signing of the Oslo Accords, the
reality on the ground in the Middle East resembled
a one-State solution more closely than the twoState solution that we, the Security Council and the
international community, are pursuing.
16/64

19/10/2016

The Council has regularly considered the
intensification and acceleration of settlement-building,
especially during this past year. Aside from being
illegal, it represents the main obstacle to the two-State
solution. Nonetheless, the last Council resolution on
the issue dates back to 2009, despite an increasingly
untenable situation on the ground. The pursuit of
settlements is ongoing, as confirmed by the figures and
statistics we heard this morning.
The demolition of houses and structures, as well
as administrative restrictions regarding the issuance
of construction permits to Palestinians — primarily in
Area C, which is completely segmented — resembles a
policy of fait accompli. According to the Quartet report
issued on 1 July 2016 (S/2016/595, annex), from 2009
to 2013, only 34 of 2,000 Palestinian applications were
approved. In 2014, only one was granted, and none in
2015. According to the same report, since the signing
of the Oslo Accords in 1993, over 570,000 Israelis
have settled in Area C in the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem.
At the Security Council’s Arria Formula meeting
on 14 October, credible presentations were made
regarding the rapid and ongoing growth of settlements,
including by Israeli organizations that corroborate that
trend. Fortunately, while warning about the danger the
expansion of the settlements poses both to the twoState solution and the security of Israel, the panellists
also showed that practical solutions are still possible.
They also called on the Council to take urgent action to
end the settlements, which are contrary to international
law and Security Council resolutions.
As for the humanitarian situation — which is
catastrrophic, particularly in Gaza — in the view of the
Senegalese delegation, it is a time bomb, with real risks
of increased radicalization and sectarianism. Therefore,
Senegal wants that this issue to be permanently included
in the briefings of the Security Council.
Beyond mere humanitarian assistance, we must
also address the recovery of the Palestinian economy.
It is in a difficult situation, primarily as a result of the
occupation, but also due to a decrease in assistance from
international partners and to the fact that the occupying
Power is withholding taxes due to the Palestinian State.
In that connection, the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development, in its annual report on the
costs of occupation, highlighted the economic stagnation
of the occupied territories of Palestine. According to
16-33267

19/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the report, 1.1 million people living in the West Bank
and 1.3 million in Gaza are in need of humanitarian
assistance, while the mortality rate has surged from 12
per thousand in 2012 to 50 per thousand today — an
untenable situation, as we look towards 2020.

S/PV.7792

Another illustration of the cost of the occupation is
the drastic decline of role of agriculture and industry
in the Palestinian economy, which has fallen from
37 per cent in 1975 to 18 per cent in 2014. In those
circumstances, it would be impossible for Palestine to
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals, despite all
governance efforts.

peace and security with the aim of reaching a lasting
solution to this conflict. It is in that spirit that we
have taken note of the conclusions of the Quartet
meeting held here in September on the margins of the
high-level segment of the seventy-first session of the
General Assembly, especially its recommendation on
improving coordination between the various initiatives
under way, such as the French initiative, so admirably
outlined by our colleague Mr. Delattre, aimed at
convening an international conference for relaunching
the process — because, and I am borrowing his words,
the status quo is aggression.

While we reiterate our reproach of hatred,
violence and terrorism, whomsoever the perpetrators
and whatever the motivations, Senegal must recall
that it is the lack of political prospects that breeds
extremists on both sides. Administrative detentions,
collective punishments, disproportionate use of force
and the firing of missiles, besides being violations of
international law and human rights, fuel the feelings of
humiliation of Palestinians who have been living under
occupation for 50 years.

For its part, Senegal will also continue to encourage
the efforts of the Arab Group and the Russian
Federation. In our capacity as Chair of the United
Nations Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, we will continue to
work to achieve a final settlement through dialogue
and consultation that ensures Israel’s security as well
as the Palestinian people’s full and complete exercise
of their inalienable right to an independent and viable
Palestinian State.

What we need, as the Secretary-General stated so
eloquently, are courageous political initiatives on both
sides that give peace a real chance, based on a clear
political goal leading to a final settlement that leaves
no room for violence or terrorism. That is why Senegal
once again calls for an end to colonization and the
activities related to it with the aim of beginning goodfaith discussions according to an agreed-on timetable
with specific goals leading to a lasting peace that
addresses Israel’s security needs and Palestinians’
legitimate aspirations to the status of a sovereign State
with East Jerusalem as its capital, based on the pre1967 borders.

Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank Mr. Stephen O’Brien, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, and Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for their briefings. I take this opportunity
to reiterate Uruguay’s full support for Mr. Mladenov in
his work.

In that regard, I reiterate Senegal’s hope that
despite being postponed, Palestine’s local elections
will be held throughout its territory and pave the way
for reconciliation between the political actors and for
forming a Government of national unity. My delegation
reiterates its active solidarity with the Palestinian people
and thereby reaffirms its support for the initiative that
aims to make 2017 the year when we see an end to 50
years of occupation.
We also encourage the Quartet in its efforts and
reiterate our belief that in assuming its responsibility,
both moral and legal, the Security Council will have the
means to play its part as a guarantor of international

Uruguay has been following the evolving situation
in the Middle East and is extremely concerned about
the increasing number of conflicts in the region and the
lack of progress that has been made in reaching lasting
solutions. This Organization has been trying to find a
path to peace in the Middle East since its creation more
than 70 years ago, and yet that goal still seems a long
way off.
Uruguay once again reiterates its support for the
right of Israel and Palestine to live in peace within
secure, recognized borders, free of any threat or action
that would disturb peace in their territories. To that
end, we support a solution based on two independent
States, in the firm belief that is the only option that will
enable Israel and Palestine to live in peace, side by side.
We also believe it is crucial to urge the international
community to step up its efforts to support that
process and to encourage the parties to return to the
negotiating table with the goal of achieving a peaceful,

16-3326717/64

S/PV.7792

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

just, negotiated and lasting solution that takes into
account the interests of both sides, in accordance with
international law. In that context, it is essential to
ensure that both parties create the necessary conditions
for resuming direct negotiations and that their actions
and policies demonstrate their commitment to a twoState solution.
Uruguay welcomed the report of the Quartet
(S/2016/595, annex), which makes a significant
contribution to identifying measures to enable progress
to be made on resolving the Middle East peace process.
In that regard, we are concerned about the report’s
conclusion that if the current situation continues, a twoState solution will no longer be viable, owing to the
continuing violence, terrorist attacks and incitement
to violence; the continued policies of expansion and
settlement building; the designation of land exclusively
for Israel’s use and the denial of development for
Palestine; and the increase in illicit weapons and
militant activity, the continued lack of Palestinian unity
and the problem of the humanitarian situation in Gaza.
In that regard, Uruguay remains concerned about
the Israeli authorities’ decisions to keep building
houses in settlements, the most recent of them
announced on 4 October for the occupied Palestinian
territory in the West Bank. The settlements are illegal
under international law and contrary to the Quartet’s
recommendations. Uruguay therefore reiterates its call
on the parties to refrain from unilateral decisions that
present obstacles to dialogue and to compliance with
their international legal obligations, and urges the State
of Israel to stop building illegal settlements.
Uruguay reiterates its firm condemnation of terrorist
attacks, in the belief that terrorist and violent extremist
attacks on the life and dignity of innocent civilians
should not be tolerated anywhere. In that regard, we
condemn the attacks on 9 October that took the lives of
two Israeli citizens. Similarly, we lament the numerous
cases of Palestinians who, despite being unarmed, have
died at the hands of Israeli security forces. We welcome
initiatives, including those of France and the Russian
Federation, that can enable us to make progress in the
quest for solutions to the Middle East peace process.
However, none of those actions can replace the sole
genuine path to peace represented by direct negotiations
between Palestinians and Israelis. In that regard, and
in conclusion, I am very proud to cite the hopeful
message that has arisen in my own region, specifically
18/64

19/10/2016

in Colombia. Colombia is showing us that peace is
possible, but it requires leaders to display the belief
and courage needed to take risks in the cause of peace.
The four years of negotiations were not easy and even
now there are still clouds on the horizon, but the leaders
on both sides continue to risk their personal prestige
and political legacies in their stubborn and relentless
commitment to peace, truly a lesson that hopefully can
serve as an example to others.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
Israeli occupation of Palestinian territory has continued
for almost a century. Instead of learning lessons
from the protracted history, the complexities of the
Palestinian question have increased with time, just as
have the efforts aimed at entrenching the occupation
and deeming it an irrevocable fait accompli.
The international community repeatedly agreed
and reached consensus on what is called the twoState solution — an Israeli State and a Palestinian
State — based on the borders of June 1967, with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as the capital of the Palestinian State. Such
a solution envisages two States living side by side in
peace, where citizens enjoy equal rights, irrespective of
their origin, ethnicity or colour.
We have seen international resolutions adopted by
the Security Council and the General Assembly, as well
as by various entities and international organizations.
We have seen piles and piles of political and legal
documents that are incontestable and, unlike other
cases, unambiguous. We have fully internalized such
prescriptions of solutions, just as have those who are
closely following the question or even those who are
not necessarily directly related to it. Despite the long
history and heritage of politically and legally binding
prescriptions, and the fact that human nature and
conscience reject injustice and favour people’s right
to self-determination, we continue to meet, deliberate
and discuss issues that should be obvious and that have
been on the list of the agenda of the Security Council
since its inception.
The urgent need to end the occupation — the most
protracted and entrenched in modern history — should
not become taboo, nor tantamount to provocation.
Moreover, it must not interpreted as a measure
directed against one group of people or another. To
the contrary, the resolution of the Palestinian question
and the restoration of land and liberty to the original
owners, who continuously suffer behind walls in the
16-33267

19/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

West Bank or under siege in the Gaza Strip, is the
optimal means for the Israeli people to live in peace
with its Arab neighbours, peoples and countries. Such
countries continue to offer their hands in peace, and the
unprecedeted positions they have adopted demonstrate
their readiness to establish good neighbourly relations
with Israel through the Arab Peace Initiative.
On 14 October, members of the Council listened to
speakers from different parts of the world — the United
States of America, Belgium and even Israel — under
the Arria Formula. The meeting confirmed once again,
that Israeli settlement activities do not only constitute
obstacles to peace and the two-State solution, but they
are the very crux of the crisis. The Palestinian question
is first and foremost a question of a territory that was
occupied by force. It is a question of a people whose
right to live in dignity in their homeland was usurped.
The meeting also showed us what we should understand
and appreciate, and by that I mean pro-peace Israeli
voices. Those voices understand that it is impossible
for the occupation to continue and for there to be
coexistence while there are ongoing attempts to force a
fait accompli by dismembering Palestinian land, acting
on the policy of home demolition and displacement
of families or discriminating in the implementation
of laws. Those are the voices that understand that no
people can exist at the expense of the rights of other
people.
I am confident that the call for peace made by Israel
at the United Nations expresses the feelings of a wide
sector of the Israeli people, if not the majority. We, as
Egyptians and Arabs, are determined to urge that sector
and the Israeli people as a whole to continue to march
for comprehensive and just peace in the region — the
same march that began years ago with the signing of the
Egypt-Israel Peace Treaty.
The picture remains bleak. The Palestinians
continue to suffer under the yoke of the occupation
and its practices and violations. However, it is possible
to salvage a settlement provided that there is genuine
will. If there are additional calls from Israel for the
restoration of Palestinian rights, it would then behoove
all of the friends of Israel to adopt the same approach,
particularly the influential, major Powers that bear a
significant share of the responsibility for the situation.
Those Powers provided cover and immunity to the
Israeli occupation. And while we encourage and are
fully committed to all the current initiatives to salvage
the two-State solution and the peace process, and while

S/PV.7792

we are determined to continue to communicate with the
Palestinian and Israeli parties in the coming period, the
friends of Israel must also realize that we, as Arabs and
Egyptians, hope they respond sooner than later to the
calls for peace put forth by Palestinians and Israelis.
We urge them to work to that end and react favourably,
both in and outside of the Security Council, to save
Israeli and Palestinian generations from a future that is
very difficult to predict.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): Let me also
like to thank Nickolay Mladenov and Stephen O’Brien
for their briefings.
This is the final Middle East open debate of New
Zealand’s current Security Council term. We think
it appropriate, therefore, to reflect on the Council’s
collective response to the grave and intensifying
peace-and-security challenges confronting the region.
Over the past two years, New Zealand has sought to
challenge the passivity that has often characterized
the Council’s response to these problems. We have
encouraged Council colleagues to focus on identifying
practical contributions to preventing and resolving
these conflicts, and we have put forward our own ideas
for action to support progress. Frankly, it has been an
uphill battle.
The forces that gave rise to these conflicts are
complex and intractable. And often, the Council has
allowed itself to outsource to other players the role
envisaged for it in the Charter of the United Nations
as the principal international organ responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security. Today
I will focus on three specific situations where we need
to make progress.
First, on Syria, after more than five years of brutal
conflict and intolerable suffering for the Syrian people,
it is shocking that those with the power to halt the
war continue to delay, equivocate and escalate, rather
than genuinely pushing for a political solution. As my
Prime Minister underlined to the Council last month
(see S/PV.7774), the key steps needed are clear to all:
a nationwide ceasefire, negotiations on a meaningful
political transition and a united front for fighting
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and other
terrorist groups.
We were deeply disappointed that the efforts by the
United States and Russia to chart a way out of the Syrian
crisis broke down. We were appalled that the breakdown
was followed by a devastating escalation in bombing,

16-3326719/64

S/PV.7792

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

particularly of eastern Aleppo. We were outraged that
the alleged pursuit of terrorists was used to justify
large-scale indiscriminate attacks, for which civilians
have paid the price. And in the face of all of that, the
Council has been unable to act, as was demonstrated
so clearly 10 days ago. We therefore welcome the
resumption of diplomatic efforts in Switzerland last
weekend and are encouraged those discussions are
continuing. Those taking part in the Lausanne process
have the opportunity and responsibility to translate
these talks into making a meaningful and sustained
difference for Syrians. But so too does this Council.
As is widely known, New Zealand has, with the
active support of a number of other Council members,
made an effort in recent days to promote a new approach
to a possible Council resolution. Our immediate
priority has been to de-escalate the current violence,
particularly in eastern Aleppo, which could be achieved
by ending attacks against civilians. We also wanted to
take steps to build trust, for example, through medical
evacuations and pauses for humanitarian access.
We have been encouraged that all Council
members have been prepared to engage in discussions
on our draft resolution. But it has also been apparent
that the level of distrust between key players is high,
as is scepticism about the prospects for a meaningful
outcome. We find that very sad. If we can do nothing,
we will only confirm the view prevalent in many of our
populaces that the Security Council is not capable of
fulfilling its responsibilities under the Charter.
Secondly, with respect to Yemen, 18 months after
the actions of the Houthi and their allies tipped Yemen
into conflict, all sides to the conflict now need to do
much more to pursue a sustainable peace. As in Syria,
civilians on both sides have borne the brunt of this
conflict. Thousands have been killed. Most Yemenis
are now in need of humanitarian assistance. Millions
are at risk of famine. And there is an increasingly
serious risk of economic collapse, which would further
exacerbate the suffering.
Like others, New Zealand was shocked by
the coalition air strike against a funeral in Sana’a
on 8 October, which resulted in significant levels
of civilian casualties. We are encouraged by the
Coalition’s response in moving quickly to acknowledge
its responsibilities and investigate the circumstances of
this tragic event. Urgent steps are now needed to ensure
20/64

19/10/2016

such incidents do not happen again and that those
responsible are held to account.
But our central focus on the Council must be
on ending the fighting. We welcome the ceasefire
announced by the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy
and due to begin later today. We urge all involved
to respect its terms and use this opportunity to
commit — genuinely and fully — to achieving a
political solution. We extend our strong support to the
ongoing efforts by the United Nations Special Envoy,
the Quad countries, Kuwait and others in the region to
maintain momentum towards a political solution to this
crisis. The Council must be ready to act in support of
their efforts.
Thirdly, with regard to Israel and Palestine, it has
been deeply disappointing to witness the continued
stagnation of efforts to resolve the decades-old conflict
between Israelis and Palestinians. During our time
on the Council, we have seen several initiatives to
encourage progress, including by my delegation. None
has borne fruit in the continued absence of a genuine
will by leaders on both sides to make the hard decisions
and tough compromises necessary to break the current
deadlock and put peace ahead of short-term thinking
and self-interest.
I would draw on Amos Oz’s recent eulogy for
Shimon Peres — where now are the brave leaders who
recognize that peace is not only possible but necessary,
because the Israelis and Palestinians have nowhere
else to go? Instead, what we have seen has been the
continuation of actions and trends that take us further
and further away from the possibility of a negotiated,
two-State solution.
Israel’s continued policies of settlement construction
and demolitions are particularly concerning, as last
Friday’s Arria Formula meeting underlined. As my
Minister stressed to the Council last month, no amount
of spin or any criticism of well-intentioned Israelis and
others can hide the fact that these settlements are a
violation of Israel’s international obligations and have
profoundly negative implications for the peace process.
The significant expansion of these settlements deep
into the West Bank increasingly calls into question the
continued viability of any future Palestinian State. We
call on Israel to stop the settlements and the demolitions.
Continued inflammatory rhetoric, incitement
and acts of violence are also profoundly damaging
to prospects for peace. We continue to see attacks on
16-33267

19/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Israeli security and civilians, at times with the tacit
acceptance or outright encouragement of elements of
the Palestinian leadership. This is unacceptable and is
further eroding what trust remains between the parties.
The Palestinian Authority must do all it can to prevent
and condemn such attacks.
The only alternative on offer to a two-State solution
is a future of perpetual occupation, characterized by
endless violence and increasingly brutal oppression.
This scenario should provide a compelling rationale for
engagement and action by the Security Council. And
yet it has been almost eight years since the Security
Council last passed a resolution on the issue. In July, the
Council was unable even to acknowledge the Quartet’s
latest report (S/2016/595, annex). We fervently hope
that Council members will commit themselves to
supporting action to reaffirm the need for a two-State
solution and enable practical steps towards making it
a reality.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing, as well
as Mr. Stephen O’Brien. They have described for us
in great detail the seriousness of the situation in the
Middle East region in general.
This is a debate in which one could speak about
the critical situation in Syria, one could speak about
the efforts that Jordan and Lebanon have been making
to address the refugee crisis, one could speak about
the critical situation in Yemen, or one could speak
about Mosul, to which Mr. O’Brien has just referred.
However, since we have the representative of Palestine
and the representative of Israel at this table today, as is
customary, and since the Security Council can address
the various aforementioned issues on a separate basis,
I am now going to focus essentially on the IsraeliPalestinian conflict.
After receiving all the information we received
a few days ago in the Arria Formula meeting on the
settlements, it would be difficult to have any doubt
that the two-State solution is in serious danger of
disappearing as a viable option, and if the two-State
solution disappears, it would benefit neither Palestine
nor Israel. What is true is that all members of the
Security Council have heard and repeated that phrase
over and over again for too long. Not surprisingly, last
Friday one of the speakers, Mr. Hagai El-Ad, recalled
that as far back as six years ago, Vice-President Biden
described the status quo as unsustainable. But even

S/PV.7792

if we have been repeating that the status quo is not
sustainable so for such a long time, it is not just rhetoric.
There are some things that need to be repeated, and I
am doing so again today.
First, with regard to the settlements, as we already
said on Friday, we believe that Israel should stop the
construction of the settlements and the demolition of
Palestinian structures. These activities are illegal under
international law and constitute an obstacle to peace.
We also believe that the expansion of settlements is
counterproductive to the Israel’s own interests, because,
by continuing on this path, the reality on the ground
will end up leading to a one-State solution, which would
not seem to be the best way to ensure Israel’s security,
which is also absolutely necessary.
Secondly, the settlements are not the only obstacle to
peace. Terrorism is also an obstacle, in addition to being
unjustifiable in every case and in all circumstances. I
would like to express our condolences to the families
of the victims of the attack on 9 October in Jerusalem,
for which we express our strongest condemnation. We
also condemn the messages of incitement to violence,
which we have again heard in recent days. The parties
must halt the incitement to violence and refrain from
the disproportionate use of force.
Thirdly, we also must not forget that the
intra-Palestinian division has as well been an obstacle to
peace. We hope that the municipal elections in Palestine
can finally take place, as they represent a very valuable
opportunity to advance the process of reconciliation
among Palestinians, which is of the utmost importance
to advance towards peace.
Fourthly, I was greatly moved by the data
Mr. O’Brien provided, much of which was not new to
me. I will not reiterate it all. But I do wish to recall that
70 per cent of the population in the Gaza Strip does
not have regular access to running water, and 40 per
cent of those who are ill cannot leave Gaza to obtain
treatment. Another 60 per cent of young people in Gaza
are unemployed, which means there is no future for
Gaza nor for Palestine. Without a hopeful future for
the Palestinian people, Israel’s security also cannot
be guaranteed. What we all want to see is a two-State
solution whereby they can live in peace.
The question that naturally arises, which all
participants raised in the Arria Formula meeting, is
what the Security Council can do to try to prevent
that from unravelling. I will not beat around the bush.

16-3326721/64

S/PV.7792

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Again and again, through the months, the Council has
debated the question of Palestine and has observed
the danger that the two-State solution may no longer
be viable. Yet again, Spain has stressed that it believes
that the Council has a role to play on the question and a
responsibility to fulfil. We continue to believe that and
will continue to do so.
But we should also keep in mind that it is crucial for
a possible Security Council statement to be vested with
true value added. For that reason, it is also essential
for us to carefully consider the right moment and mode
of action. In short, once again, we fully agree that it
is urgent and extremely important to reverse current
trends and to find ways to unblock the peace process.
This seems impossible without the international
community’s agreement and the understanding that
the international community cannot impose a solution
on the parties. Peace can ultimately be achieved only
through direct negotiations between the parties. In that
context, the Council must act. In order to do that, it
must seriously take into account the various initiatives
presented in recent months, while consistently finding
ways to strengthen them and ensuring that they leverage
their potential complementarity.
In conclusion, we particularly reiterate our support
to France in its efforts to organize an international
conference. We have always endorsed that initiative, and
we also support other initiatives under way, including
the work of the Quartet and the initiatives of Russia
and Egypt. We also reiterate the importance the Arab
Peace Initiative has to jump-start the peace process. In
the coming months, we hope that those initiatives will
converge in a coherent manner towards the goal we all
agree on, that is, none other than to help the parties
to overcome the current dynamic of estrangement
in order to bring about the necessary conditions to
resume negotiations.

19/10/2016

is the Israeli settlement policy. The announcement on
5 October of Israel’s intention to build 300 housing
units and to establish an industrial zone in the West
Bank is a clear signal of further intensification of
settlement activities. Linking a string of outposts
in the West Bank, which would effectively divide it,
will undermine and potentially even ruin Palestinian
State-building efforts, which is yet another hard blow
to the peace process.
But terror is not an answer either. Ukraine strongly
condemns the shooting that took place on 8 October
on Jerusalem’s Ammunition Hill, which resulted in
Israeli casualties. We are deeply concerned about a
vicious circle of escalation that we constantly witness.
The often repeated pattern of attacks and counterattacks demonstrates that the status quo is a road to
nowhere. We strongly believe that the Israeli side
must demonstrate genuine restraint and refrain from
a disproportionate use of force, which could only stir
up violence and lead to increased casualties, whereas
the Palestinian side must condemn any crime and
violent assault perpetrated by Palestinians against
Israelis and apply all possible efforts to prevent them.
The lack of progress on this track will only play into
extremists’ hands, who stand to win from a collapse of
the peace process. Therefore, halting the violence and
de-escalating the situation are immediate priorities.
Ukraine reiterates its position that in elaborating a
workable Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement, the
relevant provisions of respective Security Council
resolutions, the Madrid principles, including land for
peace, the road map and the agreements previously
reached by the parties, as well as the 2002 Arab Peace
Initiative, must be respected.

Mr.
Yelchenko
(Ukraine):
Ukraine
has
consistently supported the Middle East peace process
and the principle of a two-State solution with Israel and
Palestine coexisting in peace and security. The lack
of direct dialogue and an almost non-existent political
process create an extremely unpredictable and explosive
situation. That deteriorating trend has unfortunately
become a new normal, thereby making an agreement
on the basis of a two-State solution ever more elusive.

The Middle East is ablaze and suffering from deep
and entrenched conflicts that are tearing the region apart
and posing a grave danger for the wider international
security system. The conflict in Syria continues to
spiral out of control, despite all the efforts of most
Council members and those of the wider international
community. The conflict-settlement mechanism that
was built during the past 12 months has failed to bring
about the desired result in Syria. The dramatic Security
Council meeting on 8 October (see S/PV.7785), and a
predictable but nevertheless deeply disappointing fifth
use of the veto by the Russian Federation, testify to the
bankruptcy of the veto right.

On that point we have to state clearly that one of
the strongest drivers contributing to today’s status quo

Outside the United Nations framework, the
International Syria Support Group platform and the

22/64

16-33267

19/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

entire Vienna process have not provided the necessary
breakthrough either. As a result, we are practically
back to square one. We believe that only the full
implementation and adherence to the word and spirit of
the 2012 Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and
resolution 2254 (2015) can lead to the settlement of the
conflict in Syria.
Moving on to other regional threats, there is no
question regarding the urgent need to put an end to the
violence in Yemen. The continued lack of progress in
the intra-Yemeni political process is deeply troubling.
In that regard, we highly value the efforts by Kuwait
and other mediators who are engaged in ongoing efforts
to bring about peace. Taking note of the Special Envoy’s
announcement of a nationwide cessation of hostilities
for an initial period 72-hour period, we call on the
parties to resume direct talks without preconditions.
Finally, on the spread of terrorism, Ukraine is
fully committed to eradicating the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) as a global threat. We are
encouraged by the substantial progress achieved by the
coalition against ISIL in Iraq and Syria in the past two
months. The operation to liberate Mosul has a special
significance, given the city’s strategic importance. We
hope that the liberation of Mosul will become a turning
point in degrading and ultimately destroying Da’esh.
In conclusion, I would like to underline that,
without a clear way out of the multiple crises that
are tearing apart the Middle East, particularly those
in Syria, Yemen and Iraq, coupled with the ongoing
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, it will be impossible to
contain the growing threat of violent extremism and the
global spread of terrorist groups, as well as to put an
end to the continuing flow of refugees from the region.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I thank
Special Coordinator Mladenov and Under-SecretaryGeneral O’Brien for their briefings today. Let me begin
by discussing the Israeli-Palestinian conflict before
moving ont o Iraq and Syria.
We appreciate the briefing that we received today
on the troubling political, security, humanitarian and
economic conditions in Gaza. More than two years
after the last conflict in Gaza, reconstruction efforts are
beginning to bear fruit. However, a recent International
Monetary Fund report put the area’s unemployment
rate at a staggering 41 per cent. The United States
fulfilled 100 per cent of the $414-million commitment
we made at the 2014 International Cairo Conference on

S/PV.7792

Palestine “Reconstructing Gaza”, yet of the $3.5 billion
in pledges made at the Conference, just 46 per cent
have materialized thus far. Words of concern should be
matched with real resources.
As some have already mentioned, last week the
Security Council held an Arria-Formula meeting
on settlements, including panelists from the
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) Americans
for Peace Now and B’Tselem. As I stated at that meeting
and reiterate again today, the United States would like to
thank those NGOs for sharing their technical expertise
regarding developments on the ground in Israel and the
West Bank. Just as we recognize the contributions of
non-governmental organizations around the world that
are working tirelessly to shed light on difficult issues,
it is vital that all Governments promote and protect an
atmosphere in which all voices can be heard.
The United States remains deeply concerned about
continuing terrorism, violence, incitement to violence
and militant activity. On 9 October, a horrific attack
in Jerusalem killed two Israelis and injured several
others. The United States strongly condemns this act
of terrorism and all statements glorifying it, and we
send our deepest condolences to the victims and their
families.
All Council members must make clear that terrorism
is unacceptable and unequivocally unjustifiable. Those
who commit or encourage acts of violence send a
message that they are not committed to peace. Hamas is
a terrorist organization. Hamas clearly opposes efforts
to find a peaceful diplomatic solution to the conflict.
Hamas denies Israel’s right to exist. Hamas has been
responsible for the most explicit and widespread forms
of incitement and has built up illicit arms and undertaken
militant activity in Gaza, obviously refusing to abide
by the Quartet principles.
As Secretary of State John Kerry recently stressed,
Israel must decide between expanding settlements
and preserving the possibility of a two-State solution.
Proceeding with steps such as the recent announcement
of a new West Bank settlement only moves Israel closer
towards cementing a one-State reality of perpetual
occupation that is fundamentally inconsistent with
Israel’s future as a Jewish and democratic State.
Over the past three months, we have seen the
advancement of over 2,400 settlement units in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem, together with the
retroactive legalization of unauthorized settlements

16-3326723/64

S/PV.7792

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

19/10/2016

and the demolition of nearly 300 Palestinian structures.
The United States Government believes that these
developments are part of a broader trend of legalizing
outposts, seizing land and expanding settlements, all of
which systematically undermine the two-State solution.

United Nations Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura has
said, Russia and the regime cannot use the presence of
several hundred extremists as an easy alibi to destroy
an area of the city with more than 275,000 civilians
whose lives hang in peril.

The Quartet report (S/2016/595, annex) calls on
both sides to take affirmative steps to reverse current
trends and advance the two-State solution, but frankly
we have witnessed the opposite since the report was
released three month ago. As we have stressed, we
need to start implementing the two-State solution on
the ground right now. The Quartet report includes
recommendations that we had hoped the parties would
take seriously. We all understand that a permanent
status agreement that finally ends the conflict can be
achieved only through direct bilateral negotiations
between the parties, but significant progress can be
made by the parties now that will preserve prospects
for two States. The United States will continue to call
on both sides to demonstrate, through policies and
actions, a genuine commitment to a two-State solution
and we will continue to oppose efforts that undermine
that goal.

Anguish over the violence is appropriate, but so too
is clarity with respect to who is responsible for it. We
must be equally clear that Russia and Al-Assad need
to stop hiding behind alibis while their bombs kill and
maim children. No more alibis; it is time to stop the
bombing of eastern Aleppo.

Turning to Iraq, the United States is confident
that the Iraqi security forces, including the Kurdish
Peshmerga, will prevail in their offensive against
Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in Mosul.
But as Under-Secretary-General O’Brien has reminded
us today, this will be a hard-fought battle with serious
humanitarian consequences. We have all seen the
brutal tactics used by ISIL to defend its territory:
hiding improvised explosive devices, booby-trapping
buildings and deploying civilians as human shields.
The United States will continue to urge all parties to
comply with international humanitarian law and allow
access to humanitarian aid. However, a victory in
Mosul will not be sufficient to stabilize Iraq on its own.
Member States need to assist with reconciliation efforts
that support more inclusive governance in Iraq, which
will help to support the communities that have suffered
under ISIL terror.
Let me conclude with Syria. Here at the Security
Council open debate and tomorrow at a meeting of the
General Assembly, all United Nations Member States
will have the chance to make their views on Syria
heard. Member States must do more than decry the
violence; they need to recognize those responsible for
it. Russia and the Al-Assad regime have launched an
all-out campaign to seize eastern Aleppo by force. As
24/64

Russia and the regime have announced a
momentary pause in the bombing ahead of an eight-hour
humanitarian pause on Thursday. However, Russia’s
total unwillingness to coordinate this unilateral pause
with the United Nations and other partners prevents
humanitarian partners from organizing any deliveries
of aid. As the United Nations has made clear, an eighthour pause does not even begin to address the city’s
humanitarian needs. The last delivery of food there was
on 7 July. The remaining food stocks are nearly depleted.
A population of hundreds of thousands is about to run
out of food and is at risk of literal starvation.
Strikes from the offensive carried out by Russia
and the regime have destroyed or damaged every single
hospital in eastern Aleppo and killed doctors and first
responders. The siege keeps medicine out and traps in
at least 200 critically injured Syrians who desperately
need medical evacuation. The United Nations has said
that there is food and medicine available in western
Aleppo, mere meters away, but the Al-Assad regime
will not give permission to deliver it. As Al-Assad’s
cruelty across Syria continues, the regime is besieging
14 other towns with 452,000 Syrians inside, according
to United Nations estimates. In these places, we
see the same tactics the regime employs in eastern
Aleppo — unrelenting air strikes along with denial of
aid to communities that are sometimes besieged for
years on end.
As the Joint Investigative Mechanism has stated,
both the Al-Assad regime and ISIL have used chemical
weapons against the Syrian people. We have heard
that some may still harbour doubts that Al-Assad used
chemical weapons, but these doubts are not grounded
in fact. The Council established the Joint Investigative
Mechanism to make an objective determination when
Council members could not agree upon who was involved
in the attacks. Those with doubts may have hoped for
16-33267

19/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

different conclusions from the Joint Investigative
Mechanism. But they are not entitled to change the
conclusions after the investigation — which everyone
on the Council supported — is over. The investigation
dictates the conclusions, not the other way around.
And the investigation found the Al-Assad regime
responsible, together with ISIL. It is therefore time
to stop debating the Joint Investigative Mechanism’s
methodology and begin holding accountable those
involved in using chemical weapons.
The United States will do whatever we can to
find a political solution to the conflict and end the
violence. That is why Secretary of State John Kerry
convened a meeting in Lausanne this past Saturday
with stakeholders from across the region. But it is a
simple fact that for political talks to work, Russia and
the Al-Assad regime must stop bombing the people
of eastern Aleppo. And there will need to be a true
cessation of hostilities across Syri, that is, one that
does not allow Russia and the regime to launch the
bombardment they have launched under pretence of
counter-terrorism.
This week a video, reported to be from eastern
Aleppo, emerged. It showed a 16-year-old boy named
Marouf dangling by his legs from the top of an apartment
building that had been hit by an air strike. Marouf was
quite literally hanging in the air with his legs pinned
between blocks of concrete and his hands wrapped
around bits of rubble. Eventually a first responder
managed to pry Marouf free from the rubble with a
cherry-picker. I am sorry, but Marouf was no Al-Nusra
terrorist when he was pinned under the rubble. He posed
no threat to Russia or the Al-Assad regime. Yet there he
was, a few inches from plummeting to the ground. Most
striking, perhaps, when one watches the video, was
Marouf’s yellow T-shirt, which had a simple message
on it saying “Don’t shoot”. Of course, the fighter pilots
that have dropped bombs on eastern Aleppo could not
read Marouf’s T-shirt. But we, as Members of this
Organization, can reiterate that message and demand
that Russia and the Al-Assad regime halt their attacks.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We align ourselves with the
part of the statement made earlier by the representative
of Venezuela that was on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
We are grateful to the briefers in this open debate on
the situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question, on which we will focus our attention.

S/PV.7792

Regrettably,
Under-Secretary-General
Stephen
O’Brien and Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov
were unable to report any positive developments in the
region in intra-Palestinian relations and reconciliation,
or between Israelis and Palestinians.
We would like to stress at the outset the fact
that Angola maintains good relations with Israel and
Palestine and that our stance, which we will spell out,
is exclusively based on the fundamental duty to uphold
justice and the rights of the Palestinian people. Despite
our friendly and very fruitful relations with Israel,
we are not by any means prepared to appease and
condescend to policies that we deem wrong, harmful
to international peace and security and, in the last
instance, harmful to the Israeli people themselves.
Our tenure in the Security Council ends soon, and
it is with sadness and great frustration that we note not
only the lack of progress in the Israeli-Palestinian peace
process, but a regression in the prospects for a twoState solution and the continuing lack of unity within
the Council on how to reverse those negative trends and
get the peace process back on track.
The most negative trend is the continued expansion
of illegal settlements in Palestinian territories, which
maintains an atmosphere of mistrust, hostility and
violence among Israelis and Palestinians and the
frustration and despair of the international community.
We believe that a crucial point in time has come to
step up efforts to counter such an unfortunate and
dangerous trend. It seriously undermines the prospect
for a two-State solution, on which rests the hopes of the
international community, of the Palestinians and even
of Israelis as the only reasonable outcome for a just
and lasting solution to that protracted and distressing
conflict and on which to build a stable, peaceful and
prosperous future for Israelis and Palestinians.
Once again we would like to stress that such a state
of affairs also flows from the persistent lack of unity
within the Security Council and the Council’s reluctance
to hold anyone to account for illegal policies and actions
that are in violation of international law. The lack of
cohesion within the Council and the double standard
applied when it comes to holding selected perpetrators
of violations of international and humanitarian law
accountable for their deeds are unacceptable and
unsustainable. The Middle East Quartet, which the
Security Council endorsed as a driving force to bridge
the gap between the two sides, has proven powerless in

16-3326725/64

S/PV.7792

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

its assertion of principles and strategies for negotiations
towards a solution to the conflict.
Symptomatic of such a state of affairs is that since
the recent report of the Middle East Quartet (S/2016/595,
annex) —which offered recommendations for the way
forward — the Israeli Government has increased
settlement-related activities, as well as demolitions of
Palestinian homes and civilian infrastructure, in total
disregard for international initiatives aimed at reviving
the peace process. The settlement regime upheld by
Israel, which the international community should put
at the centre of its concerns, became the pillar of the
colonization policies and the means to entrench the
occupation of the Palestinian territories by recourse to
military force in its systematic expansion of settlements
in the occupied West Bank, particularly in and around
East Jerusalem. That policy led to the settlement of
over half a million Israelis on Palestinian soil, a move
in total contravention to the creation of a Palestinian
State.
With such a backdrop, we would like to put a few
straight questions to Israel. What does Israel intend to
achieve with the expanding occupation of Palestinian
territories? How does Israel intend to resolve the
wrecking of territorial contiguity of Palestine if a
meaningful peace process is finally engaged? Does
Israel intend to perpetuate the status quo of permanent
violence, dissent and the irremediable separation of
the two peoples — the Israelis and the Palestinians?
With the accomplished facts on the ground towards
the effective physical separation of the two peoples,
does Israel intend to build an apartheid-style regime?
Since the two-State solution seems to vanish under
the decisions taken on the ground, does Israel intend
to move towards the creation of a one-State solution,
embracing Israelis and Palestinians, with equal rights
of citizenship and to end the Jewish character of the
State of Israel?
Those are candid questions that we raise in order
to understand the medium- and long-term purpose of
Israeli policies in its relations with the Palestinians and
the international community at large.
As always stated, this conflict has global
repercussions and time is running out to bring about a
meaningful solution to create a viable political horizon.
In fact, we currently witness a dangerous descent into
chaos in the Middle East region, mainly due to the
conflicts in Palestine, Syria, Yemen and Iraq and the
26/64

19/10/2016

volatile political climate in several other countries
resulting from mass migration due to those conflicts.
In order to counter and prevent further instability and
conflicts in the region, we must tackle the root causes:
widespread discontent, radicalization and sectarianism.
We therefore support the call for urgent action, by
demanding the active mobilization of the international
community in order to preserve the two-State solution.
International players — particularly the Quartet, the
permanent members of the Security Council and regional
stakeholders, namely, the Arab Peace Initiative — must
do all in their power to restore a political horizon
conducive to the revival of the peace process.
We wish to reiterate our support to both Israelis
and Palestinians who seek to live side by side in peace
and security in their own independent States. The
current state of affairs is unsustainable, and we call on
both sides to urgently undertake confidence-building
measures with policies and actions aimed at creating
conditions for direct and meaningful peace negotiations.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): My delegation is grateful
to Special Coordinator Mladenov and Under-SecretaryGeneral O’Brien of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs for their briefings.
Malaysia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of Kuwait
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
As this is Malaysia’s final quarterly open
debate on the Middle East in our capacity as a
non-permanent member of the Council, I would like
to take this opportunity to make several observations
on the Council’s approach to the issue of the
Palestinian question.
First of all, despite persistent warnings by the
Secretary-General and the Special Envoy on the
unsustainable situation on the ground and the everincreasing threats to the two-State solution, it is
regrettable that the Council has not been able to offer
either effective or even symbolic responses to address
the situation. For many years, Council progress on the
issue of Palestine was practically nonexistent, which
belies the worsening situation on the ground. Mainly
this is due to the inability to muster enough political
will, or the familiar excuse that the time is not right
for the Council to act. Today we expect to hear yet
16-33267

19/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

again repeated calls from States Members of the United
Nations for the Council not to shirk its responsibility
under the Charter of the United Nations and to take
urgent action to salvage the two-State solution. As we
speak, more homes are being destroyed, more deaths
and despair inflicted.
Secondly, there is a tendency for the Council to
accord equal treatment to both the occupying Power and
the occupied people when, in reality, no such balance or
equality exists. On the one side we have an occupying
Power with great military might, which has been
occupying a defenceless civilian population for almost
half a century. On the other side we have the occupied
Palestinians, who live under repressive occupation and
a brutal blockade, who face discriminatory treatment
and violations of their basic human rights on a daily
basis and who are dispossessed of their homes and
lands, deprived of natural resources and economic
development and restricted in their movement. All of
this is inflicting enormous hardship and suffering. It is
misleading for us to assume that the occupying Power
and the occupied people have the same level of legal,
political and moral obligations and responsibilities.
Under international law, especially the Fourth Geneva
Convention, substantial obligations are clearly imposed
on the occupying Powers to protect the general welfare
of the inhabitants of an occupied territory. That includes
protection from forcible transfer and protection for
their property. All of that has been violated. Indeed,
the international community did not try to be balanced
when we condemned and sanctioned apartheid in South
Africa, just as it should not try to be balanced when
discussing the Holocaust. What is wrong cannot be
right. The sooner we realize this, the clearer our focus
on the issue will be.
Thirdly, the Council tends to focus on symptoms of
the conflict and conveniently ignores its root causes. It
is much easier and more palatable to condemn sporadic
attacks and acts of violence than to address the bigger
question of what creates, fuels and breeds such anger,
frustration and despair in the first place, which has
given rise to desperate, albeit violent, responses.
The Secretary-General earlier this year said,
“as oppressed peoples have demonstrated
throughout the ages, it is human nature to react to
occupation” (S/PV.7610,2).
He also said that:

S/PV.7792

“[n]o one can deny that the everyday reality of
occupation provokes anger and despair, which
are major drivers of violence and extremism and
undermine any hope of a negotiated two-state
solution.”
That statement should prompt us to think, reflect
and act. It brings a humanistic angle to the conflict
that the Palestinians should no longer be denied their
fundamental right to self-determination and their quest
for statehood. Therefore, unless and until we deal with
the root cause of the problem, which is the prolonged
and repressive military occupation, the endless cycle
of violence will continue and feed into the political
narrative of those who thrive on it.
Last Friday, Malaysia, together with Egypt,
Senegal, Angola and Venezuela, organized an Arria
Formula meeting of the Council on the issue of illegal
Israeli settlements. We listened to various experts who
provided factual analyses on the worrying developments
relating to settlement expansion in the occupied
Palestinian territory. Their summation was decidedly
clear: the settlement expansion and repression must
stop. The politics of yore have no place amid the world’s
hunger for peace.
I listened carefully to the statement by the Israeli
Permanent Representative. Not a single sentence
addressed the issue of settlement expansion, which is
a top-most concern of the international community. In
the coming weeks, we hope to see effective Council
action to use the various tools at its disposal to address
the issue of settlements. The settlements are not only
illegal under international law, they also constitute
the most tangible and visible threat to the two-State
solution, and therefore to peace in the region.
Clearly, habitual verbal condemnations in the
past decades have done nothing to halt or deter illegal
settlements activities. Instead, the occupying Power
is further emboldened by our inaction and has further
sought to legalize outposts and seize more private
Palestinian land.
With the recent announcement by Israel to build
new settlement units in the occupied West Bank, the
ball is now in the Council’s court to act urgently, enforce
its own resolutions, uphold the rule of law and prove its
commitment to the two-State solution. Similarly, the
international community should also pursue all legal,
political and economic channels to step up its pressure

16-3326727/64

S/PV.7792

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

19/10/2016

on the Israeli Government to make it too costly for
Israel to continue with its illegal settlement policy.

East Peace Process, and Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs O’Brien for their briefings.

I wish to highlight a recent attempt by a group of
15 women on board a freedom flotilla that sailed from
Barcelona and headed for the Gaza Strip last week to
highlight the ongoing illegal blockade of Gaza and
deliver humanitarian aid. Among them were Northern
Ireland’s 1976 Nobel Peace Prize winner and Dr.
Fauziah Hassan, a female Malaysian doctor. Although
their attempt was successfully blocked by Israel, their
courageous non-violent resistance managed to raise
awareness of the ongoing violations of international law,
international human rights law and Security Council
resolutions by Israel. It also provided a glimmer of
hope for the Palestinians in Gaza, fostered solidarity
and conveyed to them that the world had not abandoned
or forgotten about them.

The question of Palestine is at the core of the Middle
East issue and the source of the problems in the region.
Safeguarding the legitimate national rights and interests
of the Palestinian people is a shared responsibility of
the international community. The current situation
in Palestine is dire, with constant violent conflicts,
peace talks at a stalemate and a profound humanitarian
disaster. The international community cannot stand by
while the Palestinian people suffer and the Middle East
peace process is stalled. It should take practical steps to
push for a settlement of the Palestinian-Israeli issue and
the early realization of the two-State solution.

We urge civil society worldwide to continue its
struggle to call for accountability and to highlight gross
violations of international law, including international
humanitarian and human rights law, in the occupied
Palestinian territory. Its role is especially important
in shaping public opinion and providing pressure from
the bottom up, in view of the collective failure by
Governments and world leaders to take effective action
to resolve the conflict. This is not about demonizing
Israel. It is about seeking justice and ending the
occupation and its repressive nature. It is about seeking
a political shift and attitudinal change. It is about
creating the enablers and conditions for lasting peace.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Malaysia’s request
that a briefing on the humanitarian situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question, be
made a permanent feature of the Council’s meetings on
the issue. We believe that the humanitarian situation
on the ground demands particular attention and a
separate briefing by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.
Although this is our last intervention as a Council
member in the quarterly open debate, Malaysia
remains committed to pushing for the establishment
of an independent, democratic, contiguous and viable
Palestinian State living side by side in peace and
security with Israel.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates Russia’s initiative to convene this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East. I wish to
thank Mr. Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle
28/64

First, we should remain committed to moving
in the correct direction of building an independent
State of Palestine and achieving peaceful coexistence
between Palestine and Israel. The establishment of a
fully sovereign State of Palestine based on the 1967
borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital is the
inalienable right of the Palestinian people and the key to
the settlement of the question of Palestine. The parties
should work on the basis of the principle of land for
peace, the two-State solution, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the relevant resolutions of the United Nations and
the Security Council, so as to resolutely push forward
the peace process.
Secondly, Palestine and Israel should exercise
restraint and continue peace talks, which is the only
practical way to resolve the Palestinian-Israeli issue.
The fact that the peace talks are stalled can only serve
to drag Palestine and Israel into a vicious cycle of
esclating violence, which would be a disaster for both
sides. Only through an early resumption of talks will it
be possible to arrive at a lasting settlement and achieve
peace and stability between Palestine and Israel, as
well as in the entire region. Israel and Palestine should
put an end to violent confrontations. Israel should take
the lead to show good faith, cease settlement activities
and put an end to the demolition of Palestinian homes,
so as to create conditions for relaunching peace talks.
The legitimate security concerns of the countries of the
region should be respected.
Thirdly, the international community should
provide guarantees for the advancement of the peace
process. A series of new ideas for a resolution of the
Palestinian-Israeli issue were recently raised, including
the convening of an international peace conference on
16-33267

19/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the issue and expanding peacemaking efforts on the
Middle East. When Chinese Foreign Minister Wang
Yi attended the Middle East peace process ministerial
conference in Paris, he put forward China’s ideas for a
settlement to the Palestinian-Israeli issue. He called on
the international community to explore peacemaking
efforts on a broader scale, take follow-up measures
for peace talks, and establish incentive mechanisms
for peace. China supports all efforts conducive to
easing tensions between Palestine and Israel and for
the achievement of the two-State solution. We support
the establishment of more effective peacemaking
mechanisms for the Middle East. We support the
Council taking practical steps as soon as possible to
actively respond to the legitimate concerns of Palestine
and Arab States and play a larger role in pushing the
parties concerned to put an end to conflict and restart
peace negotiations.
Fourthly, we should continue to push forward
economic reconstruction in Palestine. China urges
Israel to cooperate with international assistance
efforts and comprehensively lift its blockade against
Gaza. The parties should respond actively to the
United Nations assistance programme for Palestine
and engage in economic cooperation with Palestine in
order to improve its humanitarian situation and living
conditions. China will continue to provide assistance to
Palestine and is willing to work within the cooperative
framework of our one-belt-one-road initiative to help
Palestine achieve economic and social development as
soon as possible.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I join others in
thanking our briefers, Nickolay Mladenov and Stephen
O’Brien. I thought it was particularly interesting to
hear the considered views of colleagues coming to the
end of their two years as non-permanent members of
the Security Council.
When we last met here in July (see S/PV.7736), we
discussed the Quartet report (S/2016/595, annex). It
set out worrying trends for the Israel-Palestine issue,
trends that, as the report itself made clear, are eroding
the viability of the two-State solution. Since our last
discussion there has been an acceleration of some of
those trends in the wrong direction, and so we are
further still from the ever-elusive two-State solution. I
see three areas of particular concern.
The first is settlements. As we saw in the Arria
Formula meeting last week, Israel has pushed forward

S/PV.7792

plans for more than 1,500 settlement units, and it
continues to demolish Palestinian structures. That runs
in direct opposition to Quartet recommendations to
cease the policy of systematic settlement expansion and
to remove blocks on Palestinian development. This year,
as Stephen said, we have seen 958 structures levelled.
But they are not just structures, they are homes, shops
and schools. This is all part of an Israeli policy that
has left 1,000 people displaced, including 690 children.
That is 690 members of a generation who currently seem
destined to inherit a situation no closer to peace than
their parents. With demolition orders issued against the
Palestinian village of Susiya and the Kahn Al-Ahmar
school, east of Jerusalem, I fear we have not seen the
end of this disturbing trend. Livelihoods are on the
line just when Israel needs to be building confidence
between communities, not demolishing the bedrock on
which they are built. The United Kingdom once again
urges Israel to cease its systematic policy of settlement
expansion, demolition of Palestinian structures and
limits on Palestinian development.
Secondly, we are extremely worried, as is Nickolay,
about the dire situation in Gaza. It is there where the
ramifications of 50 years of strain are most visible.
There is a water crisis; far from drinking quality, 90 per
cent of the water is not even fit for agricultural use.
There is a jobs crisis; unemployment rates are among
the highest in the world. And we are on the brink of
an even more disturbing crisis: a possible return to
war. Anyone sleep-walking into that needs to wake up.
The continuing rocket attacks launched by Hamas, and
subsequent Israeli responses, demonstrate just how real
the risk is.
My third point is that this is not inevitable. Health
facilities and schools have been rebuilt in Gaza.
Efforts have been made, by both sides, to improve
energy supplies for the Palestinian people. Leaders
on both sides must seize whatever momentum those
small positive developments provide to make strides
and progress in other areas. We need to see elections
in Gaza and the West Bank. We need to see an end to
the hateful rhetoric. And, finally, we must see a return
to the negotiating table, to end this conflict once and
for all.
I would like to turn our attention to the worst
single issue facing the Middle East region — indeed,
possibly the whole world — Syria. The suffering of
the people of Aleppo has become a weekly focus for
the Council. Veto after veto prevent Security Council

16-3326729/64

S/PV.7792

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

unity and prevent us from taking action. But we must
press forward. There are 100,000 reasons for us to do
so — 100,000 children under siege; 100,000 children
struggling without food or medical provisions; 100,000
children living in the wreckage of eastern Aleppo.
These children hold no responsibility for the events
that have led to their life in a war zone, and yet the
Syrian regime and Russia have consistently chosen to
put them at risk. They have chosen to continue to send
their jets over the homes of these children, bringing
with them havoc and destruction. Russia has chosen
to back a regime that employs the medieval tactics of
siege and starvation in the pursuit of military victory.
What is their rationale for being on the wrong side of
history? The excuse — and that is exactly what it is,
an excuse — is that the terrorists must be defeated. Of
course the terrorists must be defeated. We all agree
with that, but it does not justify bombing Aleppo until
there is nothing left to bomb.
After its veto, Russia’s proposed solution to regain
some goodwill is an eight-hour pause, uncoordinated
with anyone else. That is wholly inadequate. The United
Nations has repeatedly called for at least 48 hours to
provide the most basic aid, and even that would not be
enough time to address meaningfully the suffering in
Aleppo. Sustained access on the basis of a full cessation
of hostilities is required. It is within Russia’s gift to
make that happen. It is not too late.
The Security Council must unite to end the
war — unite around a policy to stop the aerial
bombardment and shelling of eastern Aleppo
immediately and for a lot longer than eight hours. It
must do so indefinitely. After five years of bloody
conflict — after the deaths of hundreds of thousands of
Syrians — we can do better, and those 100,000 children
in Aleppo deserve better.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to begin by
expressing our sorrow for the passing of Mr. Shimon
Peres, who engaged tirelessly in the Middle East peace
process during his long political career. While we mourn
his loss, we are deeply troubled by the developments in
the region that undermine the prospects for the peaceful
solution that Mr. Peres supported.
Japan is alarmed by the continued violence towards
civilians, terrorist attacks and incitements to violence.
They are fundamentally incompatible with a peaceful
solution. We also express our deep concern over the
continuing policy of settlement expansion, which is
30/64

19/10/2016

in violation of international law. The expansion of the
settlements steadily erodes the viability of a two-State
solution and raises questions about Israel’s support
for such a solution. The dire humanitarian situation in
Gaza remains an urgent challenge to be addressed by
the international community.
More than two years have passed since the current
impasse in the Middle East peace process began. We
have seen a vicious cycle of violence and increasing
mistrust and frustration between the parties. We must
stand firm and continue to encourage the resumption of
meaningful negotiations so as not to lose sight of a twoState solution. Leaders on both sides must show serious
commitment to the peace process and take concrete
steps towards peace. Today, I would like to stress the
importance of confidence-building between the parties.
In the year 2006, then Prime Minister Junichiro
Koizumi of Japan visited Israel, Palestine and Jordan.
Mr. Koizumi met in Israel with Prime Minister Olmert
and Mr. Peres, who was then Deputy Prime Minister.
Mr. Koizumi stressed the need to achieve peace through
dialogue. Prime Minister Koizumi asked Mr. Olmert
and Mr. Peres for their support and cooperation on a
new Japanese initiative called the Corridor for Peace
and Prosperity. That initiative is an effort to support
economic and social development in Palestine through
regional cooperation among Palestine, Israel, Jordan
and Japan. The following year, Mr. Peres visited Japan
and took part in the launch of the ministerial meeting
of the initiative, at which the four partners agreed
to cooperate.
It is Japan’s belief that in order to achieve a twoState solution, we need to assist Palestinians in realizing
sustainable economic development. Such mediumto long-term effort underpins the coexistence of the
parties in peace and prosperity. The cooperation among
the parties through the initiative helps to build mutual
trust, creating an atmosphere that is more conducive
to peace.
This year marks the tenth anniversary of the
Corridor for Peace and Prosperity initiative. The fifth
ministerial meeting was held in September. Today, three
Palestinian companies have commenced operations in
the Jericho Agro Industrial Park, which is the flagship
project of the initiative. Thirty-four other companies
have signed lease agreements. The project now creates
jobs. The products made in the Agro Industrial Park
are now available in local grocery shops, contributing
16-33267

19/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7792

to the local economy. The project has not been an easy
one; the achievements were possible only because each
party has strived to overcome its concerns in the spirit
of cooperation. We envisage that products made in the
Agro Industrial Park will be exported through Jordan to
countries of the region and beyond in the years to come.
We hope that the Park will grow to become a pillar
of the Palestinian economy. We believe that a more
prosperous Palestine will contribute to the stability of
the region.

root causes have not yet been eliminated. Israel has
begun building new housing for settlers in the West
Bank and East Jerusalem. The de facto legalization of
so-called illegal settlement outposts is occuring even
as the Israeli authorities are destroying the homes that
Palestinians have built for themselves. The pace at
which Israelis are seizing Palestinian land indicates that
the point of no return will be reached in the foreseeable
future. After that, the only remaining option will be the
one-State solution.

We must not let pessimism stall the Middle East
peace process. We must continue to move forward.
Reversing the negative trend remains an urgent task,
and efforts to build confidence between the parties
must continue ceaselessly, regardless of the situation
we face.

It is unlikely that such an outcome would serve
Israel, as its leadership has acknowledged, but in its
actions Tel Aviv is nonetheless heading down that
path. In response, Palestinians are making their cause
internationally. They are calling for international
pressure to persuade Israel to ensure that peace
agreements and the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State in the framework of agreed parameters
are time-bound objectives. Over all, this is a matter of
raising the stakes for both sides.

In closing, I would like to stress that Japan, as a
member of the Security Council, will continue to
actively engage in achieving peace in the region, in
close cooperation and coordination with the United
Nations and the international community.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.
We thank the Special Coordinator Nikolay Mladenov
and Under-Secretary-General for Humantarian Affairs
Stephen O’Brien for their detailed briefings.
The pause in the political process between the
Palestinians and the Israelis has lasted too long. The
sides need to return to the negotiating table and resume
a substantive dialogue on the issue of the final status.
Given the deep-rooted antagonism between Ramallah
and Tel Aviv, the task will be extremely difficult. We
continue to work actively in the framework of the
Quartet of international mediators. The publication of
its 1 July report (S/2016/595, annex) can, in our opinion,
rightly be regarded as a significant event in the context
of international efforts on the Middle East peace track.
It is important that this document not only reflect the
real situation in the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, but
also offer concrete recommendations to preserve the
prospects for a two-State solution.
It should be frankly acknowledged that at this
time the provisions of the document are not being
implemented. While not as intense as it was in 2015,
violence on the ground continues. The likelihood of a
recurrence of last year’s confrontation is high, as its

Against that backdrop, unorthodox steps may be
needed to launch a direct political dialogue between
the parties. In response to appeals from both the
Palestinians and the Israelis, we reiterated our
readiness to arrange a meeting between Mr. Mahmoud
Abbas and Mr. Benjamin Netanyahu in Moscow, under
the auspices of the Russian President. If successful,
the meeting could at some point help us to convene an
international conference on the Middle East at a certain
stage in Moscow. I would like to point out that, at the
time it was proposed, that initiative was supported by
the Security Council. We believe that Russia’s efforts
as a country that supports genuine dialogue with all
the interested parties can help us make progress with a
Palestinian-Israeli settlement.
However, there will be no real prospects for any
efforts to resolve the situation in the Middle East
unless Palestinian national unity is restored. We
consider that issue to be a priority for achieving and
implementing a final agreement. We are encouraging
the intra-Palestinian opposition parties to work
together on the basis of the political platform of the
Palestine Liberation Organization and the Arab Peace
Initiative. We support the Palestinian leadership’s
intention to form a national unity Government and hold
presidential and parliamentary elections. Overcoming
the split between Palestinians by unifying both parts of
the Palestinian territories politically under the umbrella
of the central Palestinian authorities in Ramallah

16-3326731/64

S/PV.7792

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

would help to stabilize the situation in the Gaza Strip,
including resolving the enclave’s humanitarian issues,
lifting the embargo and restoring the infrastructure that
was destroyed in the summer of 2014.
The entire world is watching the conflict in Syria
with mounting anxiety — a conflict whose flames
have been artificially fanned from outside the country
since its beginning. The answer to the question being
asked today about who is responsible is clear to the
whole world — it is the United States of America
and the United Kingdom, who invaded Iraq and have
wreaked havoc, along with other activist countries,
through an adventurist campaign for regime change in
Syria, in which they have not shrunk from supporting
openly terrorist groups. The sentimental statement
by the United States representative would have more
effect if it were not for Washington’s actual record
and the methods that the United States uses to attain
its geopolitical aims — economic suffocation and the
indiscriminate use of massive force.
Significant forces of the armed resistance to the
current Government, coordinated by the terrorists
of Jabhat Al-Nusra, are concentrated in the eastern
districts of Aleppo. Those groups have lately been
working to nullify international efforts to improve
the humanitarian situation and relieve the civilian
population. Thousands of people in the eastern part of
the city have become hostages to the insurgents, and
thousands in the western part are their targets. The
representative of the United States virtually asserted
that Russia is preventing humanitarian assistance from
having access to eastern Aleppo. That is not true. It was
the groups holding people hostage in eastern Aleppo
who refused assistance from the United Nations in the
western part of the city. It was they who would not
allow the Castello road to be used for humanitarian
aid access. If the United States is so worried about the
situation of the residents of eastern Aleppo, why have
the American military refused to stand together with
Russian forces on the Castello road in order to ensure
that that vital artery can function without interruption?
Is it out of cowardice, or a desire to foment tensions
over Aleppo at any price?
I am also compelled to comment on another
unscrupulous move that the representative of the
United States made in his statement by attempting to
predetermine in advance the conclusions of the work of
the Joint Investigative Mechanism regarding chemical
weapons in Syria. The United States is systematically
32/64

19/10/2016

attempting to shield the terrorists by assigning a priori
blame to Damascus.
Getting back to Aleppo, in the current circumstances,
Russia is working intensively to try to halt those
negative trends. During months of consultations with
the United States, our co-Chair in the International
Syria Support Group (ISSG), we worked out a concrete
plan for a ceasefire and for improving humanitarian
access. Unfortunately, thanks to blatant sabotage, the
implementation of the joint agreement of 9 September
was suspended. Following a meeting in Lausanne on
15 October of the core of ISSG, an attempt was made to
re-start the process with the help of outside actors with
direct influence on the armed groups. Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
put forward an interesting proposal for Aleppo. With
the aim of successfully implementing the previously
announced humanitarian pause planned for 20 October,
the Russian and Syrian forces yesterday halted air
strikes in the Aleppo area.
The immediate priority is to separate the moderate
opposition from the terrorists as soon as possible.
That cannot be dragged out any longer. Enough with
the ambiguous attitude to terrorists. Those who are
prepared to break with Al-Nusra can officially declare
their commitment to the cessation of hostilities. In the
circumstances, we urge everyone to reject provocative
acts and initiatives and incendiary rhetoric. We must put
an end to Aleppo’s years of tragedy as soon as possible
and revive the intra-Syrian political process under the
auspices of the United Nations. Boris Johnson, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Great Britain, estimates that there
are between 10,000 and 11,000 fighters in Aleppo, but
according to United Nations figures, only 900 of them
are Al-Nusra terrorists. So if those 10,000 fighters are
really trying to defend their city, why have they not
driven the Al-Qaida people out? Why would those who
are supporting them not urge them to do that?
An enormous amount of attention is now being
focused on the campaign that has just begun to liberate
Mosul from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
We hope that the Iraqi Government succeeds. We
presume that the coalition led by the United States has
sufficient strength and means to prevent a spillover of
terrorists from Iraq into Syria and thence to Europe and
the whole world.
We support the resumption of intra-Yemeni talks
mediated by Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, Special
16-33267

19/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Envoy for Yemen. We welcome his announcement on
17 October of the decision of the parties to the conflict
to restore the comprehensive ceasefire regime. In that
context, we can only express our profound indignation
at and condemnation of the coalition strike that hit a
funeral procession in Sana’a, killing about 200 people
and injuring more than 500. It is only the cruellest in a
series of such attacks. The coalition, which is supported
by the United States and Great Britain, must make
radical changes to their methods.
We are not encouraged by the situation in Libya,
which has resulted from the invasion in 2011 by the
countries I cited earlier in a gross violation of Security
Council resolutions. It is having an adverse effect on the
stability of Libya’s neighbours, in fact on virtually the
entire African continent. Yet another intra-Libyan clash
occurred in Tripoli in just the past few days. Counterterrorism efforts are fragmented, since the key task of
restoring Libya’s national armed forces under a single
command structure is a long way from happening,
and the steps being taken by some of Libya’s outside
partners in terms of military assistance do not always
correspond to that goal. We affirm our position of
supporting taking the interests of a broad spectrum of
Libyan forces into consideration in the ongoing political
process brokered by the United Nations.
Lastly, we hope for a speedy end to the power crisis
in Lebanon, which will have a positive impact on the
stability of that friendly country.
With that I conclude my statement in my capacity
as representative of the Russian Federation, and
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
We will now give the floor to non-members of
the Security Council. I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and
to deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber. I would also like to appeal to speakers to
deliver their statements at a reasonable speed so that
interpretation can be provided accurately. I wish to
inform all concerned that we will be carrying on this
open debate through the lunch hour, as we have a large
number of speakers.
I now give the floor to the representative of Lebanon.

S/PV.7792

Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): We are
meeting today as the great tragedy in Syria continues to
unfold, despite the announcement in September by the
co-Chairs of the International Syria Support Group, the
Russian Federation and the United States of America,
that they had reached an accord that included a cessation
of hostilities throughout Syria as a whole and in Aleppo
in particular. That announcement revived hopes that
the violence would decrease and that it would facilitate
the delivery of humanitarian assistance to those in need
throughout the country. But the continued fighting and
the failure by the Security Council over the past few
years to address the grave situation in Syria dealt a
heavy blow to the hopes of the Syrian people and the
international community that the end of this massacre
was nearing an end.
Lebanon therefore calls for the Security Council
and the International Syria Support Group to redouble
their efforts to end the hostilities in order to restart
negotiations among the Syrian parties in Geneva, with
a view to achieving a lasting political solution, on the
basis of the resolutions of the Security Council, that
would fulfil the aspirations of the Syrian people to live
in safety and dignity in a united, sovereign State.
In response to this terrible, widespread tragedy
and the displacement of millions of our Syrian brothers
from their cities and villages, the United Nations
brought together last September Government leaders
and representatives of civil-society organizations in the
context of two high-level meetings in order to discuss
the wide-scale movements of refugees and migrants.
The United Nations is no stranger to dealing with mass
movements of refugees and migrants. It has coped
with one of the oldest, long-running human tragedies
from the very beginning: the tragedy that usurped the
Palestinian people’s territory, forcibly uprooted them
from their land and caused hundreds of thousands of
them to become refugees in neighbouring countries,
including my country, Lebanon.
Perhaps the aggressive Israeli practices that have
been documented in the scores of reports issued by
the United Nations and its organs, as well as in those
issued by human rights bodies, are the most compelling
testimonials of Israel’s persistent disregard for the norms
and principles of international law and its defiance of
the resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly. There has been no answer to the requests
made by the various investigation commissions to look

16-3326733/64

S/PV.7792

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

into practices in the occupied Palestinian territories, or
to the appeals made by the Secretary-General.
The State of Palestine is continuing to build up
its constitutional institutions and its international
legitimacy, despite the fact that its occupied territories
continue to be developed by Israeli settlers, according
to the briefing given by Mr. Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General. He
informed us that the Israeli authorities, from early June
through the end of August, had approved 1,000 housing
units in East Jerusalem and 735 in the West Bank.
The settlements have been a major obstacle to the
peace process, and the continuing settlement policy
has undermined the two-State solution. This has been
universally condemned by all Member States. The most
recent example was the strong condemnation by the
United States Administration of the Israeli authorities’
decision to build 298 settlement housing units in the
West Bank.
Israel continues with its illegitimate practices,
flouting its responsibilities as occupying Power.
The Office for the Coordination of Human Affairs
reported that the Israeli authorities have destroyed 726
Palestinian homes since the beginning of the year. That
coincided with an unprecedented increase in violence
by Israeli police and army personnel against Palestinian
civilians and the adoption of the “shoot to kill” policy.
Time and again, we have cautioned against the
increasing terrorism by Israeli settlers as well as the
practice of arbitrary detention. We have always stressed
that Jerusalem, with all its holy sites, including the
Al-Aqsa Mosque, will continue to be the capital of all
the faithful. We have called for an end to the Israeli
attempts, which have been condemned, to change the
pluralistic character of the city of Jerusalem. It should
not be made exclusive to any one religion.
In this regard, we cannot but underline the
resolution adopted by UNESCO in this regard.
In closing, I wish to reiterate to the Council, which
is meeting today in a formal setting, what the Executive
Director of the Israeli organization B’Tselem, Mr. Hagai
El-Ad, said at the informal Arria Formula Council
meeting last Friday, so that his words can be recorded
in the annals of the Council:
34/64

19/10/2016

(spoke in English)
“The reality facing the international community is
this: absence of action not only effectively gives the
oppressor a licence to proceed without having to
suffer too many repercussions, but also gives the
oppressor the power to decide when will be the
right time to start considering alternatives. ‘Wait’,
demands Israel, ‘now is not the right time’. But
‘wait’ has almost always meant ‘never’, responds
Martin Luther King Jr.: ‘The time is always right to
do what is right’. That time is now: the time to, at
long last, take action. The Security Council has more
than just power: it has a moral responsibility and a
real opportunity to act with a sense of urgency”.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Ms. Krisnamurthi (Indonesia): My delegation
wishes first of all to thank the presidency of the Russian
Federation for having convened this open debate. Let
me also thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov and Mr. Stephen
O’Brien for their respective briefings. Our appreciation
also goes to the five non-permanent members of
the Security Council — Angola, Egypt, Malaysia,
Senegal and Venezuela — for having conducted the
Arria Formula meeting on the issue of settlements. It
was an eye-opening meeting that gave us precise and
actual facts on the conditions in the occupied territories
of Palestine.
We would like to align ourselves with the statement
delivered by the representative of Venezuela and that to
be delivered by the representative of Kuwait, on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, respectively.
As we all know, in 2017 Palestine will mark the
fiftieth year of its occupation by Israel. Throughout
those years, a lot of Palestinian blood has been shed
and a lot of talking has been done by members of the
international community. There have been meetings
and proposals and real solutions, but there has been no
tangible peace in Palestine. The reports available to
us speak of the continued deterioration in the security
and humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory. Worst of all, the denial of the basic human
rights of Palestinians by the occupation authorities is,
sadly, limitless. We will not and cannot wait another
50 years for the Palestinian people to regain their
sovereignty and dignity as an equal member of the
international community.
16-33267

19/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7792

As we gather here in this edifice for yet another
debate, the biggest challenges to the two-State solutions
are the persistent gross human rights violations and the
restriction of access to basic humanitarian requirements
in Palestine. Unfortunately, Israel’s illegal settlements
and the continued construction of the separation wall
remain ongoing features of Palestinian life, as a result
of the failure of the international community to find a
concrete, practical solution.

access and movement of Palestinian populations even
as its forces revel in violent incursions into the West
Bank, killing, injuring and making arrests at will. What
we are dealing with is not a mystery. It is about a basic
moral obligation that the international community has
regrettably failed to uphold. That means it remains
a principled challenge for the Council because the
Council and no other authority has the responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.

Only last month, during the general debate of the
General Assembly, Palestinian President Mahmoud
Abbas urged world leaders to declare 2017 as the
international year to end the Israeli occupation (see
A/71/PV.14). In that light, we would like to express our
support for this notion. It was in that context, and in
view of the stalled Palestinian-Israeli peace talks in
April 2014, that we were pleased to participate in last
June’s ministerial meeting on the Middle East peace
process, led by France and aimed at finding a path back
to the peace process. We therefore welcome the report
of that meeting.

It is strange to reflect on the fact that the Security
Council alone has adopted approximately 89 resolutions
on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, some of which call
for the withdrawal of the Israeli occupation force.
It is stranger still to consider that neither Israel nor
the Council — the very body responsible for those
resolutions — has honoured them. History will further
question the commitment of the Security Council to the
issue at hand.

Furthermore, Indonesia is on record as having
repeatedly called upon the Security Council in recent
times to fulfil its responsibility under the Charter of
the United Nations for maintaining peace and security
and to take action to achieve what is right on behalf of
the Palestinian people. We reiterate our conviction that
the Organization was founded principally to satisfy the
hunger of the peoples of the world for peace and security
and to promote the equal rights and self-determination
of peoples.
While we do not deny or seek the abrogation of the
rights of Israelis, we are firm in our position that the
fundamental rights of the Palestinians must be heard.
Without any doubt, the task of resolving prolonged
conflicts and ending foreign occupation, particularly in
the case Israeli-Palestinian conflict, remains the United
Nations greatest challenge. While Israel continues
to expand its illegal settlements in the West Bank,
including Jerusalem, the humanitarian situation in the
Gaza Strip following the 2014 war remains desperate.
The illegal settlements are a prime obstacle to the
peace process and the prospect of achieving a two-State
solution.
Moreover, we remind the Council that Israel’s
continued construction of the separation wall contravenes
the 2003 advisory opinion of the International Court
of Justice. In the process, Israel is fully restricting the

My delegation welcomes the accession of Palestine
to a number of multilateral treaties and conventions,
with particular reference to human rights-related
instruments, as this works to enhance its status at the
United Nations. It is a regrettable fact of history that for
over 60 years, the Palestinian people have been living
without a homeland. It is time to take seriously the task
of advancing the two-State solution.
We therefore call on the Security Council to
champion the pursuit of peace as mandated by the
Charter rather than the unassigned role of a referee.
In our view, only one thing stands between us and
the achievement of the two-State vision of Palestine
and Israel living side-by-side in peace: political will.
Indonesia calls upon the Security Council to summon
the political will to implement its own resolutions,
which will break the stalemate and impunity and enable
the Palestinian people to actualize their dream of a
sovereign State of their own.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): The full
version of my statement will be made available.
I would like to express my appreciation to you, Sir,
and the Russian presidency.
I align myself with the statement made by the
representative of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries.

16-3326735/64

S/PV.7792

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The systematic violations of Palestinian rights and
international law, including the demolition of homes,
the forced displacement of Palestinian civilians, the
arrest and detention of Palestinians, including children,
and the incessant violence, terror and provocations by
Israeli settlers and extremists, including at sensitive
religious sites, particularly at the Al-Aqsa mosque
compound in occupied East Jerusalem, have persisted
unabated. Over the years, the Israeli regime has
continuously intensified its illegal, oppressive measures
against the defenceless Palestinian civilian population,
including, inter alia, the use of excessive force against
children and women, causing more death and injury
and depriving them of their right to protection.
The increasing number of illegal settlements
in Palestinian territory, which constitute not only
grave breaches of the Fourth Geneva Convention, but
war crimes, as defined by the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, have long demonstrated
that the Israeli regime has never had any interest in
peace with the Palestinians and that its participation in
the peace process has been just a cover to hide its policy
of aggression.
At the same time, the illegal blockade on the Gaza
Strip is causing massive deprivation, hopelessness and
a grave humanitarian crisis. The destructive impact of
such Israeli violations is immense as reflected in the
rising tensions, deteriorating socioeconomic conditions
and deepening despair among the Palestinian civilian
population living under the nearly half-century
Israeli occupation.
While these crimes and policies are worsening,
the extremely fragile situation on the ground must be
addressed seriously to avert further destabilization.
It is unfortunate that they are being perpetrated with
impunity and that the international community has yet
to take any measure to address them. Regrettably, the
Security Council continues to be paralysed, failing to
uphold its obligations despite the clear global consensus
on both the illegality of Israeli policies and practices
on Palestinian territory. The Security Council should
uphold the Charter of the United Nations, international
law and its obligations to respect and ensure respect
of the latter, including through necessary measures to
compel the Israeli regime to end its war crimes and
human rights violations against the Palestinian people,
its illegal foreign occupation of another people’s land
and the plight of the Palestinian refugees.
36/64

19/10/2016

The other crises in our region, such as the those
in Libya, Iraq, Syria and Yemen, are all examples of
crises being stoked through invasion, illegal foreign
intervention, terror, extremism and violence. Those
problems have persisted and deepened because the
international community has failed to do its part in
dealing with root causes and the erroneous actions of
outsiders and naive trans-regional actors.
The unjustified invasion by the Saudi-led coalition
in Yemen has been ongoing for over 500 days. The
tragic and horrific air strikes by Saudi jet fighters on
a funeral hall packed with thousands of mourners in
Sana’a, on 8 October, was another single incident out
of thousands over the past 18 months, which have
killed or permanently maimed thousands of civilians,
including women and children, displaced more than
3 million persons and turned the situation in Yemen
from one of deprivation into one of devastation. All
those horrendous and heinous attacks, which display
a total disregard for human life and international and
international humanitarian law are occurring under the
watch of Security Council, which is failing to take any
action to stop them.
The President (spoke in Russian) I give the floor to
the representative of Norway.
Mr. Pedersen (Norway): I will not read out my
prepared statement.
It has been three months since the United Nations
called for 48-hour pauses in the fighting in Aleppo.
Since then, another ceasefire in Syria has broken
down and a Security Council draft resolution to end
the bombardment of Aleppo has been vetoed. That
is highly disappointing. It is unacceptable that the
fighting continues, the eastern part of Aleppo is in the
process of being destroyed and civilians and hospitals,
medical personnel and schools are routinely attacked.
The bloodshed and the bombing must stop and the
massive violations of international humanitarian law
must end.
Once again, we underscore that the Syrian regime
is obliged, under international humanitarian law, to
provide immediate, full, unhindered and sustained
humanitarian access to all parts of Syria. We expect the
Security Council to fulfil its responsibility and ensure
an end to the conflict. The countries in the region,
as well as international actors, have a particular duty
to secure a credible political process and to ensure
that resolution 2254 (2015) is fully implemented. We
16-33267

19/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

welcome the resumption of meetings between regional
and international actors at the ministerial level.
Norway firmly supports United Nations efforts in
Syria on both the political and humanitarian tracks. All
actors must work together to ensure that life-saving aid
reaches the millions in need. The Syria Humanitarian
Response Plan for 2016 has only been 37 per cent
funded. Many donors have delivered on the pledges they
made in London in February, but humanitarian needs
are increasing. Donors must deliver on their promises,
and more countries need to contribute. Norway has
disbursed 80 per cent of its pledge of $280 million
for 2016. and we intend to deliver on our pledge of
$1.16 billion over the next four years.
The Ad Hoc Liaison Committee (AHLC) meeting
in New York on 19 September was the most constructive
meeting in years. The recent agreement on the transfer
of authority for the electricity sector to the Palestinian
Authority and on electricity debts was indeed important.
It proves that economic cooperation between the
parties can yield positive results. We urge the parties to
continue resolving other outstanding fiscal issues and
to agree on key infrastructural projects. The Palestinian
Authority will not be able to close the current financial
gap by itself. Continued budget support is also needed
to enable reform.
The rationale behind the Gaza Reconstruction
Mechanism is to prevent unintended use of the building
materials entering Gaza. However, the current volume
of imported construction materials remains insufficient
to meet the needs. An increase in the flow of cement
through the Mechanism is urgently needed. The entry
of construction materials through other channels
is undermining the efforts to address dual use and
security problems in Gaza.
Israelis and Palestinians have to address the most
imminent threats to the two-State solution. Every
announcement of a new settlement and every act
of violence corrodes the prospects for a two-State
solution and they must end immediately. Our own
contribution, through the AHLC, is to underpin the
efforts to realize a two-State solution and to advance
the Palestinian institutions and economy in preparation
for independence.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.

S/PV.7792

Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): We thank the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process for
his briefing. As that briefing underlined, the response
of the international community has not matched the
urgency of addressing the grave situation created by the
growing violence in the region. The tide of turmoil and
conflict, far from receding, has been rising with even
greater force and unpredictability. As a consequence,
millions of people are having to endure unimaginable
suffering, caught up in a vortex of violence now
largely being driven by the divergent interests and
priorities of embattled Governments and regional and
external Powers.
It will be difficult to resolve the series of conflicts
and crises afflicting the Middle East and to reverse
the rise of terrorism and extremism unless a just and
durable solution is found to the Arab-Israeli conflict
in the Holy Land. The brutal and prolonged occupation
of Palestine and the denial of self-determination and
statehood for the Palestinian people is the epicentre
and a key source of the conflicts that now consume the
entire region. The violence within the Israeli occupied
territories will not remain insulated from the conflict
raging across Israel’s imposed frontiers.
Pakistan rejects the recently announced Israeli plan
to construct 300 new settlement units in the West Bank.
With every new settlement plan the Israeli Government
is systematically sabotaging the possibility of the twoState solution — the only viable option for durable peace
and one that has been accepted by the parties, as well
as by the international community. But impunity is not
limited just to settlements. As Amnesty International
pointed out last month, there is also no accountability
for extrajudicial killings by occupation forces.
We appreciate last week’s Security Council meeting
in the Arria Formula format on the issue of Israeli
settlements. Yet what is needed now is to follow up the
talk with action. The inability of the Council and major
Powers to halt the expansion of Israeli settlements
and enforce the two-State solution has encouraged
the Israeli leadership to entrench its obduracy and
intransigence. The Council must categorically reject
and condemn Israeli moves to create a fait accompli
to defeat the two-State solution. Indeed, the occupying
Power should recognize that its political identity would
not survive in a one-State alternative. It would only
reinforce its character as an apartheid State.

16-3326737/64

S/PV.7792

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Pakistan remains committed to supporting the
Palestinian people in their legitimate struggle for their
right to self-determination and statehood. We firmly
believe that the creation of an independent, contiguous
and viable State of Palestine, based on pre-1967 borders
and with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, is an essential
prerequisite to sustainable peace in the Middle East.
The grim situation in Syria represents the sum of
our tragedies: foreign interference, State repression,
terrorism, and ethnic and religious divisions. The
Syrian conflict, epitomized today by Aleppo, has
caused human suffering and a refugee crisis on a scale
that is unprecedented since the end of the Second World
War. Syria’s domestic divisions are now inextricably
intertwined with the complex and competing interests
and alliances of regional and major Powers.
The challenge the world confronts in Syria is
multifaceted. That challenge is to defeat Da’esh and
other terrorist organizations; to restore the rights of
all of Syria’s people, minorities and majorities, while
preserving the country’s territorial integrity; and
to ensure that the sources of terrorism and violence
in Syria do not spread to its neighbours and beyond.
Pakistan commends the patient and heroic efforts
of Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and urges all
concerned parties, including the regional States and
major Powers, to work together with the Special Envoy
to untangle the vicious web of violence and suffering
in Syria.
In Iraq, a diverse coalition is finally imposing
military reversals on Da’esh. It is hoped that it will
soon be ejected from Mosul. The world welcomes
the progressive demolition of the self-styled Islamic
State. Its various terrorist manifestations within and
outside the region will also have to be contained more
vigorously. Military success against Da’esh will also
need to be accompanied by credible political measures
to reconcile the ethnic and denominational differences
within Iraq and the associated rivalries among
regional Powers that have prevented the restoration
of peace and stability in the country since the 2003
foreign intervention.
The conflict in Yemen has also created devastating
chaos and human suffering. The intensity and impact
of that conflict has been exacerbated by external
factors. The realization of peace in Yemen must be
based on the restoration of international legitimacy
and the reconciliation of the political, religious and
38/64

19/10/2016

tribal differences within the country. We hope that the
ceasefire that is expected to go into effect in a few hours
time will be a harbinger of mutual accommodation,
leading to enduring change.
Finally, Pakistan has a vital stake in the solution of
the multiple conflicts that afflict the Middle East today.
We will work with sincerity and purpose to help in any
effort to resolve such crises and re-establish peace and
security in that central part of the Islamic world.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Sobral Duarte (Brazil): We thank the Russian
Federation for organizing this open debate, as well as
Under-Secretary-General Stephen O’Brien and Special
Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for their briefings.
We are distressed by the ever-worsening spiral of
violence in Syria. Brazil welcomed the announcement
last month of a renewed cessation of hostilities in Syria.
The apparent collapse of this promising initiative, only
a few days later, was a bitter setback. The destruction
of medical facilities in Aleppo, the bombing of Syrian
Government positions in Deir ez-Zor, the attack on a
humanitarian convoy in Oram Al-Kubra and the shelling
of the Russian Embassy compound in Damascus are
only the latest unacceptable episodes of a seemingly
endless sequence of serious violations of international
law perpetrated by all sides of the war.
We are particularly worried by the delay of the
Security Council to uphold its responsibilities, in view
of a persistent lack of unity among its members. That
was confirmed on 8 October, when this body rejected
two draft resolutions (see S/PV.7785). Such omission
underlines yet again the urgent need to reform the
Security Council and to adjust it to the geopolitical
realities of our multipolar world.
Tomorrow’s informal meeting of the General
Assembly on Syria will, we hope, inspire the Council
to build consensus and identify new avenues to achieve
the long-overdue peace and stability in Syria. Brazil
stands firmly in favour of an inclusive and Syrian-led
political process that meets the legitimate aspirations of
the Syrian people, as established by Security Council
resolution 2254 (2015). We urge all parties to cooperate
constructively, without preconditions and in good faith,
with Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and to resume
the intra-Syrian dialogue. We also stress the need to
separate so-called moderate opposition forces from
16-33267

19/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

all terrorist groups active in Syria, particularly Jabhat
al-Nusra and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
as well as the importance of ceasing any support
whatsoever to those terrorist entities.
Countries with direct influence on the developments
on the ground should resume full dialogue and
cooperation in order to revive the cessation of hostilities
and tackle terrorism in Syria. That would allow for
unimpeded humanitarian access for all Syrians in need
and pave the way for the resumption of the peace talks.
Brazil has long advocated accountability regarding
allegations of war crimes, crimes against humanity,
acts of terrorism and other serious violations in Syria.
We reiterate such calls today.
The eight-hour humanitarian pause announced
for tomorrow in Aleppo is a positive, though limited,
step. Other actions could be taken to minimize civilian
suffering. We should consider adopting multilateral
measures to curb the proliferation and supply of weapons
to Syria, including the imposition of an arms embargo,
as recommended by the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on Syria. However, existing
or new unilateral economic sanctions have a negative
impact on the welfare of civilians in Syria and create
further barriers to humanitarian assistance and
reconstruction activities. We stress that, according
to the Charter of the United Nations, the only body
with the legal authority to impose coercive economic
measures is the Security Council.
Brazil is concerned with recent developments
concerning the question of Palestine. Of particular
concern is the unrelenting expansion of and official
support for Israeli settlements in the West Bank and
in occupied East Jerusalem. As highlighted last week
by an informal meeting of the Security Council, Israeli
settlements in the occupied territories represent a
serious obstacle to the peace process. Brazil strongly
condemns all recent acts of violence and terrorism
in the region, including a shooting attack on Israeli
civilians in Jerusalem. Such actions are deplorable and
unjustifiable.
Brazil took note of the decision of the State of
Palestine to postpone local elections due to legal
difficulties and urges all Palestinian actors to overcome
their divisions and uphold democracy and national unity.
We welcome recent efforts by Russia, France and
Egypt, among others, to promote an atmosphere that
is conducive to the revitalization of Israeli-Palestinian

S/PV.7792

negotiations. Nevertheless, no ad hoc initiative can be
a substitute for the responsibilities of this Council in
resolving the dispute.
We are heartened by reports that the Security
Council may soon draft a long-awaited resolution that
would define parameters for the peace process. Brazil
actively encourages the Council to lead the way towards
the creation of a fully independent, free, sovereign and
viable State for the Palestinian people within its 1967
borders and in peace with the State of Israel. Reaching
such a concrete outcome before 2017 would send a
positive signal. The Council has a vital role to play in
this regard.
The conflict in Yemen shows no sign of abating.
We regret the apparent deterioration of the political
process since the end of negotiations in Kuwait.
Brazil urges all parties to resume consultations with
Special Envoy Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed in order
to reach a comprehensive agreement. We join the
Secretary-General in condemning the airstrikes on
a funeral ceremony in Sana’a that reportedly caused
over 140 civilian deaths. All actors must abide by their
obligations under international humanitarian law.
On Lebanon, we are concerned that the positive
momentum generated by the successful local elections
could not be translated into a solution for the political
deadlock on the national level and the vacancy of the
presidency that has lasted two years. The situation
creates serious difficulties for the effective functioning
of the Lebanese Government, which is already faced
with challenging circumstances in its vicinity. Brazil
reiterates its commitment to the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon and its support to the Lebanese
Government and people.
Nearly one year since the Libyan Political
Agreement was signed, the consolidation of the
Government of National Accord remains a work in
progress. Libya continues to face the political, social,
security and humanitarian consequences of the absence
of effective State authority. We reiterate our support
for Special Representative Martin Kobler and the work
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya. We
strongly condemn the recent attempted coup against
the Government of National Accord and urge all parties
to cooperate towards achieving national and local
reconciliation in the country and restoring the national
unity of Libya. Recent progress in the fight against

16-3326739/64

S/PV.7792

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

ISIL and other terrorists groups should be matched
with similar breakthroughs on the political side.
We took note of two important decisions adopted
by this Council on Libya. We welcome resolution 2298
(2016), which allows for the removal and destruction
of all chemical weapons precursors from Libya.
Concerning resolution 2312 (2016), which renewed the
authorization for naval operations to prevent migrant
smuggling and human trafficking on the high seas
off the coast of Libya, let me recall the imperative
of protecting the human rights of all refugees and
migrants who attempt to cross the Mediterranean,
especially the most vulnerable. Migration is not a
threat to international peace and security and should
not be criminalized.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): We would like to express our strong
denunciation of Mr. Nikolay Mladenov’s insistence on
ignoring the situation in the occupied Syrian Golan
and refusing to explain the United Nations position
on the Israeli occupation of the Syrian Golan in
accordance with relevant United Nations resolutions,
including resolution 497 (1981). That is not to mention
his disregard — for perhaps the tenth time — of
illegal Israeli practices that continue in the occupied
Golan and the ongoing Israeli violations of the 1974
Disengagement Agreement by virtue of its cooperation
as an occupying Power with the armed terrorist groups
that have occupied positions of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force on the separation line.
That is all in spite of the fact that those issues lie at the
heart of this item and represent an important parcel of
Mr. Mladenov’s mandate as Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process.
Our meeting today coincides with the passage
of almost 50 years of the Israeli occupation of Arab
territories and the adoption of resolution 242 (1967), and
of 70 years since the adoption of resolution 181 (II). In
spite of the adoption by the United Nations of hundreds
of resolutions over those long decades demanding
that Israel end its occupation of Arab territories and
end its crimes, successive Israeli Governments have
rejected their implementation and have systematically
committed documented crimes against international
humanitarian law and human rights law that are
tantamount to war crimes and crimes against humanity.
40/64

19/10/2016

It has been around half a century of settlement
campaigns, the expulsion of Palestinian inhabitants
from their homes, the destruction of those homes, the
confiscation of lands and properties — more than half a
century of total Israeli disregard of the United Nations
resolutions on ending the Israeli occupation.
Today the Council has heard the statement of the
representative of Israel indicating that all of the United
Nations resolutions will not help the Palestinians in the
least. For more than half a century, certain influential
members of the Council have blindly supported the
continued Israeli policy of occupying Arab territories
by using the privilege of veto more than 44 times
since the inception of the United Nations against draft
resolutions on the Arab-Israeli conflict. I say the
“privilege” of veto, not the “right” to veto, because I
consider it a privilege, as stipulated in the Charter of
the United Nations.
Syrian inhabitants under Israeli occupation in the
occupied Syrian Golan for more than half a century
endure the worst policies of oppression, discrimination,
racial discrimination, detention, torture and kangaroo
courts; as well as the deprivation of their natural
resources, their right to education based on a Syrian
national curriculum, and their right to carry the identity
cards of their own country, Syria, and to build their own
national hospitals in their own territories and villages
in the occupied Golan. The Israeli occupation force has
also continued its settler expansionist policies with the
aim of Judaizing the occupied Syrian Golan, in total
disregard of international resolutions.
The Israeli occupation Government has recently
granted priority to settlements in the Golan in its
budgetary disbursements. In its latest provocative
meeting, held in April in the Golan — a meeting that
did not attract the attention of anyone in the Secretariat
or in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
and was not noticed by Mr. Mladenov either — Israel
provided new settlers with great incentives, such as tax
exemptions and assistance in establishing agricultural
projects, and endorsed the construction of thousands of
housing units in the occupied Syrian Golan, just as it
does in occupied Jerusalem and occupied Palestinian
territories, in flagrant violation of United Nations
resolutions.
I note that the chairman of the municipality of
the Katzrin settlement in the occupied Syrian Golan
recently announced the construction of 4,000 new
16-33267

19/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

housing units, indicating that the expansion falls on
the fortieth anniversary of the beginning of the Israeli
settlement in Katzrin, which was built on the remains
of the razed Syrian villages of Qisrin, Al-Shoukif
and Aldoura.
Since the beginning of the events in Syria, Israel, the
occupying Power, has opened a new chapter of aggression
and of violation of the Disengagement Agreement and
of Security Council resolutions, particularly those
relating to fighting terrorism. It has provided armed
terrorist groups — including the Al-Nusra Front, which
is registered on the Security Council’s list of terrorist
entities — with all sorts of assistance and support along
the ceasefire line in the occupied Syrian Golan. It has
continued to communicate with those terrorist groups
across the ceasefire line, facilitating their movement
from south to north. It has supported them logistically
and medically, in public and on Israeli TV screens, by
transferring the injured terrorists across the ceasefire
line to treat them in Israeli hospitals at the expense
of the Qatari regime, then returning them to Syria to
pursue their terrorist activities, as documented by all
United Nations reports. Nonetheless, they were not
noted by Mr. Mladenov.
We note that Israeli support to terrorists not only is a
flagrant violation of the disengagement agreement, the
mandate of the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force (UNDOF) and international law, but also exposes
the lives of United Nations workers to great danger and
undermines their mission, as has already happened
several times with regard to those terrorist groups
that have kidnapped UNDOF peacekeepers or fired
at them and targeted their positions. We have reported
all those details to the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO), including the collusion by Qatari
intelligence in the kidnapping of UNDOF peacekeepers
of the Philippine regiment. We have requested an
investigation, but we are still waiting for Godot — that
is, for DPKO — to come and conduct the investigation.
The Israeli occupation forces have sought recently
to spread their influence in the Yarmouk and Raqqa
valleys near the Dera’a region, adjacent to the occupied
Syrian Golan and the Syrian-Jordanian borders, in
collusion with the Al-Nusra Front and all related groups.
They are attempting to force the inhabitants to leave
the area by depriving them of their basic daily needs
and confiscating their homes if they are away for more
than two days, and preventing them from returning to
these homes. The Syrian Arab army does all it can to

S/PV.7792

prevent Israel and those terrorists who collude with it
from implementing their aggressive design. In scores
of letters we have reported documented information
on those Israeli aggressions and violations. We are still
waiting for the Security Council to take immediate
measures against Israel to force it to put an end to its
aggression and its violations and to force it to withdraw
from the entire Syrian Golan to the line of 4 June 1967,
in accordance with resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973)
and 497 (1981).
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to observer of the Holy See.
Archbishop Auza (Holy See) (spoke in Arabic):
My delegation thanks the presidency of the Russian
Federation for organizing the open debate on the
item “The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question” and for calling the attention of the
entire international community to this issue.
The gradual movement away from the two-State
solution proposed by the United Nations in 1947 is a
cause for very grave concern. The straying from the
Madrid Peace Process and the Oslo Accords of the
1990s has served to increase the level of frustration
and desperation among the Palestinian people. A unity
Government in the West Bank and Gaza is essential
for advancing the negotiations and for bringing peace
and prosperity to its people. It is the responsibility of
the international community to respond generously
to the appeal launched recently by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East in order to face the ever-growing
humanitarian needs.
My delegation would like to underline once again
that the Holy See believes that the two-State solution
holds the best promise. If Israel and Palestine do not
agree to exist side by side, reconciled and sovereign,
within mutually agreed and internationally recognized
borders, peace will remain a distant dream and security
an illusion. While the focus of today’s debate is how
to urge Israel and Palestine to stop making unilateral
decisions and taking independent actions that endanger
the resumption of meaningful negotiations, the
Palestinian question can be viewed only as part of the
Middle East conflict.
The Middle East is the cradle of civilizations and
the birthplace of Judaism, Christianity and Islam, and
yet it has become a theatre of incredible barbarism.
Utter disregard for international humanitarian law has

16-3326741/64

S/PV.7792

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

reached new levels of barbarity. Corpses buried under
ruins and drifting refugees are clear evidence of the
cynical contempt for and violation of international
humanitarian law. Pope Francis has reiterated his
appeal for an immediate ceasefire in Aleppo and other
parts of Syria, saying,
“With a sense of urgency, I renew my appeal,
pleading with all my strength to those responsible,
for an immediate ceasefire that can be imposed and
respected at least for the time necessary to allow
the evacuation of civilians, especially children,
who are still trapped under the bloody bombing.”
In this Chamber and in other United Nations
forums, we continue to debate, while Christians and
members of other ethnic and religious minority groups
in the Middle East are on the verge of total annihilation.
The intentions of the terrorists and extremists groups to
banish them from the region have been unmistakably
manifest since the start of the barbaric persecution. The
Council, which is mandated to maintain international
peace and security, is called upon to lead the entire
international community’s efforts to stop the bloodshed
and destruction. Therefore, States supporting terrorist
groups must stop the flow of weapons and munitions
into the region. Madmen preaching hatred and inciting
violence in God’s name must be stopped. All States
are summoned to do their part in fostering respect for
fundamental human rights in the region, including
freedom of religion and of expression.
My delegation would like to conclude with a remark
made by Pope Francis on the fundamental importance
of dialogue:
“Dialogue is what brings peace. Peace is
impossible without dialogue. All of the wars,
conflicts and troubles that we encounter with each
other are due to a lack of dialogue.”
Such dialogue is still possible and must be urgently
pursued for the sake of the people of Syria and all
inhabitants of the region.
The President (spoke in Russian): I call on the
representative of Nicaragua.
Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): Nicaragua commends the Russian presidency
for its leadership and excellent stewardship of the
Security Council this month. We also congratulate the
Russian team for the hard work it has carried out in the
Council, which is facing major challenges, such as the
42/64

19/10/2016

subject we are addressing today – the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
Nicaragua acknowledges the tireless strength
and leadership shown by the Russian Federation in
solidarity with the people of the Middle East, and the
Russian initiative to convene a meeting in Moscow
between the Palestinian and Israeli authorities to
promote dialogue and seek a peaceful solution to the
conflict. We welcome the initiative, as we believe that
only dialogue and negotiation will allow us to find a just
and lasting solution. We also welcome the Arab Peace
Initiative and other initiatives, such as those of France
and Egypt, aimed at putting an end to the suffering of
the Palestinian people and at restoring Palestine’s right
to be a sovereign State, within the 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, which would enable the
two States – Palestine and Israel – to coexist in peace,
harmony and prosperity.
Nicaragua aligns itself with the statement made
by the Permanent Representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries and with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People. Allow me to quote the words of our President,
Commander Daniel Ortega, who spoke about peace
and dialogue after the passing of the Israeli leader
Mr. Shimon Peres. He said,
“From peaceful Nicaragua, we greet the
people of Israel at this time of the passing of their
leader Shimon Peres. We remember him from
various occasions and meetings of international
organizations, when we were able to appreciate his
gifts as a profound statesmen and a man of dialogue.
Shimon Peres made his whole life a dream, a
personal dream that was not always understood,
but a dream that lived on until the end of his days,
promoting ideas for a world that required dialogue.”
We welcome the initiative of the Palestinian leaders
to declare 2017 as the year that will see an end of the
Israeli occupation of Palestine. For more than five
decades ,we have condemned Israel’s illegal occupation
and its expansionist policies, which undermine efforts
to convene a dialogue aimed at achieving peace, a
peace that would greatly benefit the Palestinian people,
the Israeli people and the region as a whole. It is crucial
to put an end to the occupation immediately through
dialogue and negotiation.
16-33267

19/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In the light of all of Israel’s actions, impunity
and the ongoing occupation are holding the Council
hostage, impeding a two-State solution through the use
and abuse of the veto, and perpetuating the suffering of
the Palestinian people in its occupied territories and of
the more than 5.5 million Palestinian refugees around
the world. The Council has been unable to take action
and demand that Israel put an end to the occupation
of the Palestinian territory and other occupied Arab
territories, that it immediately halt the construction of
settlements, that it put an end to the criminal blockade
of Gaza and its 2 million inhabitants, and that it release
all political prisoners.
At this time, when we must urgently implement
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals, Palestine
must be able to exercise its right to development and to
achieve those Goals. Under occupation, Palestine is not
growing and it is not developing. On the contrary, Israel
is growing and developing and taking over the natural
resources and the export revenue of goods produced in
the Palestinian territory, as well as appropriating for
itself the customs duties and international assistance
and remittances directed to the Palestinian people,
adversely impacting the Palestinian economy and,
consequently, the well-being and the future of its young
people, women and children. We would like to highlight
the report of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development on the impact and economic cost of
the occupation, which we hope will be accounted for
and restored in its totality.
To conclude, we reiterate that peace in the Middle
East means resolving the Palestinian question and the
withdrawal of Israel from Lebanon, from the Syrian
Golan and from all of the occupied Arab territories.
It is also crucial to put an end to foreign interference
and intervention in the region, so that we can finally
achieve a Middle East of peace and security for both the
Arab and Israeli peoples.
The President (spoke in Russian): I call on the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): We thank the Russian
presidency for convening today’s open debate on the
situation in the Middle East. We also thank the UnderSecretary-General, Mr. Stephen O’Brien, and the
Special Coordinator, Mr. Nikolay Mladenov, for their
briefings and efforts to bring peace to the region.

S/PV.7792

Kazakhstan attaches great importance to the
Middle East region and has consistently pursued a
political solution to the Israeli-Palestinian issue. We
are seriously concerned about the lack of real progress
in resolving the conflict, which impacts regional and
international security. In his latest report, entitled
“Assistance to the Palestinian People” (A/71/87), the
Secretary-General points out the negative trends on the
ground, which, according to him, made the two-State
solution more distant.
My delegation is particularly concerned about the
gravity of the Palestinian situation and calls on the
international community to take urgent action to resolve
it in order to mitigate the suffering of Palestinians
in all aspects of their existence. The blockades in
Gaza, along with a beleaguered economy, exacerbate
the socioeconomic and humanitarian situation of the
Palestinian population, deteriorate relations between
the parties and diminish prospects for peace.
The settlement process and its rapid expansion in
the occupied territories not only aggravate the conflict
but also militate against all peace processes. As the
Middle East Quartet’s report (S/2016/595, annex) points
out, Israel’s continued construction of settlements is a
serious threat to peace.
We see the two-State solution as the only viable
option for a durable peace to be reached by dialogue,
in keeping with the Charter of the United Nations
and relevant Security Council resolutions. We must
avail ourselves of other mechanisms and initiatives
at the bilateral and multilateral levels, such as the
road map for peace and the Arab Peace Initiative. My
delegation urges the Middle East Quartet to pursue its
mediation efforts and calls on Israeli and Palestinian
leaders to demonstrate political responsibility towards
the long-cherished peace. Kazakhstan fully supports
international efforts in that regard and recognizes the
legitimate right of the Palestinian people to become a
full-fledged member of the United Nations. We also
recognize Palestine as an independent State.
The situation in Syria requires urgent attention
and we hope that the Council finds a viable solution
by resuming negotiations, as stipulated in the final
communiqué of the Action Group for Syria (S/2012/522,
annex) and resolution 2254 (2015). We particularly
commend the untiring efforts of the Secretary-General
and the United Nations Special Envoy for Syria,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura. We call on all parties to put

16-3326743/64

S/PV.7792

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

an end to civilian deaths and suffering and to provide
access to food, water and health services. Of special
importance is allowing much-needed humanitarian aid
into the besieged areas. Neighbouring Lebanon, Jordan
and Turkey have opened their borders, are struggling to
cope with one of the largest refugee exoduses in recent
history, and need international support.
The situation in Yemen continues to deteriorate and
the peace talks in Kuwait, ongoing for more than three
months, should continue through the good offices of
the Secretary-General and the United Nations Special
Envoy for Yemen, Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed. We
welcome the latter’s announcement to resume his plan
for a comprehensive cessation of hostilities, with the
diplomatic engagement of many Member States. It is
essential that all parties allow unhindered humanitarian
access and ensure the safety of humanitarian personnel.
It is critical that all parties adhere to international
human rights and international humanitarian law, and
take all necessary actions to avoid civilian casualties.
Finally, we reiterate Kazakhstan’s commitment
to join the multilateral effort to ensure peace in the
Middle East.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Saikal.
Mr. Saikal: Given the time limitations, I will
deliver only part of the statement of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People. The full version will be circulated shortly.
As we meet at the quarterly debate on the
question of Palestine, the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
is compelled to sound the alarm on the downward
spiral in all aspects of the situation of the Palestinian
people under the nearly half-century Israeli military
occupation, which is causing so much human
suffering, derailing the prospects for a two-State
solution and undermining the pursuit for peace. As the
humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate — with
socioeconomic conditions in the blockaded Gaza Strip,
in particular, reaching the lowest point since the Israeli
occupation began in 1967 — the continuous building
and expansion of illegal settlements has also reached an
unprecedented level, effectively confiscating more than
50 per cent of the territory of the State of Palestine,
undermining its contiguity and viability.
At last week’s Arria Formula meeting, we all
heard the briefings of international and Israeli experts
44/64

19/10/2016

describing how settlement construction and expansion
is not only a breach of numerous relevant resolutions
adopted by the Council and the General Assembly, but
also a direct violation of article 49 of the 1949 Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War and the 2004 International Court of
Justice advisory opinions on the construction of a wall
in occupied Palestinian territory. We also heard about
the massive impact of the Israeli settlement campaign
on the Palestinian people’s human rights.
Despite repeated international calls for a cessation
of all settlement activities, Israel continues to
methodically plan, tender and build new settlements,
expand existing ones, attempt to legalize settlement
outposts, expropriate land and demolish Palestinian
homes and other structures in unprecedented numbers,
as well as to declare increasing sections of the Palestinian
territory to be State land, military zones, national parks
and archaeological sites. Israel’s systematic policies
increasingly deprive Palestinians of their own land
with impunity, in violation of international law and
in contradiction to its stated commitment to the twoState solution. The settlement enterprise, sustained
and enabled by an entire network of bypass roads
and infrastructure only for Israeli settlers, is not only
impairing the daily lives of Palestinians and violating
their rights, but it is fragmenting the Palestinian territory
in hundreds of separate, disconnected enclaves, eroding
the two-State solution based on the 1967 borders.
As has been amply documented by the
United Nations and others — including Israeli
organizations — those illegal practices constitute grave
violations of the individual and collective inalienable
rights of the Palestinian People, particularly their rights
to life, freedom and self-determination. The practices
also violate the Palestinian people’s economic, social
and cultural rights, preventing them from exercising
sovereignty over their natural resources, and hampering
their right to sustainable development.
The Committee underscores the responsibility of
States and private entities to not contribute to Israeli
violations of Palestinian human rights, particularly
as it relates to settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, in line with their
obligations under international law. In that regard, the
Committee encourages Member States to implement
Human Rights Council resolution 31/36, of 24 March
2016, requesting the High Commissioner for Human
Rights to produce a database of business enterprises
16-33267

19/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

involved in the activities of the illegal settlements, in
line with the United Nations Guiding Principles on
Business and Human Rights. The Committee further
welcomes the stance taken by the European Union on the
labelling of products manufactured in the settlements.
In several resolutions, the Council itself has
described Israel’s settlements in the West Bank and
East Jerusalem as a serious obstruction to peace, calling
on Israel — to no avail — to cease their construction
and to dismantle existing settlements. It is now time for
the Council to take action, to remove all obstacles to
implementing international law and the long-standing
parameters for a solution, and to move decisively
towards a just and durable solution that will allow the
Palestinian State, within the 1967 borders and with East
Jerusalem as its capital, to live side by side, in peace
and security with Israel. Stressing that the political,
physical and socioeconomic division of Gaza and the
West Bank is another major obstacle to advancing the
prospects for peace, the Committee reiterates today the
call on Israel to lift the Gaza blockade.
The international community cannot continue
managing this conflict, as in the past; it is clear that
the situation is rapidly deteriorating, as indicated
by the number of civilian victims of violence, and as
reported yesterday by several international human
rights organizations at the meeting of the Committee’s
Working Group. The Committee condemns all forms
of violence against civilians, by which Palestinians
are disproportionally affected, and calls for action to
ensure their protection and accountability, including
for unlawful killings, in accordance with international
law. The Committee also urges Palestinians to move
decisively forward on the path of national reconciliation.
The international community, especially the
Council, has to demonstrate strong political will and
ingenuity to break this untenable impasse and signal
to the world that the United Nations is serious when
it talks about peace between Israel and Palestine.
The Committee reiterates that an end to the Israeli
occupation and the realization of the rights of the
Palestinian people, including to self-determination and
independence, remain top and unavoidable priorities
for the international community and should be pursued
with courage and determination.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.

S/PV.7792

Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin by congratulating the Russian
Federation on having assumed the presidency of the
Security Council for October and by thanking it for the
invitation to take part in the open debate on a topic that
is so important for the international community — the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question.
Argentina is deeply concerned by the conflicts
taking place in the Middle East, which have generated
a great humanitarian crisis, the growth of terrorism
and the spread of fundamentalist groups. My country
favours a solution to the conflict through dialogue
and diplomacy; respect for international law and the
sovereignty, independence, national unity and territorial
integrity of States; the rejection of the acquisition of
territory by force and trust in the constructive role and
persuasive power of the international community to find
paths towards dialogue and progress in negotiations.
Regarding the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic,
Argentina is deeply concerned about the humanitarian
situation in the country and condemns all acts of
violence, in particular against the civilian population.
We regret the fact that the Security Council has been
unable to reach an agreement to adopt measures with
a view to establishing a ceasefire and ensuring access
to humanitarian assistance, especially in Aleppo. To
that end, Argentina and 69 other Member States have
asked the President of the General Assembly to hold
a meeting to discuss the item. We anxiously await
the informal meeting of the General Assembly to be
convened tomorrow.
The situation of Syrian refugees is particularly
alarming. In May, the Argentine Republic dispatched
a contingent of White Helmets to Lebanon in order to
offer their assistance to a refugee camp. Likewise, as
President Macri announced at the Summit for Refugees
and Migrants on 20 September, Argentina expressed
its intention to receive 3,000 Syrian refugees with the
financial support, technical assistance and logistical
backing of the international community.
Argentina is also deeply concerned by the deadlock
in the negotiations between Israel and Palestine. We
support a just, comprehensive and lasting peace on the
basis of the two-State solution, with the State of Israel
and the Palestinian State coexisting side by side in
peace and security on the basis of the 1967 borders and
other decisiosn reached by the parties in the negotiating

16-3326745/64

S/PV.7792

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

process. Likewise, we acknowledge the right of the
State of Israel to live in peace alongside its neighbours
within safe and internationally recognized borders, as
well as the right of the Palestinian people to establish an
independent and viable State recognized by all nations.
My country reiterates its concern over the persistent
and ongoing expansion of illegal Israeli settlements in
the occupied Palestinian territories, and calls for an
end to such expansion. Settlements impede peace and
weaken the prospects of two States living in peace and
security, and thereby promote the perpetuation of an
unsustainable status quo. At the same time, Palestinian
leaders must honestly address Israeli security concerns.
Hamas and other Palestinian groups must end
incitements and attacks against Israeli citizens. Rocket
launches from the Gaza Strip against Israel must also
stop immediately. My country strongly condemns all
terrorist attacks and is therefore convinced that just as
there is no military solution to the conflict, no solution
can be imposed by terrorist methods.
Argentina reaffirms the special status of Jerusalem,
in accordance with the relevant United Nations
resolutions, and rejects any unilateral measure to alter
that status. My country believes that the holy city must
be a peaceful place where people can come together,
and that unrestricted access to the holy sites must be
ensured for the three main monotheistic religions of
Judaism, Christianity and Islam.
Peace is possible only through dialogue and
negotiation that respect the parameters acknowledged
by the international community, namely, the twoState solution on the basis of relevant United Nations
resolutions, the agreements signed between the parties,
the Quartet road map, the Arab Peace Imitative,
a mutually acceptable solution to the question of
Jerusalem, and a just resolution to the refugee question.
On 28 September, we were saddened to learn of
the passing of the former President of Israel, Shimon
Peres — a statesman who worked tirelessly for a twoState solution that would allow Israel to live in peace
with Palestinians and the other countries ofthe region.
His commitment was acknowledged when he received
the Nobel Peace Prize, along with Yitzhak Rabin and
Yasser Arafat. Similarly, Israel and Palestine must
work together to build peace, while the international
community must not shirk its responsibility to work
jointly on a solution to the decades-long conflict.
46/64

19/10/2016

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the Representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Mendoza-García (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): We commend the Russian presidency and
Mission for the work they are carrying out this month
at the helm of the Security Council. We also thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, and Stephen O’Brien,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, for their briefings.
I will focus my remarks on two conflicts in the
Middle East: the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the
situation in Syria. In both cases, the escalation of
violence remains alarming and civilians, including
women and children, continue to pay a high price,
which we firmly condemn.
We also extend our condolences to the Government
and the people of Israel for the passing of former Prime
Minister Shimon Peres. We will remember him for his
role in the negotiations of the Oslo accords, for which
he received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1994, along with
Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat.
My country reiterates the urgency for the
Palestinians and Israelis to resume negotiations on
the central pending issues of the conflict, based on
prior obligations and agreements previously reached
by the parties, supported by international law and
the decisions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly. It is imperative that a political solution to
this conflict be found and that a new peace architecture
be created as soon as possible in order to resolve
differences and achieve sustainable peace with a view
to establishing the basis for direct negotiations that lead
to the agreed objective of the international community:
the harmonious coexistence between an independent
Palestinian State and the State of Israel.
We believe that it is urgent that we succeed in
stopping any act that leads to the death of innocents. We
also believe in the need to prosecute those responsible
and join efforts to stop the spiral of violence and prevent
suffering of more civilians.
Costa Rica deeply regrets the way the conflict in
Syria is progressing and how the situation is continuing
to deteriorate while the Security Council fails to take
action to resolve it. It is urgent that we put an end
to armed confrontation and seek an early political
solution, given the humanitarian crisis the country is
16-33267

19/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

experiencing. We very much regret what happened in
this Chamber on 8 October, where the draft resolution
sponsored by both France and Spain was not adopted,
despite its significant humanitarian component (see
S/PV.7785). In that regard, we reiterate the call for
the application of the code of conduct promoted by
the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group, to which we belong, so that the permanent
members of the Council properly weigh the use of the
veto in such situations and that a restriction on its use
be implemented.
As indicated by the Secretary-General himself
in a recent report to the Council (S/2016/714), the
humanitarian crisis threatening Aleppo could become
the largest in these years of conflict. Hostilities
are characterized by indiscriminate violation of
fundamental rules of international humanitarian law,
and the worst is that obligations to protect civilians are
not being fulfilled.
We regret that the meeting last weekend in
Lausanne, Switzerland, convened by Secretary of State
John Kerry, did not agree on a common strategy for
reaching a peaceful solution and an end to hostilities.
The remarks of the Special Envoy for the Syrian crisis,
Staffan de Mistura, are particularly troubling. On
Monday, 17 October, he said that if we cannot find a
solution to such violence before December, the city of
Aleppo “will not be there anymore”. We welcome the
recent announcement of an eight-hour humanitarian
pause in Aleppo, which will take place on Thursday,
20 October, and we hope that it will be recurring
and extended.
We continue to call on the Security Council to
exercise its mandates to maintain international peace
and security and to ensure the full application of
international justice and the rule of law. In the light
of the inaction of the Security Council, we believe it
would be appropriate for the General Assembly to be
convened in an emergency session to address what
is within its jurisdiction. We urge the international
community continue its efforts until a new ceasefire
is achieved, with the particular aim of ensuring the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to Aleppo.
Costa Rica reiterates its concern about the
increasing tensions between regional Powers, which are
raising tone of the fighting, as it makes a strong call for
peace in the Middle East.

S/PV.7792

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Jordan.
Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate my colleague, the
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month. I would like to thank the Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process and the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Stephen
O’Brien, for their comprehensive briefings today.
We meet once again in the Council to discuss
the situation in the Middle East. The situation is
deteriorating, given the crises in the region and the
resulting humanitarian tragedies. The failure of
the international community to reach a lasting and
comprehensive solution to the crises in the region
threatens international peace and security more than
ever before.
The protection of the region from destruction
and violence is an important responsibility of the
international community and the Security Council,
pursuant to international instruments and resolutions.
We have a choice to make — either to work collectively
and seriously to ensure peace for future generations or
to surrender this world to obscurantist Powers and let
them sow division and chaos. The ongoing situation
in the Middle East and instability in the region should
not prevent us from working effectively to relaunch the
peace process, end the Israeli occupation of Palestinian
land and find a just and comprehensive solution to the
Palestinian question. That is key to ensuring peace in
the region.
The absence of a solution to the Palestinian
question is at the heart of tensions in the region. The
solution to the Palestinian question should ensure the
rights of the Palestinian people and allow them to fulfil
their aspirations towards establishing their viable and
sovereign independent State on Palestinian land within
the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, based on the two-State solution, international
resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative, as the fruit
of serious and effective negotiations within a specific
time frame.
Such negotiations should preserve the highest
national interests of Jordan, especially with regard
to the final-status issues, including refugees, water,
Jerusalem, borders and security. Accordingly, Jordan
reiterates its condemnation of Israel’s continued

16-3326747/64

S/PV.7792

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

settlement activities in occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem, which are dangerously and
systematically undermining the two-State solution.
With respect to East Jerusalem, our position
is based on the historical Hashemite guardianship
of Muslim and Christian holy sites in the city under
the supervision of His Majesty the King of Jordan.
Pursuant to that guardianship, Jordan will continue
to make every effort to protect these holy sites,
especially Al-Aqsa Mosque and Al-Haram Al-Sharif.
Jordan will continue to counter any Israeli violations.
We will work effectively in the international arena to
protect Jerusalem and to take every diplomatic and
legal measure against any violation that targets these
holy sites, which is in line with the historical role of
Jordan in Jerusalem, as recognized by the peace treaty
between Jordan and Israel.
The recent decision of the Executive Board of
UNESCO reflects the international concern over the
dangerous violations committed by Israel, the occupying
Power, in occupied East Jerusalem, especially against
Al-Aqsa Mosque. This decision mirrors the UNESCO
Director-General’s press statement issued in September
2015. The decision, prepared by Jordan in cooperation
with the Palestinians, stresses the importance of the Old
City of Jerusalem and its walls for the three revealed
religions, but does not address the legal status of East
Jerusalem as a city under Israeli military occupation.
Nevertheless, Israel, the occupying Power, has a
number of obligations that it must fulfil in accordance
with international law and international humanitarian
law. We would note that the decision uses the correct
names of the holy sites, including Al-Aqsa Mosque
and its surrounding installations. The decision also
provides for Jordanian obligations over the management
of Al-Aqsa Mosque, including maintenance and repair
and access to the site.
Jordan is concerned by the ongoing Israeli
settlement activities, in particular its continued
settlement expansions, in violation of international law.
To date, Israel has not been compelled to respect the
Security Council resolutions condemning its settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory. That has
undermined the possibility of reaching any peaceful
solution, in particular the two-State solution, and
has contributed to increased violence in Palestinian
territories. If Israel sincerely wishes to achieve peace
in the region and live peacefully with its neighbours,
it should pay closer attention to the international
48/64

19/10/2016

community’s calls for it to change its unilateral and
irresponsible policies.
Terrorism today is threatening our present and our
future, making us lose sight of our aspirations to peace
and security. Terrorist groups have nothing to do with
Islam or its noble, humane values. These groups have
no identity; they oppose tolerance and moderation and
meet mercy with further isolation. How can there be
any link between these groups and Islam or any other
religion?
Our response should be commensurate with
expectations and address the threat of terrorism across
the world. We believe that collective efforts are much
more important than individual efforts. Therefore, in
order to confront violent extremism and terrorism, there
should be a collective effort at all levels that is not be
based on military solutions alone but should also wage a
battle of enlightened ideas against extremist ideologies
and hate speech, founded on affection, tolerance and
positive values enshrined in our daily lives and in our
national and international policies. In that regard, my
country rejects violent extremism and terrorism in all
their forms, regardless of their motivations. We are
committed to implementing all relevant United Nations
counter-terrorism resolutions in order to combat these
terrorists and to preserve our human values.
Regarding Iraq, Jordan hopes that the fight to liberate
Mosul will eliminate theIslamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), one of the most heinous manifestations
of violence and crime against humankind. Jordan hopes
that we will be able to achieve this goal as soon as
possible so as to spare the suffering people of Mosul,
who have already suffered at the hands of ISIL for
two years. In this regard, Jordan stresses the need to
stabilize the city while preserving the lives of civilians
and ensuring their protection.
The Syrian crisis is now entering its sixth year.
We are witnessing increasing violence around Syria,
especially in Aleppo. Jordan stresses its position on the
need to reach a political solution that ensures the safety
and territorial integrity of Syria, with the participation
of all factions of the Syrian people, provides an
environment conducive to the return of its people, meets
the aspirations of Syrians and ends violence, extremism
and terrorism in Syria. We must implement Security
Council resolutions on the matter, including resolution
2254 (2015), and to launch a serious political process
leading to a political solution based on the statements of
16-33267

19/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7792

the International Syria Support Group and the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/523, annex).

to end the conflict. It remains the only realistic way of
ending the conflict once and for all.

All Syrian parties should commit to resolution
2268 (2016), which endorses the cessation of hostilities
in Syria, and resolution 2258 (2015), which calls for
the delivery of humanitarian assistance in Syria. The
crisis of Syrian refugees is an urgent global issue. The
international community must alleviate this crisis,
which is one of the most disastrous humanitarian
tragedies of our times. Jordan is hosting more than
1.4 million Syrian refugees, who represent 21 per cent of
its people. Our capacities have been strained due by the
cost of hosting these refugees, which has had disastrous
effects on host communities and infrastructure.

Since early 2016, and particularly since the
publication of the Quartet report (S/2016/595, annex),
there has been an acceleration of Israeli settlement
expansion. Settlements are illegal under international
law. On 28 September, Israel announced plans to
construct 98 new housing units in what is effectively
a new settlement near the existing one of Shiloh,
which drew wide condemnation from the international
community. This cuts deeply into the West Bank and
further increases risks to the contiguity of a future
Palestinian State.

The President (spoke in Russian): I give the floor
to Ms. Adamson.
Ms.
Adamson:
The
candidate
countries
Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the country of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; the European Free
Trade Association country Liechtenstein, member
of the European Economic Area; and Ukraine align
themselves with this statement.
The following remarks are focused on the Middle
East peace process. The European Union (EU) position
on Syria will be outlined during the forthcoming
informal meeting of the General Assembly.
Before the Council in July (see S/PV.7736), the
European Union expressed concern at the trends on
the ground that threaten the viability of the two-State
solution. Parties were called upon to swiftly engage with
the Quartet and other relevant stakeholders, implement
the Quartet’s recommendations in full and reverse
negative trends. Regrettably, we have instead seen an
acceleration of negative trends, in direct contradiction
with Quartet recommendations and Foreign Affairs
Council conclusions. The risk is to entrench a one-State
reality of perpetual occupation and conflict that is
incompatible with realizing the national aspirations of
both peoples.
For the European Union, there is no alternative to
a negotiated two-State solution, based on parameters
set out in European Council conclusions of December
2009 and July 2014, that meets Israeli and Palestinian
security needs and Palestinian aspirations to statehood
and sovereignty, ends the occupation that began in
1967, and resolves all permanent status issues in order

Other related policies threaten notably the
socioeconomic viability of Area C for the Palestinian
population. As clearly illustrated by the data provided
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs,
Israeli
demolitions
of
Palestinian
structures — including some funded by the European
Union and European Union member States — have
vastly increased in 2016, not least recently.
Such settlement and planning policies constitute
an obstacle to peace. A fundamental change of policy
by Israel with regard to the occupied Palestinian
territory, particularly in Area C, is necessary to
prevent the irreversible loss of the two-State solution.
It will significantly increase economic opportunities,
empower Palestinian institutions and enhance stability
and security for Israelis and Palestinians alike.
We continue to be deeply concerned by the
continuing cycle of violence and killings, most recently
on 9 October in Jerusalem. The European Union
unequivocally condemns acts of terror and extends its
deepest condolences to the families of the victims. We
urge all parties to work towards the de-escalation of
tensions, observe international humanitarian law, and
adhere to the principles of necessity and proportionality
in the use of force. Palestinian leaders are again urged
to consistently and clearly condemn terror attacks and
take all steps within their capacity to end incitement.
Violence not only brings personal tragedy, but also
makes any peace process infinitely more difficult.
Let me now turn to the situation in Gaza, an
important topic of today’s meeting. Militant activity
and the dire humanitarian situation in Gaza feed general
instability and constitute a recipe for renewed conflict.
What hopes can Palestinian youth in Gaza have for their
future in current circumstances? While all international

16-3326749/64

S/PV.7792

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

donors should swiftly honour their pledges made at the
Cairo Conference, Gaza’s humanitarian needs can be
properly addressed only through political progress on
the following three tracks:
First, all sides must respect the cease-fire. All
indiscriminate attacks are illegal and unacceptable and
increase risks of escalation. Such activities threaten the
lives of civilians, divert resources from humanitarian
efforts and impede reconstruction and development.
The illicit arms build-up by Hamas and other militant
groups must stop.
Secondly, the European Union urges all Palestinian
factions to engage in good faith in the reconciliation
process on the basis of the Palestine Liberation
Organization platform and Quartet principles. A single,
legitimate and democratic Palestinian Authority, with
full control over Gaza, is critical for fulfilling the
national aspirations of the Palestinian people and for
achieving a viable Palestinian State. In this context,
the European Union encourages the prompt setting of
a new date for the planned Palestinian local elections,
which, if held in line with international standards, could
provide an important renewal of Palestinian democracy
and a first step towards advancing national unity.
Finally, we reiterate our call on Israel for an end of
the closure and a full opening of the crossings, while
addressing legitimate security concerns. The lifting
of restrictions on the movement of people, including
representatives of the international community, services
and goods — particularly those designated as dual-use
items — is needed to allow reconstruction, service
delivery and international infrastructure projects. The
EU urges both parties to promote confidence- and trustbuilding measures. In that regard, the EU commends the
signing of the Israeli-Palestinian electricity agreement
on 13 September. The EU reiterates its readiness to
provide its full support to resolve the situation.
In these challenging times for the peace process,
the EU believes that regional partners can play a key
role in changing the dynamics on the ground, not least
through discussion based on the Arab Peace Initiative,
which provides key elements for a comprehensive
settlement. Their engagement and progress in the peace
process represent an opportunity and could unlock new
forms of cooperation benefitting the whole region.
Recalling French efforts and the communiqué
adopted at the ministerial meeting in Paris on 3 June,
as well as conclusions adopted by the Foreign Affairs
50/64

19/10/2016

Council on 20 June, the EU is determined to continue
to work in close coordination with the parties, Quartet
partners and all other relevant stakeholders towards a
two-State solution that would end the occupation that
began in 1967 and resolve all permanent status issues.
I will end by thanking the Secretary-General and
his Special Coordinator for their ceaseless efforts.
The President (spoke in Russian): I give the floor
to the representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Skinner-Klée (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation thanks the Russian Federation, as the
President of the Security Council, for convening this
open debate.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Although the Council has discussed the situation in
the Middle East on many occasions, this open debate is
timely, given the critical situation affecting the region.
Indeed, indiscriminate military offensives, whether in
Aleppo or Yemen, or recently in Mosul, have victimized
civilians in a barbaric manner, violating the most basic
human right to life. It is unacceptable that civilians
have not been spared the indiscriminate attacks of
armed forces that further threaten international peace
and security.
The abject violence sadly reminds us that Iraq is one
of the countries with the largest displaced populations
in the world, with almost 3.5 million people who have
fled their communities because of indiscriminate
violence. At the same time, the terrible situation in
the Syrian Arab Republic has highlighted the heartwrenching reality faced by its civilian population. That
tragic situation is largely due to inaction on the part of
the Council. In Aleppo, alone, about 275,000 people are
trapped in the crossfire between the Syrian army and
its allies and opposition groups, while the international
community is shocked to see the Council incapable of
reaching the minimum consensus, thereby becoming
an ineffective and nearly irrelevant body.
Guatemala regrets the lack of access for
humanitarian aid and calls on the forces on the
ground not to violate international humanitarian law
and to facilitate the affected populations’ access to
humanitarian aid. Furthermore, Guatemala joins the
UNICEF strong condemnation of the heinous attack
on a primary school in the city of Dara’a, Syria. Most
shameful of all, regarding the maelstrom of violence, is
16-33267

19/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the fact that the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, whose essential mandate is the
maintenance of international peace and security, are
being rendered null and void by the Council’s failure
to meet its Charter-mandated responsibilities, thereby
transforming the tenets of the Charter into mere
rhetoric in the absence of substantive action. Equally
unacceptable are the scale and size of the indiscriminate
bombing, including the use of prohibited weapons, in
densely populated areas. Furthermore, it is regrettable
to see the Council’s inaction lead to an increase in
unspeakable violence.
Guatemala supports the efforts made to date by
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura. We agree with the Special
Envoy that we must exert all possible pressure to
achieve a cessation of violence and, at the very least,
regular cessations of hostilities to ensure the access
of the civilian population to humanitarian aid. We
consider the unilateral ceasefire to be an important first
step and hope that such action will continue, not only
in Aleppo, but throughout Syrian territory. A ceasefire
is crucial to implementing a humanitarian pause in the
area. Guatemala regrets the fact that no agreement was
reached at the recent discussions between the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation and the
United States of America, in Lausanne, Switzerland.
We therefore urge the parties to do their utmost to
pursue dialogue.
Equally critical is the question of Israel and
Palestine, not only due to the complex history and
the convergence of religions. We share the concern
expressed by the Secretary-General about the decision
of the Israeli authorities to build 98 dwellings as part of
a new settlement, and the establishment of an industrial
complex west of Ramallah, both in the occupied
Palestinian territory in the West Bank. As we have said
here before, walls, checkpoints, violent responses by
security forces, the demolition of homes, restrictions
on non-governmental organizations, violent attacks by
individuals and groups, as well as rocket launches and
disproportionate responses, all impede a solution to the
conflict. Furthermore, we reiterate that the building
of settlements is illegal, fuels the conflict, flouts the
recommendations of the Quartet for Middle East peace
and violates international law. All such actions have
become a clear obstacle to the achievement of a twoState solution, with both States living peacefully side
by side.

S/PV.7792

To conclude, Guatemala urges the parties to
continue the dialogue aimed at stabilizing the region,
ensuring respect for human rights and, in particular,
reducing violence towards civilians in the Middle East.
We appeal yet again to each and every member of the
Council to comply with their responsibilities under the
Charter of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Russian): I give the floor
to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Zaayman (South Africa): We join other
Member States in expressing our appreciation to the
Russian Federation for convening this open debate
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. We trust that the debate will assist
in mobilizing the international community, in particular
the Security Council, to support the Palestinians and
the Israelis in finding a lasting solution to the conflict.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
A few weeks ago, President Jacob Zuma addressed
the General Assembly during its general debate (see
A/71/PV.9). He expressed South Africa’s concern over
the lack of progress in finding a durable solution to the
Palestinian question and stressed the importance of the
United Nations in carrying out its historic mission of
ensuring that the issue is resolved once and for all.
The Palestinian people have lived under Israeli
occupation for almost half a century. The occupation
remains untenable and threatens the two-State solution.
The West Bank continues to experience heightened
tension and sporadic acts of violence between
Palestinians and Israelis, as we have seen in Jerusalem
and Hebron recently. Illegal Israeli settlements
continue unabated and have led to a fragmentation of
the West Bank and continue to threaten the feasibility
of a contiguous Palestinian State. The illegal blockade
of Gaza has led to a dire humanitarian situation,
which is both unacceptable and unsustainable. The
Israeli occupation not only violates the collective and
individual rights of the Palestinians, but also poses a
threat to the security and very existence of Israel.
South Africa reaffirms that the central responsibility
for attaining peace is primarily in the hands of the
Palestinians and the Israelis themselves. We, as part
of the international community, should support and

16-3326751/64

S/PV.7792

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

encourage the parties towards that endeavour. In that
regard, dialogue and negotiation remain the only way
forward to finding a lasting solution. The guidelines for
those negotiations have to be based on the established
international legal framework, which includes General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions, the Madrid
principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
road map, to name but a few.
The Security Council must live up to its Charter
obligations and play a more active role in resolving
the conflict. Meetings of the Security Council like
this open debate are important, but they need to be
followed up with meaningful, concrete action, as the
Council does in other cases on its agenda. In other
cases, the Council has asserted the moral and legal
weight of the United Nations and coerced action by the
parties through threats and action under Chapter VII
of the Charter.Surprisingly, in the case of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, responsibility for facilitating the
peace process has been deferred to the Quartet with
questionable results. My delegation has long held
the view that there should be a broader international
framework to assist the parties towards a negotiated
settlement and in which the United Nations assumes the
role of neutral arbiter.
In this context, we welcome the French initiative.
The common message flowing from the participants
at the Paris conference is that the time has come for
the parties to resume negotiations with the full support
of the international community, based on the existing
international legal framework, and to work towards a
two-State solution. South Africa recently co-hosted, in
partnership with the United Nations, an international
media seminar on peace in the Middle East. This
seminar was held for the first time in sub-Saharan
Africa and helped to heighten awareness of the
situation in Palestine, we believe, in a balanced and
objective manner. It also provided an opportunity for
civil society and the media to contribute towards an
atmosphere conducive to dialogue.
In conclusion, we wish to reiterate that the situation
on the ground cannot be allowed to continue unchanged
as it will continue to be an impediment to the peace,
security, stability and development of the wider Middle
East region. In our view, ending the occupation is in
the interest of Israel and Palestine alike, and we would
encourage all Member States to direct the parties
towards attaining a lasting solution to the conflict.
52/64

19/10/2016

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Begeç (Turkey): As we approach the fiftieth
year of the occupation of the Palestinian territories,
prospects for a lasting peace are fading away. The
revitalization of the peace process is not only necessary
to grant a dignified life to the Palestinian people, but
also a fundamental requirement to achieving stability
in the region. In this regard, we support initiatives
that would address the long-standing vacuum on the
political track.
However, the continuing occupation and Israel’s
practices in contravention of international law,
particularly the systematic expansion of settlements,
erode the viability of a two-State solution. In addition,
house demolitions, land confiscation, administrative
detentions, denying Palestinians’ right to development,
as well as efforts to undermine the status and sanctity
of Al-Haram Al-Sharif breed desperation and anger
among the Palestinians, who have being collectively
punished for decades. These facts, particularly the
concerns regarding the settlements, were underlined
by all the Council members during the Arria Formula
meeting on 14 October. Their words must be backed
by action.
The international community can no longer
afford to turn a blind eye to this historical injustice.
Inaction not only aggravates the daily suffering of the
Palestinians, but creates deplorable consequences for
the region and beyond, as it fuels radicalization. In
order to overcome the current impasse, the Palestinians
should be able to sit at the negotiating table as the State
of Palestine, with equal standing with Israel. In this
regard, the recognition of the State of Palestine by more
countries and its full integration into international
forums are vital.
To reach a lasting peace, it is also crucial for
Palestinians to voice their legitimate demands in unity.
In this regard, Turkey will continue to encourage the
reconciliation of the Palestinian groups. Empowering the
Palestinian people and improving their living conditions
through development assistance and investments is
more urgent than ever. In that understanding, Turkey’s
$200-million pledge for the period of 2014-2017 is
channelled into various projects. In the past two years,
we have provided a total of $100-million worth of aid.
The agreement on the normalization of TurkishIsraeli relations, which was concluded in June, enabled
16-33267

19/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7792

us to restore our bilateral relations in many fields
and further increase our assistance to the occupied
territories, particularly Gaza. The first Turkish
shipment of 11,000 tons of humanitarian aid reached
Gaza on 4 July through Ashdod port, and a second
shipment arrived on 7 September. In addition, the
Turkey-Palestine Friendship Hospital built in Gaza,
with a 200-bed capacity, will be operational soon. The
construction project for 320 housing units in Gaza for
Palestinian families will be completed by the end of
2017.

Mr. Diamonds (Namibia): I wish to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your country’s assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October. I thank you, Sir, most sincerely for organizing
this debate on the important topic of the situation in
the Middle East, in particular in Palestine. I would
also like to take this opportunity to thank the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator for their comprehensive
briefings this morning.

Turkey will contribute to efforts for a just and
lasting settlement of the Palestinian issue with
the establishment of a sovereign and independent
Palestinian State within the pre-1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.

Furthermore, my delegation aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Venezuela
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The ongoing catastrophe in Syria continues to
unravel the very principles the Charter of the United
Nations. The regime and its supporters are reducing
Aleppo to rubble. The inhabitants of eastern Aleppo are
faced with unprecedented cruelty under indiscriminate
air strikes and shelling. The brutal scenario is well
known — besiege the city, starve the people and force
them into submission. Impunity for these war crimes
and crimes against humanity only encourage the
regime to go further. The perpetrators of these horrific
acts, including the use of chemical weapons, must be
held accountable.
Aleppo is the latest test for the international
community. Failure will mean further death,
displacement, despair and the rise of radicalization.
Failure will mean the end of the multicultural Syria
as we know it. In this regard, initiatives, such as the
11 October joint letter on Aleppo, sponsored by 62
countries, as well as the informal meeting of the
General Assembly to be organized upon the request
of 70 countries tomorrow, are promising steps. They
should be supported by concrete actions on the part of
the overall membership and the Security Council in
order to make a difference on the ground.
After six years of brutality and crime, the Syrian
people are looking to us, the international community.
They want to see our commitment to bringing peace
to their country. We need to feel the weight of this
expectation every single day and strive to deliver it.
This is our collective responsibility.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Namibia.

The Security Council has recently heard about the
increasingly dire situation in the Middle East, especially
about the occupation of the Palestinian territories. The
situation in Syria causes general apprehension that,
owing to the ongoing fighting, the humanitarian needs
in Aleppo and other parts of Syria are devastating. The
situation in Yemen grows more difficult by the day and
it is becoming increasingly impossible to keep track of
who is attacking whom. Furthermore, a major attack
against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham in Mosul,
in northern Iraq, is under way and analysts are raising
serious concerns regarding the consequences for the
region.
Last week, at the Arria Formula meeting called
by some members of the Security Council, we heard
that the situation in Palestine is worsening, as the
Israeli Government insists on continuing its settlement
programmes. There is no way to sugar-coat the realities
of apartheid, as practiced by the Israeli Government.
We commend the French Government for its
initiative aimed at mobilizing international support
for Palestinian-Israeli peace and for convening the
Israel peace conference. We commend and encourage
the efforts by Egypt, the Russian Federation and the
Quartet in moving forward with the peace efforts.
Namibia also hopes that the renewed efforts in the Arab
Peace Initiative will yield positive results. That vision of
hope drives activities, such as the International Day of
Solidarity with the Palestinian People, on 26 November,
and the declaration of 2017 as the International Year of
Solidarity with the Palestinian People.
In the face of a truly dire conflict situation in
the Middle East,we call on Israel to reassess its
aggressive stance towards the Palestinians to end their

16-3326753/64

S/PV.7792

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

ongoing punitive destruction of Palestinian homes and
infrastructure and to seize their illegal construction
of settlements on the occupied territory. Namibia is
concerned about the ongoing reports about Palestinian
security detainees and prisoners, including children
held in Israeli prisons. We are equally concerned that
the Israeli Parliament, on 3 August 2016, approved the
youth bill allowing the Israeli authorities to imprison
Palestinian children as young as 12 years of age if
convicted of terrorism against Israeli civilians or
military personnel. Reports of the widespread and
systematic torture of Palestinian detainees by the
security services in the occupied West Bank are also an
issue of concern.
Namibia therefore calls for Israel’s complete
and unconditional withdrawal from the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. We urge
the international community to facilitate the creation of
a Palestinian State based on the 1967 borders. We also
call on both sides to work for the restoration of calm
and to return to the table of negotiation and dialogue
with a view to achieving a two-State solution.
In the same vein, Namibia continues to support
the people of Palestine in their quest to achieve their
inalienable right to self-determination, justice, freedom
and independence. Namibia stands with the people
of Palestine in their determined efforts in pursuit
of these principles through political, diplomatic and
non-violent means. We further look forward to the end
of this occupation of close to 50 years and to seeing the
Palestinian people exercising their inalienable rights to
self-determination and their quest for nationhood.
In conclusion, the one-State solution that Israel is
seeking to impose on the international community is a
road map that will lead to nowhere. We hope that Israel
will soon wake up to this realization.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I wish at
the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council and to thank
you for having convened this meeting. We also thank
Mr. Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, and Mr. Stephen O’Brien, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for their
briefings this morning.
54/64

19/10/2016

The increasing variety of challenges that the
world is witnessing requires that efforts be made that
are commensurate with their scope and their impact
on international peace and security. It seems that the
lessons learned in the context of international efforts
to deal with conflicts and crises have been insufficient,
and we are now paying the price for the spread of these
challenges, which include terrorism.
The continued consideration by the Security
Council for many years of the situation in the Middle
East reaffirms this. We welcome the holding of regular
meetings by the Security Council on the situation on
the Middle East; however, we believe that achieving
peace in the region is dependent on respect by the
parties for the provisions of international law and
requires refraining from actions that are catastrophic
for international peace and security.
The international community has agreed on the
basic criteria for resolving the crisis in the Middle East.
The realization of peace in the region requires the defeat
of terrorism in a context of international legitimacy and
the implementation of all peace initiatives. That means
that there is no alternative to the establishment of a
Palestinian State living side by side with Israel in peace
and security on the basis of the June 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, in line with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, particularly resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the Arab Peace Initiative.
This requires that an end be put to the Israeli occupation
of all occupied Arab territories and to all settlement
activities, the lifting of the siege of Gaza, protection
for the Palestinian people, the return of refugees and
the realization of the inalienable right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination.
The success of any peace initiative will require
Israel to desist from its policy of imposing a fait accompli
on the occupied territories, in violation of international
law. Such actions by Israel are all null and void and will
not lead to a comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
In addition, addressing the dire humanitarian situation
in Gaza will have a positive impact on peace efforts.
When we speak of the situation in the Middle East,
we cannot ignore the current situation in Syria, which
represents the greatest challenge to the international
community. The repeated failures to put an immediate
end to the Syrian crisis will lead only to the continuation
of flagrant violations of international law and to
instability in the Middle East, thus affecting Syria’s
16-33267

19/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

territorial integrity and the unity of its people as well
as the security and stability of the region and the world.
However, the efforts made by the international
community and the International Syria Support Group,
as well as the adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 2268 (2016), have not had the desired effect.
The Syrian regime continues to violate international
law, targets civilians, uses weapons with indiscriminate
effects and commits massacres in all areas. It exploits
divisions in the Security Council and continues its
violation of international humanitarian law against
civilians in Syria, in total disregard of their impact
on the region and the world, using the United Nations
and other forums to change the facts on the ground
and manipulate the situation, as it has done recently
in Aleppo.
This humanitarian disaster has seemingly not been
enough for the Syrian regime to change its policies.
The Syrian people have become fodder for war in the
absence of an international consensus. We are aware
of the seriousness of the challenges facing the Security
Council with regard to the Syrian crisis and of how they
prevent the Council from taking immediate measures
to put an end to the violations and massacres being
committed in Syria. The Security Council is required,
today more than ever, to immediately step in to protect
civilians in Aleppo and other parts of Syria.
The only way to guarantee an end to the violence
is through the implementation of resolution 2254
(2015). The only solution to the crisis is a Syrian-led
comprehensive and inclusive political process that
would enable the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian
people to be realized, implement in full the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and lead to a peaceful
transfer of power and the release of all detainees and
prisoners, as well as allow international assistance to
reach all those in need.
We will continue our efforts, along with the rest of
the international community, to ensure the realization
of the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people in
accordance with international law and the Charter of
the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the States members of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC). I would

S/PV.7792

like also to express my sincere congratulations to you,
Sir, for assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October. I wish you every success and
express my thanks to you for having convened this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including the
question of Palestine.
After almost 50 years of the Israeli occupation, the
deadlocked political horizon and the fact that the peace
process is at an impasse continue to present a serious
challenge to the international community owing to the
intransigence of Israel, the occupying Power, and its
disrespect of the will of the international community
and international resolutions.
At every juncture, Israel has rejected and
obstructed international and regional peace efforts
that have been based firmly in international law and
United Nations resolutions. Instead, it has sought
to justify its illegal behaviour with empty, distorted
pretexts and has persisted with such illegal behaviour
on the ground, causing deep suffering to the Palestinian
people under its occupation and further entrenching its
illegal occupation.
Among the primary methods by which Israel has
pursued its illegal agenda in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, has been its building
and expansion of colonial settlements and the transfer
of its own civilians to the occupied land, in grave
breach of international humanitarian law. It should be
emphasized that Israel’s settlement practices, which
involve the illegal confiscation of Palestinian property,
the demolition of Palestinian homes and the forced
eviction and displacement of Palestinian civilians,
unmistakably underpin a policy of colonization and
ethnic cleansing and constitute blatant violations of
the inalienable and national rights of the Palestinian
people.
Recent figures reveal that the socioeconomic and
humanitarian situation of the Palestinian population in
the Gaza Strip in particular, where Israel for nearly 10
years imposed an illegal blockade, is the worst it has
ever been since 1967, when the occupation began. At
the same time, other unlawful Israeli practices, such as
the ongoing arrest, detention and abuse and captivity of
Palestinian civilians, including children, and military
raids in which Palestinians are killed, injured or extrajudicially executed, have become a pattern of daily life
in Palestine, which constitutes a vicious and destructive
cycle, with both short and long-term consequences on

16-3326755/64

S/PV.7792

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the occupied population, as well as on the prospects for
peace and stability.
It is clear and should be of extreme concern to
the international community, including the Security
Council, that Israel’s persistent pursuit of such
aggressive policies not only undermines international
efforts to ensure peace and security and the vision of
the two-State solution, based on 1967 borders, but also
constitutes flagrant breaches of international law and
international humanitarian law, the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949 and the relevant resolutions of
the Council. That lack of accountability undermines
international law, the credibility of the Security Council
and the international system as a whole. In that regard,
the OIC underlines the urgency of the Security Council
assuming its Charter-mandated role and taking the
necessary measures to end the deteriorating situation.
A clear and unequivocal draft resolution should
be adopted to address Israel’s violation of the law,
including its settlement policy, the demands for a halt
to the illegal colonization campaign and an end to
Israel’s prolonged occupation. Such a draft resolution
will constitute a meaningful contribution to, and real
support for, the ongoing international efforts aimed at
preserving and attaining the two-State solution, on the
basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions, the
Madrid land-for-peace principle and the Arab Peace
Initiative, which sets forth a clear and just path for
peace.
In that regard, the OIC reiterates its support for the
French initiative to restore a political horizon under
international, multilateral patronage and within a
specified time frame, with a view to ending the Israeli
occupation and achieving a just, comprehensive, lasting
and peaceful solution, which has been obstructed and
delayed for far too long. Fifty years of occupation,
oppression, humiliation and the worst kind of human
rights violations is enough, and it is morally, legally
and politically unacceptable to allow that to continue.
The OIC warns against the repeated provocations
and attacks by extremist Jewish groups on worshippers
at Islamic and Christian holy sites, namely, at the
Al-Aqsa Mosque and a number of churches in Jerusalem.
The dangerous consequences of such extremist action
could be far-reaching and grave and must be averted.
Israel’s illegal practices and measures are aimed at
falsifying the history of the occupied city of Jerusalem,
obliterating its Palestinian Arab identity and attempting
56/64

19/10/2016

to alter its indigenous, demographic composition. The
expansion of colonial settlements and the expulsion
of Palestinian citizens must end. In parallel, we must
caution against the grave impact of the actions of
Israel’s terrorist settler groups, including “price-tag”
and “hill-top youth” militias, which continue their
incitement and terrorist attacks against Palestinian
civilians — all with the support and protection of the
Israeli occupation forces.
Such Israeli practices have created a tragic
situation that calls for serious action by the Council to
stop the ongoing violations, as they nurture extremism,
violence and racism and further destabilize an already
fragile situation. Such action also further fuels religious
conflict, which endangers regional and international
peace and security. It should be stressed that the right
to security is not exclusive to Israel; security is a right
that should be provided to, and enjoyed by, all nations,
especially the victims of occupation. We call on the
Council to assume its responsibility and provide the
Palestinian people with international protection in
accordance with international humanitarian law. In
line with the duty conferred upon it by the Charter of
the United Nations to maintain international peace and
security, the Council must also act to safeguard the
prospects for peace and chart a way forward to finally
and justly resolve the question of Palestine, after all of
these decades, and contribute to the establishment of
lasting peace and security in the Middle East region.
A just peace would be one through which the
Palestinian people recover their inalienable rights,
including their right to return, self-determination and
independence in the State of Palestine on Palestinian
territory occupied since 1967, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, and would include reaching a just solution
to the Palestinian refugee issue, in consonance with the
relevant United Nations resolutions.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): We convey our
appreciation to the Russian presidency for having
convened today’s open debate.
My delegation aligns itself with the statements
made, respectively, by the representative of Venezuela
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
and by the representative of the State of Kuwait on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
16-33267

19/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The open debates in the Council Chamber on the
Palestinian question reverberate with a deepening sense
of frustration, given the Council’s persistent failure and
inability to live up to its obligations to end the nearly
five decades’-long Israeli occupation of the Palestinian
territories, and thus pave the way for a peaceful, just
and durable solution to the crisis.
We agree with most delegations that the immediate
priority for the Council is to send out an unqualified
message condemning the illegal Israeli settlements,
including the recent expansion plans. Such plans
have emerged as the symbol of the protracted illegal
occupation and have been identified as the main
obstacle to pursuing the final status negotiations, and
thereby a viable two-State solution.
We cannot agree more with the Ambassador and
Permanent Observer of the State of Palestine when
he underscored the need for restoring the “political
horizon” in order for the Council to act in a decisive
manner on this seminal issue of concern, and doing
so while drawing on its own resolutions, the Quartet
road map, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Madrid
land-for-peace principle. We urge that the Palestinian
delegation’s current initiative to hold dialogues with
all Council members on the possibility of a Council
draft resolution to address the illegality of the Israeli
settlement regime, including the construction of the
wall in the occupied Palestinian territory, lead to its
much-anticipated and logical conclusion.
The Arria Formula meeting held last week was
unequivocal about how the illegal Israeli settlements
continue to undermine the prospects for reviving
the Middle East peace process. They deserve to
be accounted for pursuant to the provisions of the
Fourth Geneva Convention and the Rome Statute.
The international conference held in Geneva in June,
the French initiative and the Quartet report issued in
July (S/2016/595, annex) also sounded unmistakable
concerns about continued Israeli settlement activities,
which have potentially irreversible implications for
the character, status and demography of the occupied
Palestinian territories.
The dire humanitarian and socioeconomic
situation — particularly in the Gaza Strip, which
is under an Israeli blockade that is entering its tenth
year — was eloquently highlighted by the briefers this
morning. We call upon the international community to
impress upon Israel, the occupying Power, to put an end

S/PV.7792

to its systematic violation of international humanitarian
law and human rights principles and its unjustified acts
of collective punishment unleashed on the 2 million
people in Gaza.
It is perhaps an irony that the Palestinian authorities
are often called upon to take action against incitement
of so-called terrorist acts, when the most fundamental
root causes of the generational challenges of terrorism
and radicalization sweeping through our world have
been left unaddressed for decades. At the risk of
its own peril, the international community must do
something besides ignoring that stark truth. To that
effect, my delegation would support the proposal to
mark the fiftieth year of the unlawful Israeli occupation
of the Palestinian territories by declaring 2017 as the
international year to end the occupation.
We appreciate the Palestinian delegation’s interest
in playing an enhanced role in the United Nations
within stipulated rules and procedures. We pledge them
our continued support in realizing their unalienable
right to self-determination and independent and viable
statehood.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Perera (Sri Lanka): Let me join the other
speakers in commending the President for convening
this timely and important debate.
Sri Lanka associates itself with the statement made
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. I wish to make
this statement in my national capacity.
Conflicts in Syria and Yemen, an unprecedented
refugee crisis and a humanitarian situation of epic
proportions in various areas — including the the surge
in violent extremism and terrorism — have contributed
to the growing instability across the Middle East. The
unabated shelling and airstrikes, such as in Aleppo, have
caused untold suffering, and the images of little children
caught in the crossfire are more than humankind should
have to bear. Sri Lanka calls upon the parties concerned
to find a peace deal in Syria without delay. Sri Lanka
welcomes the plenary meeting of the General Assembly
to be held tomorrow on the situation in Syria. We are
deeply conscious of the dire need on the part of the
international community to address the overwhelming
humanitarian needs of Syrians and to halt all attacks
against civilian targets.

16-3326757/64

S/PV.7792

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In that context, the question of Palestine takes
on additional importance. Sri Lanka reaffirms its
steadfast support of the Palestinian cause. This debate
reminds us once again of the urgency of finding a just
solution to the question of Palestine and addressing
the plight of Palestinian people. The world must not
forget the dire humanitarian situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories — especially in Gaza, were the
conditions are intolerable — especially at this time of
unprecedented unrest in the Middle East, when we are
focused on the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
the demanding refugee crisis in Syria.
Sri Lanka supports the work of United Nations
agencies in occupied Palestinian territories, including
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East and the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, which keep
the majority of people in Gaza supplied with the bare
necessities, including education.
As Chair of the Special Committee to Investigate
Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the
Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied
Territories, Sri Lanka is particularly concerned about
the escalating violence and the number of civilian
casualties, which include infants.
The international community has repeatedly called
for a freeze to Israel’s settlement activities. Both parties
to the conflict must create the necessary environment
to facilitate peace. There is an urgent need for mutual
confidence-building measures in support of efforts to
resume dialogue and substantive negotiations. Israel
must protect the Palestinian civilian population in the
occupied territories and desist from actions that run
contrary to the established rules of international law
and practice.
We recognize the security needs of Israel.
Indiscriminate attacks against Israeli civilians will lead
to a counterproductive cycle of violence. We urge both
parties to respect international humanitarian law and
exercise the utmost restraint for the sake of the safety
of civilians.
It is important to stay engaged in finding a just and
durable solution to the situation in the Middle East.
Sri Lanka supports the implementation of the General
Assembly resolution regarding the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian to statehood.
58/64

19/10/2016

We are encouraged that, in spite of decades of
disappointment, the people of Palestine have resolutely
sustained their spirit and strength of purpose to gain
their legitimate rights. They have prevailed over the
considerable challenges facing them. We hope that
the Palestinian people will work together to preserve
national unity, which is imperative for the creation of a
fully sovereign, independent Palestine.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iceland.
Mr. Gunnarsson (Iceland): Allow me to thank
the Russian President of the Security Council for
organizing this quarterly debate on the situation in the
Middle East, which includes the question of Palestine.
The region of the Middle East faces massive
challenges amid conflict and crisis. The epicentres
of conflict — Syria, Yemen, Libya — have a severe
impact on their neighbouring countries. The fallout
from the conflicts attests to the staggering cost that the
whole world incurs when there is a failure in conflict
prevention and conflict resolution. Of course, the costs
are most brutal for the civilians living in the zones
of conflict. The continued targeting of civilians and
civilians infrastructure, particularly medical facilities,
is completely unacceptable. Impunity must not be
allowed to stand.
Yet there is one conflict in the region that should
be amenable to resolution — where preventing further
conflict should be possible. Indeed, the outline of a
viable peace plan has been on the table for years. The
two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is
the only viable peace plan that will allow both nations
to live side by side in peace. Yet at times both parties to
the conflict seem hell-bent on tearing the plan up.
Of great concern is the Israeli Government’s
continuing settlement policy. At the Arria Formula
meeting on settlements last week, we again heard
convincing evidence that Israeli Government policy
has had the effect — intended or not — of making it
impossible for a contiguous Palestinian State to emerge.
Settlement expansion and the destruction of Palestinian
structures undermine the basis for peace. We would
encourage Palestinian leaders to do everything in their
power to reduce tension and avoid provocation. Violent
acts against Israeli citizens and the firing of rockets
into Israel are totally unacceptable. We urge Palestinian
leaders to work to unite the people of Palestine under a
16-33267

19/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

democratic Government. Elections need to be held and
the different factions need to come together.
The two-State solution is in danger of slipping
from our grasp. Right now, damage control is a priority.
The Quartet report issued earlier this year (S/2016/595,
annex) is clear on the minimum actions required of
both parties to safeguard the two-State solution. It is
time the Security Council gave some real weight to its
exhortations.
Leaders on both sides bear the heaviest
responsibility in guiding their people in the direction
of peace. At the same time, we welcome the effort of
France to establish an international forum in which
peace can be discussed.
The Israeli-Palestinian situation is bad, but it
could get much worse. We urge the Council to bring its
powers of encouragement and coercion to bear on the
two parties to the conflict. The Council needs to act to
protect the two-State solution
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We wish you every
success. We thank you in particular for convening this
meeting on the situation in the Middle East, including
the question of Palestine. I would also like to thank the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and the Under Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs for their valuable and important briefings at the
beginning of this meeting.
Palestine has been occupied for half a century and
the Palestinian people have been denied their right
to self-determination. For half a century, the United
Nations has been unable to assume its responsibility
according to the Charter of the United Nations. For
half a century — despite numerous international
conferences, resolutions and advisory opinions — the
Palestinian people have been languishing under the
yoke of the Israeli occupation and suffering from the
failure of the international community.
The international community has agreed on
the illegality of the Israeli occupation and has been
condemning Israel’s aggressive practices against the
Palestinian people, in violation of international law,

S/PV.7792

including its settlement activities, its confiscation of
Palestinian land and its use of excessive force against
the Palestinian people. Israel continues to detain
thousands of Palestinians, including women and
children. Nevertheless, the international community
has not taken any effective measures to put an end to
the Israeli occupation and to hold Israel responsible for
the occupation and for its repeated crimes against the
Palestinian people.
My country therefore once again welcomes
the French initiative to hold an international peace
conference according to the terms of reference of the
peace process and, most important, the Arab Peace
Initiative, which my country put forward 14 years ago,
and based on relevant Security Council resolutions.
Those efforts aim to develop an effective international
mechanism that would put an end to the Israeli
occupation of the State of Palestine according to a set
timetable.
We hope that in 2017 the world will raise its voice
and say “Enough occupation.” For over half a century,
we have witnessed a lack of political will. We have
witnessed stalling and denial of the rights of Palestinian
people. During this half a century, we have seen
attempts to stoke violence, terrorism and instability in
the region and across the world. We call on the Security
Council to adopt a measure that is up to the challenge.
It should respond to this lack of accountability and
it should take into consideration the gravity of those
violations. It should courageously grant the Palestinian
people its right to self-determination and its right to
establish its independent State along the 4 June 1967
borders. It should ensure the liberation of all Arab
territories, including the occupied Arab Syrian Golan
and Jerusalem.
In that regard, I would like to welcome the latest
resolution adopted by UNESCO, which admits that
Jerusalem is an Islamic heritage. That is an important
step towards fulfilling the international community’s
obligations to the Palestinian people.
I would like to refer you, Mr. President, to the
statement issued on 4 October by the League of Arab
States regarding the deteriorating humanitarian situation
in Aleppo. According to the statement, the League is
greatly concerned by the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in Aleppo and other Syrian cities. The
statement condemns, in the strongest possible terms,
the heinous crimes committed by the Syrian regime

16-3326759/64

S/PV.7792

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

against unarmed and defenceless civilians, and the
continued systematic destruction of all infrastructure.
The statement reaffirms that those practices run counter
to all religious values. They are a flagrant violation of
international conventions on the protection of civilians.
They are a violation of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. Those practices
once again prove that the regime is disregarding its
most basic obligations, namely, to protect its citizens
and to protect civilians.
The statement also condemns the heinous terrorist
crimes committed by terrorist organizations, such as
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and
the Al-Qaida-affiliated Al-Nusra Front, across Syria.
Crimes committed by the Syrian regime and by these
terrorist groups amount to war crimes, and their
perpetrators should be brought to justice. The statement
also holds the Security Council — most important the
permanent members — and those interested in, and
concerned about, the Syrian crisis accountable and fully
responsible for the continued humanitarian tragedy
occurring before the very eyes of the international
community. The statement also calls on the Security
Council to promptly take effective measures in order
to implement resolutions 2254 (2015) and 2269 (2016)
in order to enforce the ceasefire and the cessation
of hostilities and implement mechanisms to ensure
humanitarian deliveries to besieged civilians.
My country welcomes the recent humanitarian
pause and the promises to facilitate humanitarian
deliveries. We are convinced that this is an initial step.
We hope that it will lead to an air ban and a no-fly
zone being imposed on the regime and its allies. The
members of the Iranian forces should withdraw from
Syria, together with the Hizbullah militias and the
militias of other criminal groups. They should be held
responsible for their crimes in Syria. Sieges should be
lifted in all cities in Syria and humanitarian deliveries
should be ensured without restrictions. All those steps
would pave the way towards political negotiations
based on a political transition according to the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and resolution
2254 (2015) and in line with the views of the High
Negotiating Committee, in a manner that would meet
the aspirations of the Syrian people.
My country reiterates its support for the efforts of
the Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, in
line with his mandate to ensure a political transition.
We are committed to providing unconditional support
60/64

19/10/2016

to the Syrian people, while respecting its decisions in
any way possible.
We support the friendly country of Iraq in its
war against terrorist organizations. We support its
operations to liberate Mosul. My country has been at
the forefront with other countries to develop and build
an international coalition against ISIL. However, we
are greatly concerned by the participation of sectarian
militias and armed groups in the liberation of Mosul.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has long warned against
a return to vengeful criminal acts based on sectarian
hatred, including the torturing of civilians and summary
executions. We call on the international community and
the Security Council to ensure an end to those practices
and guarantee the protection of civilians.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia welcomes the
initiative by Yemeni President Abdrabuh Mansour
Hadi Mansour to extend an invitation to the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen and to halt
military actions for 72 hours. The Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia supports a permanent ceasefire based on the
full implementation of resolution 2216 (2015) and in a
manner that ensures a return to negotiations based on
clear terms of reference and on the road map presented
by the Special Envoy. There is a need to complete the
political transition process as per the Agreement on the
Implementation Mechanism for the Transition Process
in Yemen, in accordance with the initiative of the Gulf
Cooperation Council.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia will spare no effort
to protect its national security and its borders against
the repeated violations committed by Houthi militias
and their allies, which have launched rockets against
the Kingdom, including some with a range of more
than 600 kilometres. We are surprised that the Security
Council has remained silent in the face of Iran’s flagrant
violation of Council resolutions. Iran continues to
smuggle weapons and rockets to the Houthis, in clear
violation of the relevant Council resolutions. While
the representative of Iran has shed crocodile tears
over the victims of Yemen, those tears will fool no
one, especially the citizens of Yemen. Yemenis are
aware of the Houthis’ intention to take control of the
Government. They know that the actions of the Houthis
are at the heart of their suffering.
Iranians have attempted to link events in Yemen
to what has been committed in Syria, including the
massacres. They have chosen to forget that the Syrian
16-33267

19/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

regime deliberately targets hospitals and civilian
structures, thereby seeking to eliminate all civilians in
Aleppo. Those acts of the Syrian regime are in stark
contrast to those of the international coalition, which
seeks to ensure the safety of Yemenis.
We call on the Security Council to hold an urgent
debate and to discuss the letter we addressed to the
Council on 14 September regarding Iranian violations,
including the smuggling of weapons to the Houthis.
The Council should impose sanctions on Iran and on
all those who violate Council resolutions so that the
resolutions do not become dead letters and to ensure
the Council’s credibility across the globe.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.
Ms. Yánez Loza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for the invitation to attend this open debate of the
Security Council.
At the same time, I wish to align myself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Venezuela
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
adopted at its recent Summit held in Margarita Island.
My delegation once again strongly reiterates the
support of the Government and the people of Ecuador
for the legitimate right of the Palestinian people to
establish an independent State within the 1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, as expressed on
12 July in this very Chamber (see S/PV.7736). I would
also like to renew our historic commitment to the cause
of peace in the Middle East.
We once again express our concern about the ongoing
absence of a decision and the lack of the necessary
political will to implement the relevant Council and
General Assembly resolutions, circumstances that
undermine the international community’s initiatives
to resolve continuing conflicts in the region, thereby
encouraging conduct that leads to systematic practices
condemned by international law, including human
rights law, international humanitarian law and even
the Charter of the United Nations, as we have heard
in the briefings presented by the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal Envoy
of the Secretary-General and by the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator in this very forum.

S/PV.7792

Ecuador
co-sponsored
General
Assembly
resolution 67/19, which granted Palestine the status of
a non-member observer State in November 2012. On
24 December 2010, President Rafael Correa was one
of the first Heads of State to recognize the State of
Palestine within the 1967 borders. As recognized in
the Middle East Quarter report (S/2016/595, annex),
we believe that a negotiated two-State solution is the
sole path to achieve a durable peace that addresses
Israel’s security needs and the Palestinians’ aspirations
for sovereignty and independence and puts an end to
the occupation that began in 1967. Only then will the
Palestinian people be able to enjoy their inalienable
rights. Their cultural and heritage rights have also been
affected, as recognized just recently by the UNESCO
Executive Board.
This legally constituted Organization has a duty
to restore hope — and owes a debt — to the Palestinian
people and to bring about the establishment of an
independent State of Palestine, including joining the
United Nations as a fully fledged Member, pursuant
to the 1947 partition resolution (General Assembly
resolution 181(II)).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Maldives.
Mr. Sareer (Maldives): Let me begin by thanking
the Russian presidency of the Security Council for
convening this quarterly open debate on the situation
in the Middle East.
This debate is taking place at a timely juncture
when the world is in trepidation over the grave
humanitarian situation in Syria, particularly regarding
the escalating violence in Aleppo. We also take note
of the Council’s Arria Formula meeting that took place
last week on the subject of illegal Israeli settlements,
which was organized by Malaysia, Egypt, Senegal,
Angola and Venezuela.
It is with great concern that my delegation joins
many other States in noting the Security Council’s
inability to exercise the duties with which it has been
entrusted by the international community in the Charter
of the United Nations with regard to the maintenance of
international peace and security.
The targeted attacks taking place in Aleppo
completely disregard civilian populations and
infrastructure and have resulted in the deaths of
hundreds, including children and humanitarian aid

16-3326761/64

S/PV.7792

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

workers. Schools, hospitals and basic infrastructure have
been annihilated, thus depriving an entire population of
their basic rights and necessities. Decades of growth
and development have been wiped out in the blink of an
eye, with the future looking increasingly dark.
We expect the Council to use all appropriate
means to protect innocent civilians, to end the
escalating violence taking place in flagrant violation
of international law and to ensure accountability for
war crimes and crimes against humanity. The failure
to act, resulting in the dire humanitarian crisis in
Syria, sets a dangerous precedent for the role of the
Council in addressing future conflicts. Therefore,
Maldives calls upon all Council members to ensure the
compliance of all States with the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council.
In a similar vein, we also call upon the international
community to enhance humanitarian aid — and upon
the actors concerned to ensure unimpeded, continuous
and full access to it for those in need. We must
undertake every effort to alleviate and end the suffering
that has been unjustly inflicted on innocent civilians in
Syria. We also strongly urge all the parties concerned
to engage constructively in political dialogue to bring
about a sustainable and peaceful solution to the crisis
and to refrain from resorting to further acts of violence,
which could fuel and escalate the conflict.
The perpetuation of hostility and conflict in
occupied Palestine, which has compromised peace and
security in the region for decades, is another result of
the Security Council’s imparity and failure to exercise
its responsibilities. The facts are clear. The excessive
punitive measures and ongoing brutal violence by the
occupying Power — the Israelis against the Palestinian
people — have not only denied the Palestinians’
fundamental human rights, but have also claimed
numerous lives. The expansion of Israeli settlements
through construction and the designation of land for
exclusive Israeli use are in clear violation of international
law, including the right to self-determination. Those
activities extinguish any prospect of development or a
stable future for the Palestinian people.
While Israel maintains the façade of being
committed to a two-State solution, its actions clearly
demonstrate the exact opposite. This year alone,
settlement activities have expanded at an alarming
rate, with the demolition not only Palestinian homes
and property, but also of humanitarian infrastructure
62/64

19/10/2016

established by the international community. Maldives
reaffirms solidarity with the Palestinian people and
reiterates its call upon Israel for an immediate cessation
of its settlement activities, which are illegal.
Although we believe that the agreed two-State
solution to the conflict is ultimately a political one
that can be reached only by the parties concerned, we
also believe that it is the responsibility of the Security
Council to facilitate the solution by setting the necessary
parameters to maintain conditions on the ground that
will enable them to work towards that goal in good
faith. The current state of affairs, with the expansion
of illegal Israeli settlements, coupled with continuing
violence, is steering the conflict further away from the
two-State solution.
Maldives commends and welcomes the numerous
initiatives that have been undertaken by various
Member States and the international community,
including civil society, to address the situation in
the Middle East. Undoubtedly, those initiatives have
substantially contributed to alleviating the suffering of
people affected by the conflict.
At the same time, we wish to emphasize that the
duty primarily falls upon the Security Council. If
the Council is unable to take adequate measures to
maintain international peace and security, its current
methodologies and strategies must be re-evaluated
and changed. Maldives is ready to play its part in such
an exercise.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate your country, Sir, on
presiding over the Security Council this month and to
thank you for holding this debate. It clearly shows your
country’s unfailing support for the Palestinian cause,
particularly given current circumstances. I would
also like to thank the Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, and Mr. Stephen O’Brien, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, for their briefings.
The situation in the Middle East is worsening day
after day, month after month. Its deterioration in the
context of the future of the region is a great source of
concern. First and foremost, we are concerned about the
worsening situation in Palestine while the international
16-33267

19/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

community is preoccupied with other issues. While the
other issues are important, they should not distract the
international community from the central issue in the
Middle East, that is, the Palestinian question. It is a
cause for all Arabs, all Muslims, who aspire to restoring
peace and harmony in the region.
The Kingdom of Morocco, whose King chairs the
Al-Quds Committee, is very concerned about what is
taking place in Palestine, particularly in Jerusalem,
which is the third most holy site in Islam. We condemn
all attacks against mosques, against the faithful and
against the legal status of the city itself. These attacks
fuel violence and extremism. The attempts to Judaize
the region, to erect settlements and expel Palestinians
hinders any peace effort.
The international community must assume its
responsibilities; it must find a way out of the current
stalemate and to bring Palestinians back from the
deadlock we have seen since the breakdown of the
Israeli-Palestinian negotiations. The international
community must spare no effort to bring the Israelis
and Palestinians to the negotiating table in order to
bring about the two-State solution, including the pre1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as the capital of
Palestine. The process must be carried out properly, in
order to build the necessary trust for the two States to
coexist in peace, in accordance with United Nations
resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative.
My country commends France’s efforts to salvage
the two-State solution, including its holding of a
ministerial meeting in that regard, during which the
Kingdom of Morocco restated its position regarding the
Palestinian question, as it relates to the setting up of an
independent Palestinian State within pre-1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. As King Mohammed
VI, Head of the Al-Quds Committee, stated at the third
Organization of Islamic Cooperation Summit, hosted
by Turkey,
“We cannot but affirm our support for the appeal of
President Mahmoud Abbas to hold an international
conference to put an end to Israeli occupation — a
crucial step for stopping the tragedy in Palestine
and achieving equitable peace, based on a twoState solution. We also support the French initiative
that seeks the resumption of negotiations between
Palestine and Israel.”
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.

S/PV.7792

Mrs. Rodríguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
The Palestinian people continue to suffer deeply.
For almost 50 years, the illegal occupation of Israel
and Israeli policies and practices have flagrantly
flouted international law, including international
humanitarian law. From October 2015 to date, Israeli
military incursions have caused the deaths of over
200 Palestinians, some of them children. From the
beginning of 2016 to date, 878 Palestinian structures
in the West Bank have been destroyed or confiscated
by Israeli authorities, which represents a 60 per cent
increase as compared to 2015 and the most structures
destroyed in a single year since 2008. New settlement
construction in the second quarter of 2016 was higher
than at any point during the past three years.
How long will the Security Council stay silent,
hostage to the United States veto or threat of veto? How
long will the Council allow Israel to act with impunity as
it commits crimes against the Palestinian people? Cuba
once again calls on the Security Council to assume its
responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
and to adopt the necessary measures to demand that
Israel immediately end the occupation of Palestinian and
other Arab territories; the blockade of the Gaza Strip,
the building and expansion of Israeli settlements and
the separation wall in occupied Palestinian territories;
the destruction and expropriation of Palestinian land
and property; forced displacements; and the transfer of
settlers to illegally occupied Palestinian land; among
other violations of international law, international
humanitarian law and United Nations resolutions.
Until the Security Council shoulders its
responsibilities, Israel will continue to consolidate the
occupation, making the two-State solution impossible
and undermining the attainment of a fair and peaceful
solution to the conflict. Cuba applauds regional and
international efforts under way to resume IsraeliPalestinian peace talks. We reiterate that the Security
Council must fulfil its obligation to promoting a
negotiated solution that ends the Israeli occupation
of Palestinian territory. The only possible solution to
the Palestinian question is the peaceful coexistence of
two independent States, with the establishment of an
independent, sovereign and viable Palestinian State

16-3326763/64

S/PV.7792

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

with its capital in East Jerusalem and with pre-1967
borders.
Cuba reaffirms its full support for the admission of
Palestine as a full Member of the Organization and calls
on the Security Council to take a decision to that end. If
it does not, the General Assembly should act with full
determination to resolve the matter. Cuba welcomes the
willingness of the State of Palestine to lead the work of
the Group of 77 in the near future. Its leadership will
honour the Group.
We condemn the politicization of the crisis in Syria
and the manipulation of the humanitarian situation and
the suffering of the Syrian people by some members
of the Council, which, to serve their own geopolitical
interests, are pursuing the declared objective of
imposing regime change in Syria. These same members
too often forget the great humanitarian needs in the
besieged Gaza Strip, where more than 1.3 million of the
1.9 million Palestinian residents need help.
Those who have fuelled the conflict in Syria,
providing weapons and funds and sponsoring
terrorist groups from outside, are responsible for the
thousands of civilian victims of the conflict and for
the humanitarian situation in the country. Cuba regrets
the loss of innocent lives as a result of this situation
and condemns all acts of violence against the civilian
population in Syria.
The threat posed by extremist groups in the
country, some of which are using terrorist methods, is

64/64

19/10/2016

the main challenge facing that Arab nation. The fight
against this scourge in Syria should be part of the
collective efforts to find a solution to the crisis. Cuba
rejects the promotion of an interventionist agenda in
the guise of the fight against terrorism. We demand
that violations of Syria’s sovereignty cease, and that
the foreign military presence, which does not have the
consent of — and whose operations are not coordinated
with — the Syrian Government, the sole legitimately
elected authority in the country, be brought to an end.
A political solution through dialogue and
negotiations and without preconditions is the only
viable solution to the conflict in that country. Peace in
Syria can be achieved only by respecting the right of
the Syrian people to decide their own destiny without
outside interference and without impositions. We
support the Syrian people in their aspirations to live in
peace and choose their destiny.
All conflict situations in the Middle East should
receive the same attention by the Security Council.
The achievement of the peace, security, well-being and
development that all peoples, including those of the
Middle East, deserve will depend upon the Council’s
decisive action. Cuba reiterates its support for a just,
comprehensive and lasting solution to the conflicts in
the Middle East, which will safeguard the sovereignty,
security and territorial integrity of all States in
the region.
The meeting rose at 4.25 p.m.

16-33267
