S/2018/521

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 June 2018
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Central Africa
and the activities of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to the statement of the President of the
Security Council dated 11 June 2015 (S/PRST/2015/12), in which the Council
requested the Secretary-General to keep it informed about the activities of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA). It provides an assessment of
the major political and security trends in Central Africa since my previous report,
dated 28 November 2017 (S/2017/995), and an update on progress in the
implementation of the mandate of UNOCA. The report also provides an update on the
situation in the Lake Chad Basin region, pursuant to Council r esolution 2349 (2017).

II. Major developments in the Central Africa subregion
A.

Political, peace and security developments and trends
2.
Central Africa continued to face serious political and security challenges against
the backdrop of a regional economic slowdown. There have been some positive
developments towards subregional integration, and efforts to consolidate democratic
governance.
Political developments and trends
3.
On 29 January, the Heads of State and Government of the Economic Community
of Central African States (ECCAS) held a consultative meeting in Addis Ababa, on
the margins of the African Union summit. They agreed to convene a session of the
Assembly of Heads of State of the Council for Peace and Security in Central Africa
in February, which was subsequently postponed to a later date yet to be announced.
They also decided to hold the seventeenth ordinary session of the Summit of ECCAS
Heads of State and Government tentatively in June.
4.
The fifth ordinary session of the Council of Ministers of the Council for Peace
and Security in Central Africa took place in Libreville on 3 and 4 March. It was
preceded by the nineteenth ordinary session of the Defence and Security Commission
of the Council for Peace and Security in Central Africa from 28 February to 1 March.
In its final communiqué, the Council of Ministers, inter alia, strongly condemned the
secessionist aspirations in the English-speaking regions of Cameroon and expressed

18-08203 (E)

050618

*1808203*

S/2018/521

its “full support to the Cameroonian authorities”; rejected all external interference in
electoral processes in the region and requested the ECCAS secretariat to reinforce
support to concerned member States, in collaboration with the African Union; adopted
the strategy to prevent and fight terrorism in Central Africa, developed within the
framework of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa; instructed the ECCAS secretariat to develop a
subregional strategy to fight mercenary activities and transnational organized crime
in Central Africa; and decided to convene a regional conference towards the adoption
of subregional regulation on pastoralism in Central Africa. The Council of Ministers
also decided to launch an institutional, structural and functional reform of the Council
for Peace and Security in Central Africa.
5.
On 20 April, a consultative meeting was held between ECCAS and the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in Lomé, where it was
announced that the two subregional organizations would hold a joint summit on
peace, security, radicalization and violent extremism in July 2018.
6.
In Angola, President João Lourenço established an Inter-Ministerial
Commission on State Reform on 15 February. He also pledged to hold local elections
before the 2022 general elections.
7.
In Cameroon, the north-west and south-west regions continued to face serious
security challenges. Increased attacks against defence and security forces and
abductions by suspected separatist armed groups, as well as the Government’s heavy
military response, resulted in fatalities and injuries. The situation deteriorated
following the arrest in Nigeria of 47 alleged separatists, including the self-proclaimed
president of the so-called “Ambazonia State”, and their subsequent extradition to
Cameroon on 26 January. According to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), those individuals had submitted asylum
claims and four had been formally recognized as refugees. They will be tried in a
military court under Law no. 2014/028 of 23 December 2014 on counter-terrorism.
On 2 March, the Government announced a Cabinet reshuffle and, inter alia, appointed
a new Minister of Territorial Administration. The new Mi nister, who hails from the
north-west region, visited the two English-speaking regions and called for a peaceful
resolution of the crisis through dialogue. A new Ministry for Decentralization and
Rural Development was created.
8.
Senatorial elections were held in Cameroon on 25 March, giving a large victory
to the ruling party. In addition, preparations continue for presidential, legislative and
municipal elections scheduled for 2018.
9.
In Chad, social tensions persisted, exacerbated by the decision of the
Government to cut the emoluments of civil servants and prompting a general strike
by trade unions against austerity measures. The Government and labour unions
reached an agreement on 14 March.
10. On 24 December, President Idriss Deby Itno announced a Government reshuffle,
reducing the number of ministers from 37 to 24. On 6 April, he announced that
legislative elections would be held in November 2018. From 19 to 27 March, the
President convened a national forum on institutional reforms in N ’Djamena. Most
major opposition parties boycotted the forum. The forum recommended, inter alia, an
extension of the term of the President and parliamentarians by one year, to six and
five years, respectively, both renewable once; the abolishment of the post of Prime
Minister; the adoption of a quota granting women 30 per cent of elected offices; and
transformation of the electoral management body into a permanent structure. Most
recommendations were included in the draft of the new Constitution, which was
adopted by the National Assembly on 30 April, in a session boycotted by opposition
deputies. On 3 May, the Prime Minister and his Government resigned.
2/17

18-08203

S/2018/521

11. In the Republic of the Congo, the Government and a representative of former
rebel leader Frédéric Bintsamou, also known as Pastor Ntumi, signed a ceasefire
agreement on 23 December. The agreement calls for the launch of a disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme and for the return of internally displaced
persons and the restoration of State authority. An ad hoc joint commission, comprising
representatives from both sides, was formed to oversee the implementation of the
agreement. On 22 January, the joint commission recommended the lifting of the arrest
warrant against Pastor Ntumi, the creation of local demobilization centres, the
restoration of administrative and judicial authorities, the withdrawal of Government
forces, the restoration of State security in the crisis zones and the identification of
former combatants. On 7 March, the commission announced the release from
detention of five close allies of Pastor Ntumi. At the end of March, the Government
shared a roadmap with the United Nations, outlining the steps envisaged for the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process.
12. In Equatorial Guinea, legislative and municipal elections took place in
November 2017, with the coalition led by the ruling Partido democrático de Guinea
Ecuatorial obtaining all 75 seats in the Senate, all municipal seats, and 99 out of
100 seats in the Chamber of Deputies. The opposition Ciudadanos por la Innovación
de Guinea Ecuatorial party obtained the remaining seat. Women obtained 20 seats in
the Chamber of Deputies and 11 in the Senate. The opposition contested the results,
denouncing fraud and irregularities. In early February, President Teodoro Obiang
Nguema Mbasogo appointed a Cabinet of 25 members, down from 29, as part of
austerity measures. On 26 February, the district court of Mongomo ordered the
dissolution of the Ciudadanos por la Innovación party, because of its “threats against
State security”. On 7 May, the Supreme Court confirmed the dissolution of the party.
13. On 28 December, local media reported that an attempt to overthrow President
Obiang Nguema Mbasogo was foiled. According to the Government, mer cenaries
allegedly involved in the attempt to destabilize the country originated from the
Central African Republic, Chad and the Sudan, leading to tensions with these
countries. Against this background, several high-level visits took place to restore
trust. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chad and President Faustin Archange
Touadera of the Central African Republic visited Malabo on 4 and 9 January,
respectively, to express solidarity. They denied involvement and offered full
cooperation in the investigation. On 25 January, following a meeting in N’Djamena
between the Minister of State for Regional Integration of Equatorial Guinea and
President Deby Itno, a communiqué was issued stating that Chad had no interest in
destabilizing Equatorial Guinea and was working to preserve peace.
14. In Gabon, legislative elections were twice postponed, first to July 2017 and then
to the end of April 2018. Except for former presidential candidate and opposition
leader Jean Ping, who continued to reject any dialogue with the Government, the main
opposition leaders expressed readiness to participate in the polls. On 30 April, the
Constitutional Court dissolved the National Assembly and called for the Government
to step down for failing to organize legislative elections withi n the constitutionally
mandated timelines. The prerogatives of the National Assembly were temporarily
transferred to the Senate. The Court further called on President Ali Bongo Ondimba
to appoint a new Government, which would be accountable to the President and would
resign as soon as elections took place. On 1 May, the Prime Minister and the
Government resigned. The Prime Minister was reconfirmed in his functions by
presidential decree on 3 May. A 41-member Government, the third since the
conclusion of the national dialogue in May 2017, was sworn in on 7 May.
15. From 13 February to 6 March, President Bongo Ondimba, in his capacity as
Chair of ECCAS, visited Angola, Chad, the Republic of the Congo, the Democratic

18-08203

3/17

S/2018/521

Republic of the Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Rwanda and Sao Tome and Príncipe to
discuss regional integration and security.
16. In Sao Tome and Principe, President Evaristo Carvalho promulgated a law
creating a Constitutional Court on 27 December. On 3 January, the Supreme Court
ruled that some provisions of the bill were unconstitutional. On 9 January, a
demonstration was organized by opposition parties in Sao Tome to protest the
nomination process for the Court’s judges. On 15 January, the National Assembly,
dominated by the ruling party, elected the five judges of the Constitutional Court
amidst protests by opposition parties and pro-Government demonstrations by the
ruling Acção Democrática Independente party, leading to the deployment of the police
to control the situation. On 30 January, the judges of the Constitutional Court
unanimously elected the Court’s president. On 23 February, the National Assembly
appointed the members of the National Electoral Commission to prepare for
legislative, local and regional elections, scheduled for 2018.
17. The Government of Burundi followed through with its decision to revise the
2005 Constitution. Among other things, the revisions included: extending the
presidential term to seven years; providing a five-year period for a possible review of
the ethnic quota in all branches of Government; creating the post of Prime Minister
and removing the post of Second Vice-President; and requiring a simple majority to
pass basic bills in Parliament instead of a two-thirds majority. Many Burundian
stakeholders and partners raised concerns that the proposed revisions could reverse
the gains by the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi.
International partners sought to persuade the Government to conclude the inter Burundian dialogue, led by the East African Community, before the referendum, but
to no avail. On 17 May, Burundians went to the polls to approve the amendments to
the Constitution, with the participation of one segment of the opposition. Voting
reportedly took place in a relatively calm environment.
Security developments and trends
Central African Republic
18. In the Central African Republic, incidents of violence in different parts of the
country reflected a fragile security situation. Continued activity by armed groups and
criminal networks led to tensions in several regions. In April, a series of clashes
occurred in Bangui following a joint operation launched by the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) and national security forces to forcefully disarm criminal groups
controlling neighbourhoods in the capital. The inflammatory rhetoric persisting in
Bangui escalated tensions in early May, with continued clashes taking place between
security forces and criminal groups. These resulted in casualties among civilians and
peacekeepers. Meanwhile, the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation
continued. Between February and April, the panel of facilitators of the Initiative
completed its second round of consultations with the armed groups.
Boko Haram/Lake Chad Basin
19. Boko Haram remained a threat in the Lake Chad Basin, with suicide bombings,
kidnappings, arson attacks, raids and attacks on villages and educational institutions,
looting, cattle raiding and ambushes on military positions, as well as the use of sexual
violence against civilians. Mass abductions increased over the past months in the
region. There were also frequent attacks against schools, with a devastating effect on
access to education in the affected areas.
20. From December to April, Boko Haram was responsible for 98 security incidents
in Cameroon and Chad. At least 81 civilians were killed in Cameroon, and one in
4/17

18-08203

S/2018/521

Chad. There were 10 suicide attacks and attempts in Cameroon during the same
period, involving 15 suicide bombers, at least eight of whom were women and at least
two children. On the night of 5 to 6 May, six people were reportedly killed, including
four local Government officials and a soldier, in an attack by Boko Haram on a
Chadian army checkpoint on the island of Gabalami in Lake Chad.
21. The growing use of young women and girls as suicide bombers created an
atmosphere of suspicion towards them and made them targets of harassment,
stigmatization by the affected communities and arbitrary arrests by security forces.
This included the women and girls who managed to escape captivity. Local
communities in Cameroon and Chad raised concerns about the reintegration of
surrendered Boko Haram fighters.
22. In December, the ministers of defence and heads of security agencies of the
countries of the Lake Chad Basin Commission met in N’Djamena to assess the
security situation in the region and plan for future operations against Boko Haram.
The Multinational Joint Task Force pursued its military operations against Boko
Haram, while engaging in advocacy efforts along with Commission to promote a
humanitarian response and address long-term development needs. The African Union
and the Commission, with the support of various United Nations entities, held a
conference to develop a coordinated regional approach to screen, prosecute,
rehabilitate and reintegrate persons associated with Boko Hara m and the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, in line with Security Council resolution 2349 (2017), in
N’Djamena from 10 to 13 April. This was a follow-up to the first Regional
Stabilization Conference for the Lake Chad Region, held in N’Djaména from 2 to
4 November 2017, with the overall aim of developing a regional stabilization strategy
for the Lake Chad region. The conference outlined six main pillars for the regional
strategy, which is expected to be finalized in June: (a) disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration; (b) the resettlement of internally displaced persons; (c) the
enhancement of local capacities in resilience; (d) the socioeconomic revitalization of
the region; (e) preventing violent extremism; and (f) education.
Lord’s Resistance Army
23. The Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) continued to pose security risks to civilians
in the Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Its attacks
consisted of ambushes, lootings, abductions, sexual violence, poaching and killings.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, two civilians were killed. Incidents were
concentrated in the Bangadi area of Dungu territory, the Banda area of Ango territory
and Nambia locality in Niangara territory. Two LRA fighters surrendered with their
weapons during the reporting period.
24. Between 1 November 2017 and 17 April, 32 LRA attacks allegedly took place
in the Central African Republic, resulting in three deaths and 79 abductions. Most of
the abductees were released within a short period. Most of the incidents took place in
Haute-Kotto and Mbomou prefectures. As part of its protection of civilians mandate,
on 1 April, a joint patrol of MINUSCA and the Central African Armed Forces rescued
15 people who had been abducted by LRA during an attack against Koubou v illage,
Haut-Mbomou prefecture.
Maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea
25. The fourth ordinary session of the conference of Heads of State and Government
of the Gulf of Guinea Commission took place on 23 November in Abuja. The meeting
approved a strategy to revitalize and improve the functioning of the Commission, as
well as the accession of Ghana to the treaty establishing the Gulf of Guinea
Commission.
18-08203

5/17

S/2018/521

26. At its fifth ordinary ministerial session, held in Libreville on 3 and 4 March, the
Council for Peace and Security in Central Africa requested the President of the
Council of Ministers of ECCAS to convene a meeting of ministers in charge of
maritime affairs and finance to discuss the financing of the maritime security and
safety architecture.
Poaching and illicit trafficking in wildlife and natural resources
27. On 11 December, the European Union and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime signed an agreement in Libreville to add ress wildlife and forest crime, as
well as the illicit trafficking of natural resources in Central Africa. The agreement
aims at strengthening the national and regional capacities of law enforcement officers,
prosecutors and the judiciary in ECCAS member States.

B.

Humanitarian developments
28. As at 26 April, the situation in Burundi remained precarious, with 3.6 million
people in need of assistance throughout the country and over 430,478 Burundian
refugees in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwa nda, Uganda and the United
Republic of Tanzania. Based on a tripartite agreement between Burundi, the United
Republic of Tanzania and UNHCR, almost 21,500 Burundian refugees were
voluntarily repatriated from the United Republic of Tanzania between Septembe r
2017 and 5 April.
29. Political unrest and violence in the English-speaking regions of Cameroon
resulted in the forced displacement of nearly 21,291 Cameroonians to Nigeria
between October 2017 and the end of April. The rise in the number of refugees and
internally displaced persons in Cameroon resulted in a surge in humanitarian needs
for both the displaced populations and vulnerable host communities. Cameroon
hosted 255,000 refugees from the Central African Republic in the eastern regions as
of April. Due to population displacement, food insecurity and epidemics, 3.3 million
people needed humanitarian assistance, for which $304.5 million was requested in
2018.
30. In the Central African Republic, the overall number of internally displaced
persons increased by 70 per cent in the past year, reaching over 680,000. The number
of refugees also increased by 30 per cent in the same period, reaching almost 570,000.
Worsening security had a negative impact on humanitarian access. Threats and acts
of violence against non-governmental organizations led humanitarian partners to
review their presence in some areas. Moreover, engagement with parties to the
conflict was becoming increasingly difficult due to the increased fragmentation of
armed groups. Humanitarian operations were hindered by lack of funding.
31. As at 30 April, Chad hosted 449,490 refugees, mainly from the Central African
Republic, Nigeria and the Sudan. Approximately 30,000 new refugees fled to
southern Chad following a surge in violence in north-west Central African Republic
at the end of December. Chad was also striving to address growing food insecurity,
malnutrition and health emergencies that had left 4.4 million people in need of
humanitarian assistance, including around 4 million who were food ins ecure. The
required humanitarian response for 2018 was estimated at $544 million.
32. The improving security situation in the Pool region of the Republic of the Congo
will facilitate the return of internally displaced persons and the delivery of
humanitarian assistance in the country. With almost 160,000 people affected,
significant humanitarian challenges remained. The country hosted 31,688 refugees
from the Central African Republic and 15,654 from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo as at 30 April.

6/17

18-08203

S/2018/521

33. The Democratic Republic of the Congo was facing its worst cholera outbreak in
15 years. Moreover, on 8 May, the Government declared an outbreak of Ebola virus
disease in Equateur Province — the ninth outbreak in the country since the disease
was first discovered in 1976 — with 51 cases reported as at 22 May. For 2018, aid
organizations requested $1.68 billion to assist some 10.5 million people, more than
twice the $812.6 million requested in 2017. The needs for almost 807,000 Congolese
refugees in the top eight recipient countries amounted to $504 million, while a
separate Ebola response plan amounts to $57 million for a three -month period.
34. Due to funding shortfalls, the World Food Programme reduced its food and cash
assistance to more than 140,000 refugees in Rwanda. This was seen by humanitarian
actors and the Government of Rwanda as a catalyst for refugees from Kiziba camp in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to start protests and a sit -in in February,
leading to the death of 11 refugees when security forces intervened to end the protests.
UNHCR deplored the disproportionate use of force by the police and called on the
Rwandan authorities to refrain from further use of force and to investigate the
circumstances of the incidents.
Boko Haram/Lake Chad Basin
35. The Boko Haram conflict continued to fuel a humanitarian crisis, with
10.7 million people in need of life-saving assistance in the affected regions of
Cameroon, Chad, the Niger and Nigeria. As at 30 April, some 211,516 Nigerian
refugees were registered in the Lake Chad Basin, including 93,114 in Cameroon and
9,932 in Chad. Approximately 2.1 million people were internally displaced. Across
the affected region, $1.6 billion was required in 2018 for humanitarian assistance,
including $189.1 million for Cameroon and $179.4 million for Chad. Across the Lake
Chad Basin, the number of food insecure people was expected to rise to 5.7 million
during the lean season starting in June.
36. By end of April, Cameroon hosted some 93,100 Nigerian refugees in the Far
North region, where the protection of civilians and gender-based violence remained
of great concern. While voluntary returns to Nigeria from Cameroon took place
during the reporting period, incidents of forced returns continued to be report ed in
the second half of 2017 and the first quarter of 2018, although in fewer numbers than
earlier in 2017. In Chad, Boko Haram activities impeded trade with Nigeria and
Cameroon, affecting in particular the Chadian herders who would previously cross
the border with Nigeria to sell their livestock.

C.

Human rights trends
37. Reports of alleged serious human rights violations and abuses, notably killings,
forced disappearances, torture, ill-treatment, arbitrary arrests, detentions and
restrictions on the freedoms of association, expression and movement continued in
Burundi. The ongoing political impasse, increased unemployment and rising prices
of basic commodities and services had a devastating impact on the exercise of
economic, social and cultural rights. The Imbonerakure continued to act as law
enforcement agents. The Government of Burundi and the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) pursued their discussion to resume
cooperation suspended since October 2016.
38. In Cameroon, there were continued reports of alleged human rights violations
in the English-speaking regions and the areas affected by Boko Haram, including the
killing of members of the defence and security forces, local authorities and civilians,
abductions, excessive use of force and arbitrary arrests by security forces, and
restrictions on freedom of movement and expression, and the right to free trial. The

18-08203

7/17

S/2018/521

forced return of 47 Cameroonians from Nigeria in late January, the majority of whom
had lodged asylum claims in Nigeria, and the unknown status of their conditions and
whereabouts, have raised concern about a possible breach of international human
rights and refugee instruments ratified by Cameroon and Nigeria.
39. In the Central African Republic, MINUSCA documented verified incidents of
violations or abuses of human rights, including targeted attacks against civilians along
religious and ethnic lines.
40. In Chad, restrictions were placed on citizens’ fundamental rights and freedoms,
including a prohibition on demonstrations for security reasons. On 6 February,
50 people were arrested during a public demonstration organized by the opposition to
protest austerity measures. Following their trial, 16 were released on procedural
grounds and 34 sentenced to imprisonment for four months by the high court of
N’Djamena. On 6 February, the Government suspended the activities of 10 political
parties accused of “incitement to violence” and disruption of public order for two
months. The suspension was lifted on 17 February for five of the parties that had
lodged an appeal.
41. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, civilians in conflict -affected areas
continued to be at risk of serious human rights violations, including killings and
sexual violence. Interethnic and intercommunit y violence resurfaced in some areas,
notably in Ituri province. The conflicts created conditions conducive to sexual
violence. There was also violent repression of peaceful demonstrations in Kinshasa
and other cities.
42. In the Republic of the Congo, some opposition and human rights organizations
expressed concern about the non-inclusion of reparations provisions in the December
2017 ceasefire agreement for the victims of the crisis in the Pool region. The
Government accepted an offer by OHCHR to assist in the establishment of a national
commission of inquiry into the allegations of human rights violations committed in
the country since 2015, including those related to the Pool crisis and incidents
surrounding the referendum on the Constitution in 2015. On 11 May, former
presidential candidate Jean-Marie Michel Mokoko was sentenced to 20 years in
prison.
43. In Equatorial Guinea, a supporter of the opposition Ciudadanos por la
Innovación de Guinea Ecuatorial party died in custody on 14 January as a result of
“torture and ill treatment”, according to the party. The Government refuted the
accusation. On 26 February, as part of its order on dissolving the party (see para. 12
above), the district court of Mongomo sentenced 21 of its members to more than
30 years in prison and heavy individual fines. This, too, was upheld by the Supreme
Court. Those sentenced were part of a group of 147 arrested during separate security
incidents following the legislative elections of November 2017. They were accused
of sedition, public disorder, abuse of authority, serious injury and conspiracy against
the State. The other arrested members were released.
44. In Gabon, opposition parties and civil society organizations denounced illegal
arrests and prolonged detention, torture, ill-treatment and disappearances of
opposition members and frequent travel bans imposed on opposition leaders. The
European Union requested an international investigation into the post -electoral
violence in 2016 during its intensified dialogue with the Government in October 2017,
resulting in the halting of dialogue to date.
45. In Rwanda, in early 2018 the Parliament adopted a new penal code removing
solitary confinement as a punishment for crimes and lessening certain provisions
related to defamation. However, the new code still contained provisions that had
reportedly been used to oppress and silence political opponents.
8/17

18-08203

S/2018/521

D.

Socioeconomic trends
46. The socioeconomic context was marked by social tension and strike actions,
including against austerity measures adopted by governments in several countries to
tackle the consequences of falling oil prices. Forecasts by the Bank of Central African
States indicated a slight increase in the prices of the main export products in the
Central African Economic and Monetary Community (CEMAC) space, including oil,
compared with 2017. In addition, Chad and the Republic of the Congo were expected
to increase their oil production. Chad was also forecasted to accelerate activities in
non-oil sectors, along with Cameroon and Gabon. Economic growth in CEMAC was
expected to rise to 1.7 per cent in 2018, compared to a decrease of 0.2 in 2017. The
CEMAC budget for 2018 would enable the institution to implement key projects in
transportation infrastructure and complete its institutional reforms programme. To
date, Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Chad and Gabon had signed new
economic agreements with the International Monetary Fund.

III. Activities of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa
A.

Good offices, preventive diplomacy and prevention
Angola
47. From 7 to 9 February, my Special Representative travelled to Luanda, and met
President Lourenço and the Minister of External Relations. They discussed the reform
of ECCAS and the country’s role in conflict prevention in the subregion.
Cameroon
48. My Special Representative travelled to Cameroon from 24 February to 4 March
to assess the situation in the country. He reiterated the call for genuine dialogue to
find lasting solutions to the crisis in the north-west and south-west regions and
expressed the readiness of the United Nations to support national decentralization
efforts within the framework of the Constitution. Several UNOCA working -level
visits were undertaken in November 2017 to provide support to the Resident
Coordinator’s office. The Department of Political Affairs, United Nations
Development Programme and the United Nations country team continued to work
closely with the Cameroonian electoral management body to develop targeted
activities, in line with the recommendations of the electoral needs assessment mission
of July 2017.
49. The United Nations Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator in Cameroon
visited the English-speaking regions on 7 and 8 February to assess the humanitarian
situation on the ground, jointly with UNHCR, the United Nations Children ’s Fund
and the Government. The mission focused on information-gathering on potential
humanitarian needs and population movements and identifying options for delivering
humanitarian assistance. On 22 February, the Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator and the UNHCR
Assistant High Commissioner for Operations visited Cameroon.
Central African Republic
50. From 15 to 18 March, my Special Representative and the Secretary-General of
ECCAS undertook a joint visit to the Central African Republic to reiterate United
Nations and ECCAS support to the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation.

18-08203

9/17

S/2018/521

They met with President Touadera and welcomed the decision by the Government to
reactivate the joint commissions between the Central African Republic and
Cameroon, as well as Chad and the Sudan to address regional security concerns. In a
joint communiqué issued on 17 March, the two officials reiterated their determination
to continue to support the panel of facilitators of the African Initiative and to
contribute to the development of the country, in close coordination with my Special
Representative for the Central African Republic. From 10 to 13 April, my Special
Representative returned to Bangui to participate in the meeting of the International
Support Group. He also visited the country from 13 to 16 May to engage with national
authorities, MINUSCA and other stakeholders on the deteriorating situation. UNOCA
dispatched a working-level team from 7 to 14 February, in the context of the
implementation of the African Initiative.
Chad
51. My Special Representative travelled to Chad from 14 to 18 January, 11 to
14 March and 17 to 19 April for consultations with the Government and other national
stakeholders, to promote an inclusive political dialogue. During his meeting with
President Deby Itno on 18 April, he called for the swift establishment of the standing
framework for political dialogue, as recommended by the national forum on
institutional reforms.
52. From 9 to 13 April, UNOCA and the Peacebuilding Support Office participated
in a programming support mission to Chad to identify priority opportunities for
consideration by the Peacebuilding Fund. UNOCA also took part in a United Nations
electoral needs assessment mission to Chad, led by the Department of Political
Affairs, from 12 to 23 February.
Equatorial Guinea
53. My Special Representative visited Equatorial Guinea from 8 to 10 January to
meet with President Obiang Nguema Mbasogo after the foiled coup attempt of
28 December. He condemned any attempted change of Government by
unconstitutional means and dispatched a working-level team to Malabo, from 22 to
26 January, to assess the political and human rights situation.
Gabon
54. My Special Representative continued to engage with political actors to
encourage their participation in the upcoming legislative elections and their
contribution to democratic governance. He also encouraged the Government to ensure
adequate communication with all political actors in preparing for the elections.
Republic of the Congo
55. My Special Representative travelled to Brazzaville from 10 to 14 January,
following the signing of the December 2017 ceasefire agre ement. He met with
President Denis Sassou Nguesso and other stakeholders to encourage continued
efforts towards achieving lasting peace in the Pool region. He further emphasized that
a comprehensive peace agreement, including a political framework, was cru cial to
ensure an environment conducive to a successful disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process. UNOCA dispatched a working-level team to Brazzaville and
Kinkala, from 10 to 17 February, to consult all stakeholders in joint efforts with the
United Nations country team to develop a gender-sensitive disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and dialogue project proposal for possible funding by
the Peacebuilding Fund. At the request of the Government, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations led a technical assessment mission to Brazzaville from
10/17

18-08203

S/2018/521

22 January to 4 February to support the national authorities and the United Nations
country team in developing a disarmament, demobilization and reintegration strategy.
The Department of Political Affairs deployed a member of its standby team of senior
mediation experts to provide further technical support from 3 to 16 March.
Sao Tome and Principe
56. From 21 to 25 January, my Special Representative travelled to Sao Tome and
Principe to defuse tensions stemming from the appointment of the members of the
newly established Constitutional Court and facilitate dialogue between the
Government and opposition parties. He met with President Carvalho, Prime Minister
Patrice Trovoada and other senior Government officials, political parties, civil society
representatives and international partners.
57. From 13 to 16 March, UNOCA and the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) co-organized, in cooperation with the United
Nations Development Programme and the Government of Sao Tome and Principe, a
training workshop for media professionals in Sao Tome.

B.

Support to United Nations, regional and subregional initiatives on
peace and security
United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in
Central Africa
58. In its capacity as the secretariat of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, UNOCA facilitated the
organization of the forty-fifth ministerial meeting in Kigali, from 4 to 8 December.
The Committee dedicated a closed-door meeting to the situation in the Central African
Republic and trans-border security challenges and affirmed its full support for the
reform of Council for Peace and Security in Central Africa. A communiqué prepared
by a youth forum in Libreville from 30 November to 2 December, called upon States
and regional organizations to take into account the priorities of the youth and ensure
their participation in security and development initiatives. The forty-sixth meeting of
the Committee was scheduled in Brazzaville from 29 May to 1 June.
59. From 17 to 19 April, UNOCA organized a visit by representatives of the Bureau
of the Committee to Brazzaville and the Pool region in the Republic of the Cong o to
assess recent security developments and discuss the situation with relevant
authorities. The findings of the mission would be presented at the forty -sixth
ministerial meeting of the Committee.
Collaboration with regional, subregional and intergovernmental organizations
60. My Special Representative held regular meetings with the Secretary -General of
ECCAS to discuss the political and security situation in the subregion and coordinate
their respective approaches in addressing a number of issues. The y agreed to conduct
joint visits to ECCAS member States to support peace and security efforts. The joint
visit to the Central African Republic mentioned in paragraph 50 above was the first
in a series of visits planned for 2018. On 12 May, they held a cons ultative and
planning meeting in Libreville, on the sidelines of a joint working -level retreat
between the two institutions, and adopted a joint biennial programme for 2018 –2019.
61. My Special Representatives for Central Africa and West Africa and the Sah el
attended the consultation meeting between ECCAS and ECOWAS, mentioned in
para. 5 above. UNOCA also participated in the opening and closing ceremonies of the

18-08203

11/17

S/2018/521

Council of Ministers of the Council for Peace and Security in Central Africa
mentioned in paragraph 4 above.
62. From 16 to 20 April, UNOCA and ECCAS conducted a joint train -the-trainer
session on terrorism, cybercrime, money laundering, drugs and narcotics for
31 Gabonese police officers in Libreville.
63. On 23 and 24 May, gender experts from Central Africa will validate the regional
action plan for the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) at a
two-day workshop co-organized by UNOCA and ECCAS in Brazzaville. The plan
identifies priority actions on women, peace and security in the subregion.
Boko Haram/Lake Chad Basin
64. My Special Representatives for Central Africa and for West Africa and the
Sahel, supported by the respective United Nations country teams, continued to
support advocacy efforts for the development of a joint regional strategy to address
the root causes of the Lake Chad Basin crisis through regular contacts with regional
leaders. In that regard, UNOCA and UNOWAS participated in the first Regional
Stabilization Conference for the Lake Chad Region and the follow-up regional
conference in N’Djamena, mentioned in paragraph 22 above.
65. From 14 to 16 February, a UNOCA working-level team participated in a regional
seminar in Maroua, in the Far North region of Cameroon, on the reintegration of
surrendered Boko Haram fighters. In line with its action plan against Boko Haram,
UNOCA deployed a working-level team to N’Djamena on 15 and 16 March to set up
a cooperation framework with the Lake Chad Basin Commission and the
Multinational Joint Task Force, and to establish a platform to exchange views with
national and subregional stakeholders and conduct joint analysis on Boko Haram. The
team also reached out to the Chadian centre for strategic studies and prospective
analysis and the Centre for Studies for the Development and Prevention of Violent
Extremism. UNOCA contacted other regional research institutions working on
radicalization and violent extremism across the Boko Haram affected countries, to
share their research findings and develop sustainable solutions.
Regional integration
66. At its second meeting, held in Libreville on 5 and 6 February, the steering
committee in charge of the ECCAS institutional reform selected the research team to
work on the technical aspects of the reform, following a public tender. During his
policy address to the CEMAC Parliament in Malabo on 2 March, the President of the
CEMAC Commission emphasized the importance of the ECCAS/CEMAC
rationalization process. He also underscored that one of his priorities would be to
implement key measures in support of the free movement of persons and goods policy
and to secure the external borders of CEMAC. On 19 February, Chadian President
Deby Itno, in his capacity as CEMAC Chairperson, announced t he temporary
relocation of CEMAC headquarters from Bangui to Malabo.
Maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea
67. From 10 to 17 February, UNOCA deployed a working-level team to Yaoundé to
assist the Interregional Coordination Centre for Safety and Secur ity in the Gulf of
Guinea to finalize its resource mobilization strategy documents. My Special
Representative met with the Executive Director of the Centre on 2 March to discuss
the operationalization of the Centre and resource mobilization challenges.
68. On 5 April, my Special Representatives for Central Africa and West Africa and
the Sahel participated in the annual meeting of the Heads of ECCAS, ECOWAS and
12/17

18-08203

S/2018/521

the Gulf of Guinea Commission in Yaoundé. Participants discussed the
implementation of the regional strategy on maritime safety and security in the Gulf
of Guinea.
Regional strategy and plan of action on counter-terrorism and the
non-proliferation of small arms and light weapons in Central Africa
69. In keeping with the recommendation made by the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, the Council of
Ministers of Council for Peace and Security in Central Africa adopted the strategy to
prevent and fight terrorism in Central Africa, as mentioned in paragraph 4 above. The
strategy awaits endorsement by the Summit of ECCAS Heads of State and
Government.
Coordination of the implementation of the United Nations regional strategy to
address the threat and impact of the Lord’s Resistance Army 1
70. From 17 to 26 February, UNOCA and the African Union conducted a joint visit
to Dungu, Democratic Republic of the Congo, to assess the LRA threat and the
effectiveness of counter-LRA operations and protection of civilians. The mission
assessed that livelihood activities away from town centres had stopped and critical
humanitarian challenges remained, underscoring a need to strengthen the military
response from the African Union Regional Task Force and mobilize funds to support
rehabilitation and stabilization initiatives in the LRA-affected zones. Within the
framework of Operation Red Kite, the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the Armed
Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo continued to carry out joint
operations in affected areas with limited resources.
71. On 28 and 29 March, in cooperation with African Union, UNOCA organized the
second workshop for sector commanders of the African Union Regional Task Force
in Addis Ababa to promote coordination between the sector commanders of the
Central African Armed Forces in Obo, Central African Republic, and the Armed
Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in Dungu. Participants agreed on
common practices in repatriating LRA defectors to their co untries of origin in line
with the standard operating procedures signed by the LRA -affected countries.
72. MONUSCO continued to encourage LRA elements to surrender and played a
key role in the repatriation of LRA defectors, with the support of internationa l
partners. Fourteen people surrendered, including two LRA fighters awaiting their
repatriation to Uganda, at FARDC headquarters. Nine escapees were repatriated and
three other victims were awaiting repatriation from Dungu.

C.

Enhancing United Nations coherence and coordination in
the subregion
73. My Special Representative participated in the 32nd high-level meeting of Heads
of United Nations missions in West Africa, held in Bamako on 5 March.
74. On 29 March, my Special Representative met with the Director-General of
UNESCO in Libreville to discuss the effective implementation of the three -year
regional programme, jointly developed by UNOCA, UNESCO and ECCAS, with the
support of the International Organization of La Francophonie, on strengthening the

__________________
1

18-08203

See S/2012/481.
13/17

S/2018/521

capacity of youth in managing an early warning system to promote peace and security
in Central Africa.
75. On 10 and 11 April, UNOCA and UNOWAS organized an experience -sharing
meeting in Libreville on conflict analysis and pastoralism. Among other things,
participants from UN and ECCAS agreed on carrying out joint UNOCA -ECCAS
conflict analyses in 2018 and on UN system support to ECCAS to implement its
decision on convening a regional conference towards the adoption of subregional
regulation on pastoralism in Central Africa, as indicated in paragraph 4 above.
76. On 26 and 27 April, UNOCA hosted the sixth annual meeting of the heads of
United Nations presences in Central Africa, comprising special envoys and
representatives of the Secretary-General, resident coordinators and regional directors
of United Nations entities. The meeting explored ways of improving coordination and
creating synergies to achieve peace, stability and prosperity in the subregion by
focusing on political dialogue and agreements in Centr al Africa.

IV. Mandate renewal of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa
77. Based on the outcome of the strategic review of UNOCA, led by the Department
of Political Affairs in 2015, the mandate of the Office was re -focused (see S/2015/554
and S/2015/555). UNOCA made noticeable contributions to conflict prevention and
management through the good offices of my Special Representative. It was
instrumental in preventing or mitigating election-related crises and promoting
inclusive political dialogue and reform processes in Chad, Cameroon, Gabon, the
Republic of the Congo and Sao Tome and Principe. UNOCA remained engaged on
the crisis in the Central African Republic and promoted bilateral cooperation with the
country’s neighbours, while encouraging coherence among international and regional
actors. My Special Representative continued to mobilize regional support for the
African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in the country.
78. UNOCA bolstered cooperation with regional and subregional organizations on
peace and security, in particular the African Union, ECCAS, CEMAC and the Gulf of
Guinea Commission. The cooperation framework between UNOCA and t he ECCAS
secretariat, signed in June 2016, was central to improving joint or coordinated
approaches between both entities in preventive diplomacy, early warning, mediation,
gender mainstreaming and capacity-building, among others. The Office remained
engaged with ECCAS and CEMAC in support of regional integration and institutional
reforms to rationalize both institutions. Through enhanced collaboration, UNOCA
and UNOWAS provided strategic support for regional and subregional initiatives to
promote maritime security and address the Lake Chad Basin crisis. UNOCA
continued to support regional efforts to counter LRA. It collaborated with ECCAS
and the African Union Commission to enhance early warning in Central Africa.
UNOCA further ensured coherence and coordination in the activities of United
Nations entities in Central Africa on peace and security. UNOCA continued to serve
as the Secretariat of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa.
79. Going forward, UNOCA will assist the countries of the subregion in
consolidating peace and resolving lingering tensions from the various elections that
took place in the period from 2015 to 2018. One of the main priorities of UNOCA for
the upcoming mandate period will be to work with ECCAS and its member States
towards laying the groundwork for the structural prevention of election -related
violence. UNOCA will continue to conduct joint assessments and visits with ECCAS
and to enhance the capacities of the ECCAS secretariat in confl ict prevention, early
14/17

18-08203

S/2018/521

warning, women and peace and security, mediation and other areas. UNOCA will also
work closely with UNOWAS on addressing transregional issues such as Boko Haram,
maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea and transhumance.

V. Observations and recommendations
80. Recent developments in Central Africa highlight the volatile and fast -evolving
nature of the political, security and social situation in the subregion. Tensions linked
to contested electoral processes, as well as social and economic difficulties continued.
I welcome efforts by concerned States in the region to undertake reforms to address
mounting challenges and to promote democratic governance. Such reform processes
should be inclusive and allow for differences to be resolved peacefully. I encourage
Member States to uphold their commitments under international human rights
instruments by, inter alia, strengthening human rights institutions at the national and
regional levels and cooperating actively with relevant international mechanisms.
81. I am encouraged by the adoption by ECCAS of a strategy to prevent and fight
terrorism in Central Africa. Practical arrangements and resource mobilization will be
essential in implementing the strategy. I also welcome the decision to undert ake a
comprehensive reform of the Council for Peace and Security in Central Africa,
especially to enhance regional solidarity and improve governance. To strengthen the
capacities of the subregion for conflict prevention and management, the reform of the
Council should be aligned with the ongoing rationalization of CEMAC and ECCAS,
which I commend for their sustained commitment to advance their respective reform
processes. I also welcome the announcement that ECCAS and ECOWAS will hold a
joint summit in July 2018. The United Nations system stands ready to support those
efforts.
82. I am heartened by regional efforts, supported by international partners, in the
fight against Boko Haram and commend the countries of the Lake Chad Basin for
their active engagement in this regard. At the same time, I am appalled by the
continuing threat of Boko Haram and other armed groups, serious human rights
violations and the dire humanitarian situation in the affected countries. It is vital for
the Multinational Joint Task Force to receive further support. The United Nations
remains committed to helping mobilize additional international support for this
endeavour in close cooperation with the African Union and the Lake Chad Basin
Commission. I also urge regional, international and bilateral partners to provide
support for the implementation of the stabilization, recovery and resilience strategy
for the Lake Chad Basin, in line with Security Council resolution 2349 (2017). I
exhort Member States to contribute to the relevant humanitarian appeals and del iver
on their pledges. My Special Representatives for Central Africa and for West Africa
and the Sahel will continue their efforts, in close cooperation with ECCAS,
ECOWAS, the African Union and the Lake Chad Basin Commission, to ensure that
all relevant strategies are mutually reinforcing and effectively address the root causes
of the crisis while integrating human rights and gender dimensions.
83. I take note of the planned elections in Cameroon, Chad, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Gabon and Sao Tome and Principe in 2018. I urge the
Governments concerned to work towards the conduct of timely, inclusive, credible
and peaceful electoral processes and to ensure an increased participation by and
representation of women.
84. I am concerned by the growing number of attacks in the English-speaking
regions in Cameroon, resulting in a deterioration of the security situation and the
disruption of public services, particularly in the education sector. I hope that the new
Cabinet, announced on 2 March, will take immediate and concrete steps towards
18-08203

15/17

S/2018/521

devising long-term solutions to address the grievances, including by establishing an
open and inclusive dialogue and advancing on the decentralization agenda to devise
long-term solutions to address grievances and prevent further violence.
85. I remain concerned by continued insecurity across the Central African Republic,
including violence against civilians and attacks against United Nations peacekeepers
and aid workers. At the same time, I am encouraged by progress a chieved by the
Government in the restoration of State authority and the continued resolve of the
international community to support the authorities in these efforts. The first meeting
of the International Support Group reflected this continued internationa l commitment.
As the work of the panel of facilitators of the African Initiative proceeds, we must
continue to remind the Government and all stakeholders that a political resolution of
the crisis is the only avenue for sustainable peace. My Special Represe ntatives for the
Central African Republic and for Central Africa will continue to consult with
neighbouring States and regional and subregional organizations to promote increased
and coherent engagement with the Central African Republic, with a specific fo cus on
the operationalization of bilateral joint commissions.
86. I am troubled by the persistent activities of LRA, which target civilians and
undermine security in the Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, further impeding development in the affected areas. I call upon the African
Union and troop-contributing countries to make the necessary arrangements for the
reconfiguration of the African Union Regional Task Force. Overall efforts should
remain focused on addressing the root causes of LRA.
87. I am encouraged by the active engagement of member States of ECCAS,
ECOWAS and the Gulf of Guinea Commission to advance the implementation of the
regional strategy on maritime safety and security in the Gulf of Guinea. UNOCA and
UNOWAS will continue to work with ECCAS and ECOWAS to provide support for
the full operationalization of the Interregional Coordination Centre for Safety and
Security in the Gulf of Guinea.
88. I remain concerned by the growing threat of mercenary activities linked with
transnational organized crime and the link between transhumance and armed conflict.
I commend ECCAS for committing to developing a subregional strategy to fight
mercenary activities and transnational organized crime and to holding a regional
conference towards the adoption of subregional regulation on pastoralism. The United
Nations stands ready to support these efforts in cooperation with other partners.
89. Over the past three years, 10 of the 11 countries in Central Africa conducted or
have been preparing for elections. Most of the electoral processes were marred with
tension before, during or after the polls. The timely intervention and persistent good
offices of my Special Representative have, on most occasions, helped to prevent
tensions from escalating out of control. UNOCA has therefore continued to serve as
an important and effective tool for preventive diplomacy and conflict prevention in
Central Africa. The strategic review conducted in 2015 recognized the role of
UNOCA in this regard. One key lesson learned from those electoral processes was
that preventing election-related violence also required addressing the structural
causes of such violence by working ahead of electoral cycles to build the trust of all
stakeholders in the process, establish a consensual legal and institutional framework,
and put in place adequate mechanisms for the resolution of legal and political
disputes. A key priority for UNOCA for the next mandate will be to work with ECCAS
and its member States towards laying the groundwork for the structural prevention of
election-related violence. Of note, elections at various levels are planned in all
11 countries in Central Africa over the next three years.
90. Furthermore, the complex nature of ongoing conflicts in the su bregion, the
emergence of new threats to peace and security and outstanding challenges require a
16/17

18-08203

S/2018/521

sustained and more coordinated and coherent support from the United Nations and
the international community. As ECCAS and CEMAC pursue their efforts to
implement institutional reforms, mobilizing the necessary political, technical and
financial support should remain a major priority. The convening of regular tripartite
meetings between UNOCA, ECCAS and CEMAC will be a useful tool in this process.
The growing transregional threats also necessitate strengthened cooperation between
ECCAS and ECOWAS, and between UNOCA and UNOWAS.
91. In view of the above, I recommend that the mandate of UNOCA be extended for
another three years, from 1 September 2018 to 31 August 202 1.
92. I would like to express my appreciation to the Governments of the region,
ECCAS, CEMAC, the African Union, the Gulf of Guinea Commission and other
regional and subregional institutions for their continued collaboration with UNOCA.
I would also like to express my appreciation to the Multinational Joint Task Force,
the African Union Regional Task Force and their troop-contributing countries for their
dedication and commitment to the service of peace and stability. I am grateful to the
Government and people of Gabon for their generous hospitality and support to
UNOCA. I would like to thank the various entities of the United Nations system
working in Central Africa, including the heads of United Nations peace operations,
regional offices, country teams and other entities, for their support to and cooperation
with UNOCA.
93. Finally, I would like to thank my Special Representative, François Louncény
Fall, and the staff of UNOCA for their continuing efforts to advance the cause of
peace and security in Central Africa.

18-08203

17/17
