V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Economic Co-operation with the task of co-ordinating
all preparations for the ~pecial session_ and of preparing, after consultation with the e~ecutive heads o! ~11
the organs, organizations and bodies co~cerned withm
the United Nations system, an analytical repo~t on
developments in the field of international econom~c cooperation towards the establishment of the _new m_ternational economic order since the sixth special session;
2. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit
the preliminary version of the report to the General
Assembly at its thirty-fourth session through the E~onomic and Social Council at its second regular sess10n
of 1979;
3. Invites the governing bodies of_ the or~ans and
organizations concerned within the {!mted Nat10ns system to assess within their respective areas of competence, the progress made towards the establishment
of the new international economic order, as well as
to indicate the obstacles that impede its establishment,
and to present interim reports to the ~eneral Asse~?lY
at its thirty-fourth session, with a view to ~ubmitti~g
comprehensive reports to the Assembly at its special
session in 1980.
95th plenary meeting
29 January 1979

33/199.

Multilateral trade negotiations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-Vl) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of
12 December 1974 containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States and 3362 (S-VII) of
16 September 1975 on development and international
economic co-operation,
Recalling the Tokyo Declaration of 1973, 190 calling
for the Tokyo round of multilateral trade negotiations
and setting forth the framework and principles to
govern the negotiations, including, inter alia, the principles of non-reciprocity in trade relations between
developed and developing countries, special and differential treatment for developing countries, and securing additional benefits for the international trade of
developing countries,
Recalling the modified Part IV of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade on co-operation and development, stipulating that developed countries should
not expect reciprocity in their trade relations with
developing countries,
Recalling also resolutions 82 (III) of 20 May 1972 191
and 91 (IV) of 30 May 1976 192 of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, in which the
Conference recognized the importance of the multilateral trade negotiations for the developing countries,
190 See General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, Basic
Instruments and Selected Documents, Twentieth Supplement
(Sales No. GATT/1974-1), p. 19.
191 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.73.11.D.4 ),
annex I.A.
192 Jbid., Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.II.D.I0 and corrigendum),
part one, sect. A.

127

Recalling further that the multilateral trade nego~iations were aimed at the achievement of the expansion
and liberalization of world trade in favour of developing countries,
Noting with concern the developments in the !nultilateral trade negotiations and the virtual exclusion of
the interests of developing countries from the process
of negotiation,
Concerned that developed countrie~ are insisti;1g ~n
reciprocal concessions from developmg. countries _m
the field of trade and that the developmg countries
may emerge with a negative_ balance-sheet _from the
negotiations, both in substantive and normative areas,
Emphasizing that the vital interests of developing
countries must be provided for in the outcome of the
multilateral trade negotiations,
1. Calls upon the developed countries to abide by
agreements arrived at in Tokyo, e~pecially wit~ regard
to the principle of non-reciprocity _and speci~l and
differential treatment for the developmg countries;
2. Declares once again that the results of the negotiations must reflect the following elements:
(a) Substantial reduction and ultimate abolition
of tariff and non-tariff restrictions against the trade of
developing countries, in particula~ on products of
special interest to developing countries;
( b) Removal of discriminatory and escalatory barriers against developing countries;
( c) Non-application of safeguard measures,. on a
selective basis, to the trade of developing countries;
(d) Improvement in the operation of the generalized system of preferences to provide wider covera~e
and deeper cuts in tariffs, bearing in mind the provision of section I.3, paragraph (a) (x), of General Assembly resolution 3202 (S-VI) and section I, paragraph 8, of Assembly resolution 3362 (S-VII) on this
subject, as well as the improvement of the system of
information on the generalized system of preferences
in order to enable all developing countries to make
better use of the latter;
3. Reiterates the need for continued efforts aimed
at the reform of the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade and the international trade regime in accordance with the principle of special and differential
treatment for developing countries;
4. Emphasizes that any new codes or rules in the
normative areas of negotiations affecting the trade of
developing countries should not be adopted without
the full participation of and acceptance by the developing countries;
5. Urges all participants in the multilateral trade
negotiations, before the closure of the negotiations, to
assess jointly the implementation, or otherwise, of the
objectives of the Tokyo Declaration concerning additional benefits to the developing countries and to take
corrective measures as necessary in the light of such
a review;
6. Urges the developed countries to extend full cooperation to ensure the successful conclusion of the
current multilateral trade negotiations, having full regard to the special needs and circumstances of developing countries and bearing in mind their just demands for an equitable international trading system
in line with the Tokyo Declaration;

128

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

7. Invites the Director-General of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session a comprehensive report on the results of the Tokyo round
of multilateral trade negotiations;
8. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth
session on the evaluation of the multilateral trade negotiations carried out at the fifth session of the Conference, as well as the recommendations emerging
therefrom.
95th plenary meeting
2 9 January 1979
33/200.

Effective mobilization and integration of
women in development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2626 ( XXV) of 24 October 1970 containing the International Development
Strategy for the Second United Nations Development
Decade, 3517 (XXX) of 15 December 1975 on the
mid-term review and appraisal of progress in the implementation of the International Development Strategy
for the Second United Nations Development Decade,
3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action
on the Establishment of a New International Economic
Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974 containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of
States and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on
development and international economic co-operation,
Taking into consideration its resolution 3520 (XXX)
of 15 December 1975 on the World Conference of
the International Women's Year, in which, inter alia,
it proclaimed the United Nations Decade for Women:
Equality, Development and Peace,
Taking further into consideration its resolution 3505
(XXX) of 15 December 1975 on the integration of
women in the development process and its resolution
31/175 of 21 December 1976 on the effective mobilization of women in development,
Convinced of the substantial contribution of women
to the over-all development of their countries,
Bearing in mind the preparations for the international development strategy for the third United Nations development decade,
Bearing in mind also the preparations for the World
Conference of the United Nations Decade for Women,
to be held in 1980,
1. Emphasizes the vital importance of the effective
mobilization and integration of women in all sectors
of development for the economic and social development of their countries;
2. Takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the effective mobilization of women in
development; 193
3. Urgently requests the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization, the United Nations Development Programme, the regional commis193 A/33/238

and Corr.l.

sions, the United Nations Children's Fund, the specialized agencies, in particular the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the International
Labour Organisation, the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, the World Health
Organization and the World Bank, and other bodies
of the United Nations system to prepare developmentoriented studies relevant to their programmes of work,
focusing on the impact of policies aimed at the effective
mobilization and integration of women in the development process, on the over-all development of their
countries, with special emphasis on the developing
countries, and on ways of promoting such policies,
with a view to the early submission of these studies
to the preparatory bodies referred to in paragraph 5
below and to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth
session;
4. Invites the Committee for Development Planning, in the framework of its further consideration of
possible elements for an international development
strategy for the third United Nations development
decade, to take into account the mobilization and integration of women in development;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to bring these
studies to the attention of the Preparatory Committee
for the New International Development Strategy 194 and
to the Preparatory Committee for the World Conference of the United Nations Decade for Women;
6. Further requests the Secretary-General, on the
basis of the studies requested in paragraph 3 above,
to submit a comprehensive report on the matter to
the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session;
7. Invites Governments:
(a) To undertake measures with a view to enhancing the participation of women in all sectors of
development at all levels;
( b) To include, when preparing and/ or implementing development plans, policies and programmes
aimed at facilitating the integration and participation
of women in the development process of their countries;
(c) To include in their technical co-operation programmes, as appropriate, special programmes aimed
at promoting the participation and integration of
women in development.
95th plenary meeting
29 January 1979

33/201.

Comprehensive policy review of operational activities

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX)
of 12 December 197 6 containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States and 3362 (S-Vll)
of 16 September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation,
Conscious of its own responsibilities, including those
under Article 17, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the
19 4 See resolution 33/193, sect.

II, para. I.
