S/2006/643

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 August 2006
Original: English

Letter dated 10 August 2006 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), I have the honour to
convey the attached report on the international security presence in Kosovo
covering the period from 1 to 30 June 2006 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

06-46559 (E) 150806

*0646559*

S/2006/643

Annex
Monthly report to the United Nations on the operations
of the Kosovo Force
1.

This report covers the period from 1 to 30 June 2006.

2.
As at 29 June 2006, the total number of troops in theatre was 16,189, which
included 2,631 troops from non-NATO countries.
3.

There was no change to the status of partner/non-NATO country contributions.

Security
4.
The overall security situation in Kosovo remains calm but tense. The ongoing
status negotiations, alleged inter-ethnic incidents and the increased KFOR presence
in northern Kosovo were the main issues throughout the reporting period. Although
there are legitimate security concerns in Kosovo for minorities, many of the
allegations of ethnic violence appear to be politically motivated and deliberately
miscategorized. Serbs in Kosovo and Belgrade may try to exaggerate the level of
violence and categorize it as ethnically motivated when many incidents are in reality
criminal in nature or remain unsolved. Provocations coming from the Kosovo
Albanian population should not be ruled out. Owing to an increasingly tense
atmosphere in the north of Kosovo, NATO/KFOR decided to reopen Camp Nothing
Hill, which became operational on 13 June 2006.
5.

During the month of June, no significant inter-ethnic incidents were reported.

6.

No significant incident against KFOR was recorded.

7.
A total of 486 incidents related to unexploded ordnance, illegal weapons
possession, weapons and ammunition findings, drugs, human trafficking and
counterfeit currency were reported during the past month, compared to 350
incidents reported in the previous month. Weapons seizures made up the vast
majority of incidents.
8.
KFOR continues operations to prevent ethnic violence and to protect
patrimonial sites, and remains vigilant to deter possible threats directed against
international organizations and military bases. KFOR continues to improve even
further its crowd and riot control capabilities in order to be better prepared to
counter any resurgence in violence.
Compliance by the Federal Army of Serbia and Montenegro and the
Ministry of Internal Affairs Special Police
9.

There is nothing to record in respect of compliance.

Kosovo Protection Corps
10. Nineteen cases of major acts of non-compliance were considered and
disciplinary actions were taken in conformity with the disciplinary code. Seven
more cases of non-compliance are still pending.
11. The KFOR Inspectorate for the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC) ensures
compliance through the day-to-day supervision of KPC using unannounced roll calls
and inspections. KFOR expressed concern about the lack of progress in respect of

2

06-46559

S/2006/643

the full implementation of the KPC disciplinary code. KPC has since then, with the
support of KFOR and UNMIK, displayed will and determination in reaching the
expected progress. The significant progress was highlighted by KFOR at the KPC
Steering Group meeting on 26 June. In addition, KFOR is supporting KPC
headquarters with webmaster training and public information officer training. In a
letter dated 27 June, the KPC Commander was requested to establish a post of best
practice officer whose responsibilities include coordinating a structured evaluation
process and KPC lessons-learned routines. This is very important for the continuous
development of KPC; for a long period, in the framework of the Standard 8
assessment process, it has been expected of KFOR, to establish, systematize and
structure the evaluation processes within KPC.
12.

KPC conducted 19 courses with 284 attendees.

13. During the month of June there were 15 approved ceremonies which involved
1,226 KPC members and approximately 3,500 civilians.
Conclusion
14. The overall situation in Kosovo is calm but the political uncertainty related to
the status talks may raise some tension in the near term, in particular after the
planned start of high-level discussions between Belgrade and Pristina this summer.
Observations and expectations of results at critical points in the status process could
affect stability. As expected, increasing political propaganda was observed. The
threat level against UNMIK and other international community facilities remains
medium, and the threat level against KFOR is low.

06-46559

3
