74

General Auembly-Seventeenth Se11ion

5. Requests the administering Power to make every
effort, including the promotion of harmony and unity
among the political elements of Zanzibar, to bring that
Territory to independence at the earliest date in accordance with the Declaration contained in resolution 1514 (XV).
1195th plenary meeting,
17 December 1962.

1812 (XVIl). Question of Kenya
The General Assembly,
Having considered the situation in Kenya,
Bearing in mind the principles embodied in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1%0,
Having taken note of the statement made by the
delegation of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland on 10 August 1962 at the 99th
meeting of the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples,
Bearing in mind the declared policy of the United
Kingdom Government to lead the people of Kenya to
full independence,
Having studied the evidence of the petitioners,
Noting further the negotiations which have taken
place between the political parties concerned and the
administering Power,
1. Affirms the validity, with respect to Kenya, of the
provisions of the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples contained
in resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Affirms further the inalienable right of the people
of Kenya to freedom and independence, and urges the
administering Power to make every effort to organize
national elections without further delay on the basis
of universal adult suffrage;
3. Requests the administering Power and all concerned to make every effort, including the promotion
of harmony and unity among the people of Kenya, to
bring the territory to independence at the earliest date
in accordance with the Declaration on the granting of
independence to colonial countries and peoples ;
4. Expresses the hope that Kenya will become an
independent and sovereign State and join the community of nations in the shortest possible time.
1195th plenary meeting,
17 December 1962.

1817 (XVII). Question of Basutoland,
Bechuanaland and Swaziland
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 embodying the Declaration on the granting of
independence to colonial countries and peoples, and
its resolution 1654 (XVI) of 27 November 1961 by
which it established a Special Committee to examine
the implementation of the Declaration,
Having considered chapter V of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 21
relating to the question of Basutoland, Bechuanaland
and Swaziland,

Having heard the petitioners,
Noting that the Government of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the administering Power, has not yet implemented the Declaration in these Territories and has not taken steps
to transfer all powers to the peoples of Basutoland,
Bechuanaland and Swaziland,
Noting that the constitutional provisions now contemplated for these Territories and the electoral legislation in force are discriminatory, do not meet the
wishes of the peoples and are not consistent with the
Declaration,
Deploring the particularly alarming economic and
social situation prevailing in Basutoland, Bechuanaland and Swaziland after several decades of colonial
rule,
Expressing its profound concern at the declared intention of the Government of the Republic of South
Africa to annex these Territories, and condemning any
attempt to jeopardize the right of the peoples of these
Territories to establish their own independent States,
Taking note of the statement made by the administering Power to the effect that these Territories are
politically completely independent of South Africa
and that the United Kingdom Government adheres to
this policy, and that there is no question of that Government agreeing at this stage to the transfer of these
Territories to the Republic of South Africa,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
Basutoland, Bechuanaland and Swaziland to selfdetermination and independence ;
2. Invites the administering Power immediately to
suspend the present constitutional provisions and to
proceed without further delay to hold elections in the
three Territories on the basis of direct universal adult
suffrage;
3. Invites further the Government of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to
abrogate the present constitutional provisions and to
convene immediately a constitutional conference with
the participation of the democratically elected political
leaders of the three Territories, with a view to setting,
in accordance with their wishes, the date on which
each of the Territories will attain its independence;
4. Considers that a serious effort should be made
to provide economic, financial and technical assistance,
through United Nations programmes of technical cooperation and the specialized agencies, in order to
remedy the deplorable economic and social situation of
the three Territories;
5. Urges the administering Power to take immediate steps to return to the indigenous inhabitants all
the land taken from them, whatever the form of, or
pretext for, such alienation;
6. Declares solemnly that any attempt to annex
Basutoland, Bechuanaland or Swaziland, or to encroach upon their territorial integrity in any way, will
be regarded by the United Nations as an act of aggression violating the Charter of the United Nations.
1196th plenary meeting,
18 December 1962.

1818 (XVII). Question of Nyasaland
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 embodying the Declaration on the granting of

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Committee

independence to colonial countries and peoples, and
its resolution 1654 (XVI) of 27 November 1961 by
which it established a Special Committee to examine
the implementation of the Declaration,
Having considered chapter IV of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situati?n with regard to ~he
Implementation of the Declaration on the Grantmg
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,21
relating to the question of Nyasaland,
1. Takes note of the conclusions and recommendations concerning Nyasaland which were adopted by
the Special Committee on 7 June 1962 and transmitted
by the Secretary-General to the Government of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland on 18 June 1962;
2. Notes with satisfaction that, at the constitutional
talks held in London in November 1962, agreement
was reached on a new constitution for Nyasaland;
3. Expresses the hope that this agreement will lead
to the achievement of independence by N yasaland without delay in conformity with the wishes of its people.
1196th plena,·y meeting,
18 December 1962.

1819 (XVII). The situation in Angola
The General Assembly,
Having considered the critical situation in Angola,
Having considered the report of the Special_ ~ommittee on Territories under Portuguese Admmistration,28 established under General Assembly resolution
1699 (XVI) of 19 December 1961,
Having considered the report of the Sub-Committee
on the Situation in Angola, 24 established under General Assembly resolution 1603 (XV) of 20 April 1961,
Resolutely condemning the mass extermination of the
indigenous population of Angola and other severe repressive measures being used by the Portuguese colonial authorities against the people of Angola,
Deploring the armed action being taken by Portugal for the suppression of the people of Angola and
the use in this process of arms supplied to Portugal by
certain Member States,
Noting that in the Territory of Angola, as in other
Portuguese colonies, the indigenous population is denied all fundamental rights and freedoms, that racial
discrimination is in fact widely practised and that the
economic life of Angola is to a large extent based on
forced labour,
Convinced that the colonial war being carried on
by the Government of Portugal in A?-gola, th~ violation by that Government of the Security Council resolution of 9 June 1961,25 its refusal to implement the
provisions of the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples contained
in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, and its refusal to implement resolutions
1542 (XV) of 15 December 1960, 1603 (XV) of
20 April 1961, 1654 (XVI) of 27 November 1961
and 1742 (XVI) of 30 January 1962, constitute a
28 Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventeenth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 54, documents A/5160 and
Add.l and 2.
24 Ibid., agenda item 2:9, document A/5286.
25 Official Records of the Security Council, Sixteenth Year,
Supplement for April, May an4 June 1961, document S/4835.

75

source of international conflict and tension as well as
a serious threat to world peace and security,
Bearing in mind the principles embodied in resolution 1514 (XV),
1. Expresses its satisfaction to the Sub-Committee
on the Situation in Angola for the work it has accomplished;
2. Solemnly reaffirms the inalienable right of the
people of Angola to self-determination and independence, and supports their demand for immediate
independence ;
3. Condemns the colonial war being carried on by
Portugal against the people of Angola and demands
that the Government of Portugal put. an end to it
immediately ;
4. Again calls upon the Portuguese authorities to
desist forthwith from armed action and repressive
measures against the people of Angola ;
5. Ur:1es the Government of Portugal, without any
further delay:
(a) To release all political prisoners ;
( b) To lift the ban on political parties;
( c) To undertake extensive political, economic and
social measures that would ensure the creation of freely
elected and representative political institutions and
transfer of power to the people of Angola in accordance
with the Declaration on the granting of independence
to colonial countries and peoples ;
6. Requests Member States to use their influ~nce
to secure the compliance of Portugal with the present
resolution;
7. Requests all Member States to deny Portugal
any support or assistance which may be used by it
for the suppression of the people of Angola, and in
particular to terminate the supply of arms to Portugal ;
8. Reminds the Government of Portugal that its
continued non-implementation of the resolutions of the
General Assembly and of the Security Council is inconsistent with it~ membership in the United Nations;
9. Requests the Security Council to take appropriate measures, including sanctions, to secure Portugal's compliance with the present resolution and with
the previous resolutions of the General Assembly and
of the Security Council.
1196th plenary meeting,
18 December 1962.

1844 (XVII). International Co-operation Year
The General Assembly,
Deeply convinced that wider and more intensive international c:o-operation would provide one of the most
effective means of dispersing international tensions,
Noting that there exists a large measure of international co-operation in various fields among the peoples
and nations of the world,
Believing that the world would be well served both
by an increased awareness of +he existing level of international co-operation and by a marked increase in
the number of projects in diverse fields jointly undertaken on an international basis,
Realizing that increased international co-operation
can most readily be brought about by expanding and
building upon the activities of existing organizations
and institutions, particularly the United Nations,
