RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE FIRST COMMITTEE

CONTENTS
Page

714 (VIII). Question of impartial investigation of charges ?£ use by United
Nations forces of bacterial warfare (3 November 1953) (item 24) ..... , ..
715 (VIII). Regulation, limitation and balanced reductiot?- ~f all armed forces
and all armaments: report of the Disarmament Commission (28 November
1953) (item 23) ................. , . , , . , •. • • • •,. • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • · • · · ·
716 (VIII). The Korean question (8 December 1953) .(item 18 (~)) ... ·:., •:
717 (VIII). Complaint by the Union of Burma regarding aggress10~ against 1t
by the Government of the Republic of China (8 December 1953) (item 25) ..

3
3

4
4

the whole programme to be carried out under effective
international control and in such a way that no State
would have cause to fear that its security was endangered,
Believing that the continued development of weapons
of mass destruction such as atomic and hydrogen
bombs has given additional urgency to efforts to bring
about effectively controlled disarmament throughout
the world, as the existence of civilization itself may
be at stake,
Mindful that progress in the settlement of existing
international disputes and the resulting re-establishment
of confidence are vital to the attainment of peace and
disarmament and that efforts to reach agreement on
a comprehensive and co-ordinated disarmament programme with adequate safeguards should be made concurrently with progress in the settlement of international disputes,
Believing that progress in either field would contribute to progress in the other,
Realizing that competition in the development of
armaments and armed forces beyond what is necessary
for the individual or collective security of Member
States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations is not only economically unsound but is in
itself a grave danger to peace,
Conscious of the continuing desire of all nations, by
lightening the burden of armaments, to release more
of the world's human and economic resources for
peace,
Having received the third report 2 of the Disarmament Commission of 20 August 1953, submitted in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 704
(VII) of 8 April 1953,
Endorsing the Commission's hope that recent international events will create a more propitious atmosphere
for reconsideration of the disarmament question, the
capital importance of which, in conjunction with other
questions affecting the maintenance of peace, is recognized by all,

714 (VIII). Question of impartial investigation
of charges of use by United Nations forces of
bacterial warfare

The General, Assembly
1. Refers to the Disarmament Commission the
draft resolution of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics contained in document A/C.l/L.67 ~ for such
consideration as deemed appropriate under its plan of
work and pursuant to the terms of reference of that
Commission as set forth in General Assembly resolutions 502 (VI) of 11 January 1952 and 704 (VII) of
8 April 1953;
2. Decides also to transmit to the Disarmament
Commission for its information the records of the
meetings of the First Committee at which this item
was discussed.
456th plenary meeting,
3 November 1953.
715 (VIII). Regulation, limitation and balanced
reduction of all armed forces and all armaments: report of the Disarmament Commission

The General, Assembly,
Reaffirming the responsibility of the United Nations
for considering the problem of disarmament and affirming the need of providing for:
(a) The regulation, limitation and balanced reduction of all armed forces and all armaments,
( b) The elimination and prohibition of atomic, hydrogen and other types of weapons of mass destruction,
( c) The effective international control of atomic
energy to ensure the prohibition of atomic weapons
and the use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes
only,
1 The

USSR draft resolution reads as follows :
"The General Assembly
"Calls upon all States which have not acceded to or ratified
the Geneva Protocol of 17 June 1925 for the prohibition of
the use of bacterial weapons to accede to the Protocol or
ratify it."

2
See Official Records of the Disarmament Commission, 1953,
Supplement for July, August and September 1953, document
DC/32.

3
