S/2022/207

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 March 2022
Original: English

Letter dated 14 March 2022 from the President of the Security
Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the Permanent
Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the 8989th meeting of the Security Council, convened
on 8 March 2022 under the agenda item “Women and peace and security: women’s
economic inclusion and participation as a key to building peace”. The interventions
of the in-person participants will be published as an official record of the Security
Council (S/PV.8989).
In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members for
the 8989th meeting, the following delegations submitted written statements, copies
of which are enclosed: Colombia, Kazakhstan, the Peacebuilding Commission, the
Republic of Korea and Saudi Arabia. These statements will be issued as a document
of the Security Council in accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated
7 May 2020 from the President of the Security Council addressed to Permanent
Representatives of members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed
in the light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease
pandemic, and reference to the document will be made in S/PV.8989.
(Signed) Lana Nusseibeh
President of the Security Council

22-03853 (E) 210322 070422

*2203853*

S/2022/207

Annex I
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Colombia to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
Colombia appreciates the Security Council’s efforts aimed at placing the
women and peace and security agenda at the centre of the debate. As we mentioned
in January (see S/2022/38), gender equity is one of the transformational legacies of
the Government of President Iván Duque Márquez. Colombia has been committed
to achieving greater economic independence for women as a fundamental aspect of
preventing gender-based violence.
The topic of today’s debate, raised by the United Arab Emirates Council
presidency, is of fundamental importance for a country such as Colombia, which
is operating in a peacebuilding framework. This occasion gives us an opportunity
to share with pride as well as humility our progress and lessons learned through
the positive and affirmative measures that we have taken, which have allowed us to
advance in the economic empowerment of women. Furthermore, it allows us to share
the way in which gender equity has been a guideline for the implementation of the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace
through the peace with legality policy framework.
In Colombia, the implementation of this public policy is based on a women’s
equity approach that responds to the differentiated impacts of the armed conflict. In
this context, the State has worked to implement resolution 1325 (2000) by integrating
its guidelines into national policies.
Under the leadership of Vice-President Marta Lucía Ramírez, the first woman
to hold that position in Colombia, the Government has, as a priority, positioned women
in the design of public policies and the implementation of new programmes. By
implementing strategies to promote political inclusion and economic empowerment,
it has managed to reduce the gender gap that had been evident for years in various
regions of the country affected by violence.
In terms of women’s political and democratic participation in decision-making
bodies for the implementation of the Final Agreement, initiatives taken include the
implementation, since 2019, of the Government’s High Instance of Gender as a tool
for realizing women’s rights within the Agreement framework; drafting 51 indicators
for monitoring the mainstreaming of the gender approach; training 12,000 women
leaders within the framework of the Comprehensive Programme of Guarantees for
Women Leaders and Human Rights Defenders; ensuring the permanent representation
of women’s platforms in the National Commission of Security Guarantees, which met
eight times in 2021; and setting up the Women’s and Gender Operating Committee,
in December 2020, which generates recommendations for building an approach that
mainstreams women and the gender in the Comprehensive Security System for the
Exercise of Politics.
Beyond the implementation of the Final Agreement and the peace with
legality policy, it is worth noting that, under the Duque Márquez Government, the
country has for the first time had in place a Cabinet with gender parity. Similarly, in
order to elect House of Representatives candidates in the next two legislative periods
in the 16 special transitional electoral districts for peace, which were created for
victims, specific measures were included so that women’s social organizations could
nominate women candidates.
With regard to economic inclusion in the framework of the peace with legality
policy, several achievements can be highlighted. Between 2019 and 2020, access to
2/10

22-03853

S/2022/207

credit for women increased by 25 per cent, and the value of rural housing subsidies
increased by 40 per cent. Likewise, 398,290.46 hectares were officially set aside and
awarded to 29,758 rural women, who represented 45 per cent of the beneficiaries.
Within the framework of reintegration policies, the gender approach was
included in a cross-cutting manner. Accordingly, in 2019, the National Reintegration
Council’s working group on gender was launched, and today 94 per cent of
reintegrated women are banked, and 85 per cent are linked to lines of economic
sustainability through productive projects or labour inclusion. Women’s participation
in peacebuilding is a priority issue that contributes to achieving the transformations
that the peace with legality policy offers to women, particularly rural women: better
living conditions translated into economic autonomy, as well as the creation of spaces
that provide dignified working conditions so as to break the cycles of violence that
violate women’s rights.
There remain many challenges in Colombia related to the economic inclusion
and the participation of women in peacebuilding. However, the road we have travelled
allows us to lay the foundations for a future in which women will continue to be at
the centre of policies aimed at promoting a peaceful society.

22-038533/10

S/2022/207

Annex II
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Kazakhstan to the
United Nations, Magzhan Ilyassov
At the outset, on the occasion of International Women’s Day, I honour and
salute women around the world, and commend the United Arab Emirates presidency
of the Security Council for highlighting the important theme of economic inclusion
through partnership in today’s open debate on women and peace and security.
In his most recent annual report on women and peace and security
(S/2021/827), the Secretary-General notes that women have been the hardest hit
by the economic fallout of the coronavirus disease pandemic. We therefore fully
support the Secretary-General’s call for increasing women’s access to economic
resources, decision-making and participation in peace and security. This can be
made effective only when each State Member of the United Nations integrates all
four pillars of the women and peace and security agenda in its national policies and
legal and institutional environments.
Gender equality has been an important priority for Kazakhstan since our
independence 30 years ago. We have been gradually introducing and implementing
progressive women-oriented policies and reforms to improve our quality of life and
create equal opportunities for all. These measures have made women resilient and
enabled them to play a robust role in national development through self-determination
and the capacity to control their destinies.
Consequently, we have achieved significant progress in addressing gender
issues. We have reduced our gender inequality index by 60 per cent, introduced a 30
per cent quota for women and youth in Parliament and local representative bodies,
and increased the proportion of women managers in State-owned corporations to the
same level of 30 per cent.
In addition, more stringent penalties for sexual crimes and domestic violence
were introduced in 2020 to better protect our women and children. Furthermore, a
presidential decree was signed on further measures to promote human rights, with
gender equality as one of its key priorities.
We are extending our support beyond our borders. At the regional level, we
are focusing on Afghanistan with a multidimensional approach to conflict recovery,
reintegration, development and humanitarian assistance. The lack of access to quality
and inclusive education is the main obstacle to achieving women’s empowerment.
That is why we have initiated a joint programme with the European Union (EU)
and the United Nations Development Programme to educate Afghan women in our
universities. We are in the second phase of that project, with a budget of €4 million,
hoping it will have a multiplier effect and serve as a model for women’s leadership
as policy designers and peacemakers.
In addition, last year, my Government issued visas to, and provided safe
passage through our territory for, 99 women Afghan judges and their families during
the turmoil in Kabul.
Kazakhstan has also supported a regional programme for Central Asia and
Afghanistan as part of the United Nations-EU led Spotlight Initiative and joined two
of the Generation Equality Forum Action Coalitions, namely, Gender-based Violence
and Economic Justice and Rights. We also support the multi-stakeholder Women,
Peace and Security and Humanitarian Action Compact launched at the Generation
Equality Forum.
Kazakhstan was among the first countries to undertake the so-called Zhusan
and Rusafa humanitarian operations to repatriate and reintegrate its citizens from
4/10

22-03853

S/2022/207

Syria and Iraq, mainly women and children, into society. It serves as a good model
for other countries, and we are ready to share our experiences and lessons learned
with the international community.
In December 2021, Kazakhstan adopted its first national action plan on
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, for the period 2022 to
2025 — a whole-of-government strategy developed in inclusive consultations with
United Nations agencies and civil society organizations. As of today, there are five
women military officers serving in United Nations peacekeeping operations in
Western Sahara and Lebanon. The adoption of a national action plan will contribute
to increased women’s engagement in decision-making at all levels, their deployment
in United Nations peacekeeping operations and improved gender-sensitive training
for armed and security forces. We have strong and sustained political will, all
the necessary resources and a results-based monitoring and evaluation plan to
achieve that.
In conclusion, Kazakhstan is committed to joining the multilateral action for
women to become agents of change and shape their societies.

22-038535/10

S/2022/207

Annex III
Statement by the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, Rabab
Fatima
In my capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), I wish to
offer the Commission’s observations and advice on women’s economic inclusion and
participation in peacebuilding contexts, based on its work and engagements.
Since 2016, the Commission’s work has been guided by a gender strategy
to ensure a more systematic integration of gender issues in its work. In 2021, the
PBC adopted an action plan with specific indicators and action areas to monitor its
progress in implementing the strategy.
The Commission supports national efforts to promote women’s economic
empowerment and advocates for the full, equal and meaningful participation of
women in socioeconomic development with a view to strengthening peacebuilding
and sustaining peace. The Commission also regularly invites women peacebuilders
to better integrate their perspectives and recommendations in its thematic and
country engagements.
In 2021, half of PBC meetings included briefings from women peacebuilders
who were either representing civil society organizations, or were local business
leaders. In 2020, 70 per cent of briefers from the private sector were women Chief
Executive Officers, providing testimonies and examples of how local businesses can
play a critical role in empowering women.
In Colombia, for example, the Secretary-General’s Peacebuilding Fund
(PBF) promoted innovative financing initiatives to leverage additional investments
for peace. The PBF funded projects in conflict-affected areas and improved the
socioeconomic condition of women ex-combatants and victims of conflict, thereby
helping to advance sustainable development, economic resilience and social cohesion.
Based on the discussions at the Commission and its engagement with women
peacebuilders and leaders on the ground, the Commission wishes to underscore the
following.
First, with regard to the importance of economic stability and growth in
conflict-affected settings for peacebuilding and sustaining peace, the promotion
of women’s economic inclusion and participation for peacebuilding and sustaining
peace are far underdeveloped. Women’s empowerment and the elimination of poverty
are key priorities.
Secondly, additional measures to increase the role of women in social and
economic development in many conflict-related settings should be taken. Measures
are needed to strengthen women’s economic capacity and to expand women’s access
to opportunities, education, financial and material resources, markets and modern
technology.
Thirdly, the socioeconomic impacts of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic have exacerbated pre-existing vulnerabilities of women. Many women
lost their livelihoods and income, resulting in their reduced ability to contribute
effectively to peacebuilding. That needs to be factored in while developing and
implementing COVID-19 recovery plans, and adequate support should be provided
to create livelihood opportunities for women, including through skills development.
Fourthly, noting the importance of ensuring adequate, predictable and sustained
financing for peacebuilding and sustaining peace, it is critical that women and
youth peacebuilders and their organizations be sufficiently financed and that women
entrepreneurs be empowered to be agents of change in conflict-affected settings.
6/10

22-03853

S/2022/207

Fifthly, in many conflict-affected settings, such as the Great Lakes region,
the role of women as entrepreneurs is catalytic for regional economic growth. It is
therefore important to improve the business climate, tax regimes and trade policies
to achieve the full potential of small and medium-sized women-led businesses.
Sixthly, the COVID-19 pandemic and instabilities have pushed more and
more women and girls into extreme poverty, thereby highlighting the importance
of the accelerated implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
including by scaling up efforts at poverty eradication for women and supporting
women entrepreneurs.
Finally, enhanced partnerships and cooperation with international and
regional financial institutions, such as the World Bank and the African Development
Bank, are critically important in ensuring women’s economic inclusion in conflictaffected countries.

22-038537/10

S/2022/207

Annex IV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Korea to the United Nations, Cho Hyun
My delegation would like to commend the United Arab Emirates for convening
today’s timely discussion on this important agenda item. The Republic of Korea
aligns itself with the statement delivered by the representative of Canada on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (see S/PV.8989). My delegation
would now like to deliver a statement in its national capacity.
At the outset, the Republic of Korea would like to reaffirm its full solidarity
with Ukraine and its people. We deplore the situation in Ukraine caused by Russia’s
act of aggression. Reports of increasing civilian casualties and massive displacement,
as well as the horrific destruction of civilian infrastructure, are of grave concern.
The disproportionate consequences of the war severely threaten the lives of the most
vulnerable, particularly women and girls. My delegation notes with concern that
the current situation places women and girls at increased risk of sexual and genderbased violence.
The unfolding tragedy in Ukraine has again proved the importance of the
women and peace and security agenda, which has been aimed at ensuring women’s
full, equal and meaningful participation in all aspects of peace and security since
resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted.
Against that backdrop, I would like to highlight the following three points.
First, peacebuilding and sustainable peace require a holistic approach,
including the building of resilience in conflict-affected countries. To achieve that
goal, it is imperative to provide women and girls equal access to livelihoods and
education and to ensure equal opportunities. In that light, my delegation is deeply
concerned that women and girls have been increasingly and systematically excluded
from economic participation, public education and access to essential services in
conflict-affected countries, including Afghanistan.
Secondly, we must step up our efforts to build a solid foundation for
partnerships with the private sector and civil society on post-conflict reconstruction
and recovery. Women peacebuilders, human rights defenders and civil society voices
have been repeatedly targeted by violence in many parts of the world. Such violence
has had a profound impact on participation and has further undermined partnerships.
My delegation reiterates that women peacebuilders, human rights defenders and civil
society members must be fully protected and should be heard more often at the United
Nations; in particular in the Council itself, as their participation is indispensable in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Last but not least, peacekeeping operations can play a positive role in
protecting and promoting women’s participation in relief and recovery efforts.
Women peacekeepers serve as powerful mentors and role models for women
and girls in post-conflict settings. As the host of the 2021 Seoul United Nations
Peacekeeping Ministerial as well as the third International Conference on Action
with Women and Peace, Korea proudly emphasized the need to advance the women
and peace and security agenda, including through strengthening the role of women
in peacekeeping. My Government will continue to expand its efforts in that regard,
including its contribution to the Elsie Fund.
The Republic of Korea pledges to remain a staunch advocate of the women
and peace and security agenda. As a candidate for non-permanent membership on
the Security Council for the term 2024 to 2025, we are fully committed to sparing
no effort in achieving the full, equal and meaningful participation of women in
peace processes, while also ensuring a safe and enabling environment that leaves
no one behind.
8/10

22-03853

S/2022/207

Annex V
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission
of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to the United Nations, Mohammed
Abdulaziz H. Alateek
[Original: Arabic]
First and foremost, my country wishes to congratulate the Permanent Mission
of the United Arab Emirates on assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month. We wish it every success in that endeavour and are confident that its delegation
can contribute positively to new successes in the maintenance of international peace
and security.
My delegation is grateful to the Permanent Mission of the United Arab
Emirates for convening this important meeting on the topic “Women and peace and
security: women’s economic inclusion and participation as a key to building peace”
on this significant date, as we mark International Women’s Day 2022.
Saudi Arabia is convinced that security is the basis for development. There
can be no development without an appropriate security environment, and no
comprehensive development without involving all of society, both men and women.
Saudi Arabia is working to achieve security and stability throughout the country,
foster a safe and serene environment and combat all forms of crime, with a view
to keeping society as a whole safe and enabling it to move forward and flourish.
Women are a fundamental part of that process.
Saudi Arabia has helped involve Saudi Arabian women in the areas of safety
and security by empowering them in several areas, including public safety, civil
defence, the border guard, the Directorate of Prisons, the fight against drugs and
the National Security Operations Centre, areas in which Saudi women now serve
alongside men in a range of security, technical and administrative roles.
As one of the world’s foremost humanitarian assistance providers according
to United Nations statistics, Saudi Arabia attaches the utmost importance to relief
and humanitarian assistance for affected persons in zones of conflict and natural
disaster, and in particular for women in areas of armed conflict.
Acting through the King Salman Humanitarian Aid and Relief Centre, Saudi
Arabia has devoted considerable attention to meeting the needs of vulnerable
societies, in particular those of women and girls. In order to empower the most
vulnerable groups, it analyses United Nations reports on women and humanitarian
needs in affected and least-developed countries and works with partners in recipient
countries to deliver humanitarian and relief projects that are free from discrimination
and consistent with the principles of humanitarian action. Its aim is to alleviate the
suffering of women and enable them to live with dignity. It implements those projects
in cooperation with United Nations entities and international and local partners. And
it does so in the conviction that women have an important role to play in building
resilient societies.
Over the past five years, Saudi Arabia has enacted a range of relief and
humanitarian actions in zones of disaster and armed conflict. For that purpose, it
has implemented 788 projects in 79 regions around the world, spending a total of
$520,686,055 for 109,644,690 female beneficiaries.
Through the support provided to women by the Centre, Saudi Arabia has
been able to achieve the following goals: increase women’s workforce participation
through economic programmes aimed at building women’s economic, social
and psychological capacities and preserving social cohesion; increase women’s
22-038539/10

S/2022/207

participation in education and educational programmes through educational, social
and other initiatives aimed at creating a sustainable environment that would have an
enabling effect for women in the labour market and generate a return on investment
by boosting performance to realize the Sustainable Development Goals; and step
up efforts to protect girls and women, particularly from gender-based violence,
and create a safe environment for them during and after conflicts and disasters,
by providing programmes to protect women from all forms of violence, including
through psycho-social, protective and legal services focused on their specific needs.
As crises and disasters proliferate around the world, a need has emerged
for strategies and an approach that can strengthen women’s role in responding to
crises and delivering humanitarian assistance in order to facilitate access to services
for all, particularly for the most vulnerable groups, such as older persons, women,
persons with disabilities, orphans and women caregivers, and shore up their capacity
for resilience. Humanitarian needs assessments should include the voice of women
in vulnerable societies, particularly those affected by armed conflict. In doing
so, response plans can be improved and made more responsive to women’s needs,
especially in emergency situations and where the most vulnerable categories are
concerned. Women need to be involved in designing and implementing humanitarian
programmes.
Lastly, there is a pressing need to coordinate and strengthen the humanitariandevelopment-peace nexus in order to foster comprehensive and sustainable
development with the involvement of women. Action should therefore be taken to
consolidate partnerships among humanitarian stakeholders with a view to assessing
and meeting women’s needs in all types of interventions; improve the management
of sources of funding for humanitarian and development assistance; and ensure that
women are involved in the development of vulnerable and affected societies, in the
hope of achieving peace.

10/10

22-03853
