S/2020/866

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 September 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 31 August 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefing provided by
Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham, Acting Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, as well as the statements
delivered by the representatives of China, the Dominican Republic, Estonia, France,
Germany (on behalf of Belgium and Germany), Indonesia, the Niger, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, South Africa, Tunisia, the United States of America and Viet
Nam, in connection with the video-teleconference on the situation in the Middle East
(Syria), convened on Thursday, 27 August 2020. Statements were also delivered by
the representatives of the Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 2 April 2020
from the President of the Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council (S/2020/273), which was agreed in the
light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease
pandemic, the briefings and statements will be issued as an official document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Dian Triansyah Djani
President of the Security Council

20-11369 (E) 110920 061020

*2011369*

S/2020/866

Annex I
Statement by the Acting Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator,
Ramesh Rajasingham
I will focus today on five areas: first, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
outbreak and its impact on health services; secondly, the economic downturn; thirdly,
the protection of civilians; fourthly, humanitarian access, which is essential for our
operations; and, fifthly, what support humanitarian agencies have been delivering to
people across Syria.
In his briefing to the Security Council last month, Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock (S/2020/758, annex I) warned that the very limited COVID-19 testing in
Syria masks the real extent of the outbreak. Reports of health-care facilities filling
up and of rising numbers of death notices and burials all seem to indicate that actual
cases far exceed official figures. What the official figures do show is that community
transmission is widespread. Of the 2,440 cases confirmed by the Syrian Ministry of
Health, the majority cannot be traced to a known source.
Rising patient numbers are adding pressure to the fragile health system. Many
are reluctant to seek care at medical facilities, leading to more severe complications
when they do arrive. Health workers still lack sufficient personal protective equipment
and associated supplies. Several health facilities have suspended operations due to
capacity issues and to staff contracting the virus. Some are in areas already among
the most underserved when it comes to health care.
In Al-Hol camp in north-east Syria, 12 health facilities had to suspend
operations this month due to staff becoming infected and having to self-isolate, or
due to a lack of personal protective equipment. Both field hospitals at the camp have
since resumed operations. Sustained health services are critical at Al-Hol, where the
population is already considered highly vulnerable. Between 6 and 10 August, eight
children under the age of five died in the camp, from a range of conditions.
I join the Humanitarian Coordinator for Syria, Imran Riza, in expressing
alarm over these deaths and in his assertion that no child should be forced to live
under the challenging and potentially dangerous conditions at Al-Hol camp. Of the
65,000 people residing at Al-Hol, the majority, 35,000 children, are under five years
of age.
The World Health Organization is leading an interagency technical mission to
Al-Hol this week to look at how health coverage at the camp can be improved despite
the immense challenges posed by COVID-19 and by the severe staffing and supply
shortages, which predate the pandemic. Al-Hol has also been affected by renewed
disruptions in water supply from the Allouk water station over the past month. Water
supply from Allouk has been interrupted at least 13 times this year, affecting some
460,000 civilians in Al-Hasakah governorate.
On 22 August, power supply from the Tishrin dam resumed to the Mabrouka
and Darbasiyah electricity stations, after which nine out of 34 boreholes at Allouk
started producing water. Technical teams were able to carry out essential repairs at
the station on 25 August. Due to the low pumping capacity and a further disruption
on 25 August, water has yet to reach Al-Hasakah. In response to the water shortages,
humanitarian partners have been delivering an estimated 2,500 cubic metres of
water to the area per day. But this is neither a sufficient nor a sustainable solution. I
emphasize that parties to the conflict are obliged under international humanitarian
law not to render useless objects, such as water installations, that are indispensable
for the survival of the civilian population.
2/28

20-11369

S/2020/866

My second point is the humanitarian impact of the economic downturn. The
Syrian pound has stabilized since falling to its lowest-ever recorded informal rate
in June. This has also reduced food inflation. Food prices are still rising, but they
are doing so at a much slower rate. The average price of the World Food Programme
national reference food basket increased by 3 per cent from June to July, after
surging 48 per cent from May to June. These are still unprecedented levels; current
food prices are more than twice the level of the previous price surge at the height of
the crisis in 2016.
One of the impacts of COVID-19 in Syria has been a disruption in some
commercial supply chains. Commercial supply chains may also be affected, to
varying degrees, by the explosion at the port of Beirut. Let me join the SecretaryGeneral in expressing his condolences to the families and loved ones of the victims
of this horrific event and in wishing a full recovery to the many thousands of injured,
many of whom were Syrian refugees who had been so generously hosted by the
Lebanese people.
My third point is the protection of civilians. The ceasefire in the north-west
is largely holding, but it will hardly seem that way for civilians in front-line areas.
Hostilities in the north-west have been increasing in July and August, with increased
levels of shelling reported by local sources in the front-line areas of the southern
Idlib, northern Latakia, northern Hama and western Aleppo governorates.
The Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights recorded at least
10 civilian deaths, including three children, as a result of ground strikes and air
strikes in the “de-escalation area” in June and July. Another 30 civilians, including
10 children, were injured during this period. I would recall that, under international
humanitarian law, all parties to armed conflict must take constant care to
spare civilians.
The contamination of large parts of Syria by explosive hazards adds to the
appalling human cost of the active fighting. Each month we see a steady stream of
civilian casualties; often these are children killed or injured while playing or picking
through rubble.
On 12 August, a group of around 70 people, including families with children,
walked into an area contaminated with explosive remnants in the area of Nobbol and
Zahraa in northern rural Aleppo. They triggered explosions that, in turn, drew fire
from armed actors in the area. While some bodies of the victims have been recovered,
it is unclear how many were killed. The group was travelling with local smugglers —
a market that has been boosted by the economic downturn and deteriorating security
situation in the south, alongside other factors that are pushing increasingly desperate
families to take extreme risks.
My next point is on access. A United Nations humanitarian delivery to northern
rural Aleppo was dispatched via the Bab Al-Hawa border crossing on 28 July. This
was the first such delivery since the adoption of resolution 2533 (2020). The convoy
took 11 hours to reach its destination, Al-Bab, after multiple delays caused by a lack
of approvals from various parties, as well as poor road conditions. Travel time to
Al-Bab from the Bab Al-Salam crossing would have been approximately two hours.
A subsequent delivery on 21 August was also delayed.
As the Secretary-General notes in his latest report on Syria (S/2020/813),
which members received last week, these challenges were foreseen. They have
resulted in a more costly, higher risk, less timely and, ultimately, less effective
humanitarian response. United Nations agencies are working to mitigate the impact
of the reduction to one authorized border crossing. The capacity of the remaining

20-113693/28

S/2020/866

authorized crossing at Bab Al-Hawa needs to be expanded, as does the capacity of
crossing points inside Syria.
Significant roadworks will need to be completed before the onset of winter
weather. Engagement is also under way with parties on the ground to ensure that
humanitarian deliveries can cross between Idlib and northern Aleppo unimpeded.
From within Syria, a United Nations inter-agency mission reached Khan
Shaykhun and Big Khwein in southern rural Idlib on 28 July. These areas were
retaken by Government forces a year ago. The mission found civilian infrastructure
severely damaged and basic services lacking. Fewer than 300 families have returned.
Work is under way to develop a response plan based on the needs identified by
the mission.
Turning to Rukban, the humanitarian operation has remained without access
to the 12,000 people at the camp since September 2019. Only a few local truck drivers
have been able to sporadically deliver basic goods through informal routes, and there
remains no access to medical services at the camp. The humanitarian situation has
significantly worsened as a result. Another 576 people have left Rukban since March.
Support is needed from all parties to help those who still want to leave. Sustainable
solutions need to be found for all who remain. Crucially, humanitarian actors must
be granted access to the camp to deliver life-saving assistance for civilians in need.
Let me conclude with an update on the assistance that we are providing to
the civilian population throughout Syria. In the first half of the year, humanitarian
operations reached an average of 7.2 million people across the country each month.
More than 12 million medical procedures were conducted, and 5.4 million treatment
courses provided. Some 3 million people were reached with protection support, such
as child protection services, support services related to gender-based violence and
mine action support.
Food assistance reached 5.4 million people on average each month and, as
of July, it is being expanded to reach vulnerable people in COVID-19 quarantine
centres. That assistance is all the more critical as food insecurity continues to rise in
Syria. It must be sustained.
In his briefing to the Council last month, Under-Secretary-General Lowcock
highlighted the generous pledges made at the fourth Brussels conference in
June. Without those contributions, we would be unable to help people throughout
Syria. I join him in urging other donors to contribute and more fairly share the
financial burden.

4/28

20-11369

S/2020/866

Annex II
Statement by the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Zhang Jun
I thank Acting Assistant Secretary-General Rajasingham for his briefing, and
I welcome the Permanent Representative of Syria to the meeting.
After listening carefully to the briefing and reading through the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2020/813), I must say that we have many reasons to be worried.
The economic situation in Syria is extremely fragile, and the international
community should support the Syrian Government in revitalizing the economy. We
acknowledge that the Syrian Government has made commendable efforts in order to
improve the livelihoods of the Syrian people, including implementing agricultural
reform, helping small businesses, facilitating inter-governorate transportation and
combating the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
The international community should support Syria’s efforts with concrete
actions and assistance. In addition, it should support Syria in defending its
sovereignty and managing its own natural resources. Syria’s oil fields belong to the
Syrian people and cannot be subject to illegal foreign plundering.
Years of unilateral sanctions have caused tremendous hardship to the Syrian
people, and such sanctions must be lifted immediately. The unilateral coercive
measures are damaging the Syrian economy, destroying the livelihoods of civilians
and undermining Syria’s capacity to respond to COVID-19. The Secretary-General,
his Special Envoy and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock have repeatedly appealed
for the waiver of sanctions.
China strongly urges the United States to respond actively to these urgent
appeals and lift unilateral sanctions without delay. The Secretariat and the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs should pay close attention to this issue,
strengthen research and analysis in that regard and report to the Security Council.
We call on all stakeholders, especially United Nations agencies, to increase
their input into and coordination of humanitarian operations in Syria.
We welcome the recent progress in cross-line humanitarian operations. There
have been missions from Damascus to both the north-east and the north-west. We
call on the United Nations to continue to strengthen cooperation with the Syrian
Government and to scale up cross-line operations in combination with cross-border
deliveries. Donor countries are encouraged to fulfil their assistance commitments
to Syria as soon as possible. Such assistance should not come with preconditions,
nor should it be used as a tool to further a political agenda or pressure the
Syrian Government.
It is disturbing that the water supply of Allouk water station was cut off,
affecting 460,000 people. The neutrality of civil infrastructure must be guaranteed.
The development of the COVID-19 pandemic in Syria cannot be overlooked.
Forceful measures, as well as more assistance, must be put in place. The Syrian
Government has taken decisive actions in many areas to reduce the risk of public
transmission and save lives. The international community needs to support
those efforts.
We are glad to know that the United Nations has formed 112 rapid response
teams and that the World Health Organization has provided dedicated training for
432 persons. China has already delivered two batches of medical supplies to Syria.
Last week, we provided specialized medical equipment to children’s hospitals in
Syria. We will continue to provide necessary assistance to the Syrian people.
20-113695/28

S/2020/866

The security situation in Syria deserves special attention. The international
community should continue to support Syria in fighting terrorism, in line with
international law and Security Council resolutions.
There has been a significant increase in attacks by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant in Syria since early 2020. Recently, improvised explosive devices and
mine explosions have caused a large number of casualties. Many incidents can be
attributed to designated terrorist groups. We are concerned that a gas pipeline in the
Damascus suburbs was attacked, causing a blackout throughout Syria on Monday.
Counter-terrorism is an ongoing battle and a long-term task. A ceasefire should
not mean the unleashing of terrorist activities. The international community must
remain alert and adopt unified standards to combat terrorism, including in Syria.
With regard to the political process, let me reiterate China’s firm support
for the Syrian-led, Syrian-owned political process. The sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria must be upheld.
We are glad to learn that the third session of the Constitutional Committee is
resuming today. We hope that the meeting is productive.
China rejects the groundless accusations of the United States. Such political
propaganda and blatant lies have become a cliché in the United States statements.
If the United States truly cared about the humanitarian situation in Syria, it could
do many things instead of blaming others, including lifting unilateral sanctions. I
strongly urge the United States to stop politicizing the Syrian humanitarian issue
and to match its words with deeds.

6/28

20-11369

S/2020/866

Annex III
Statement by the Special Envoy to the Security Council of the
Dominican Republic, José Singer Weisinger
I thank Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham for his briefing. Through him, we once
again thank all humanitarian workers, volunteers and local organizations. In the
most unthinkable circumstances, they still go out every day to serve the needs of the
Syrian people.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has a different dimension
in conflict-affected countries. We are all shaken and disrupted by the effects of
such an unprecedented situation. But we must recognize that in contexts such as
the Syrian Arab Republic there are deep, protracted layers that contribute to a much
complicated environment. The country’s limited testing capacity, its collapsed
health-care system and an increase in burials and death certificates could be telling
a very different story from the one the numbers tell. We commend the efforts, led
by the World Health Organization in support of the national health authorities, to
increase Syria’s overall capacity to address and respond to the pandemic.
We continue to be extremely concerned over the levels of food insecurity in
the country. We are thankful that the explosion in the port of Beirut will not have an
impact on the delivery of food assistance led by the World Food Programme.
However, we are concerned that the situation in the north-west, for example,
where 2 million people could become food insecure, could deteriorate even further
given the difficult economic situation and the ever-present possibility of increased
hostilities. We therefore reiterate that humanitarian access must be sustained and
facilitated in order to provide emergency food assistance and prevent more damage.
In that same vein, we wanted to highlight something that Mr. Rajasingham has
already touched upon, namely, that, due to the closure of the Bab Al-Salam crossing
point, humanitarian assistance in the north-west has become more costly, more risky
and less timely. That is truly both concerning and shameful.
But in the north-east, while cross-line access has been possible to a limited
extent, we continue to pay attention to the existing gap created by the closure of AlYarubiyah. The numbers speak for themselves, and we are seeing more COVID-19
cases in the north-east than in the north-west. In that regard, we emphasize the
humanitarian imperative to utilize the most efficient and effective means for
impartial needs-based assistance to the people in the north-east.
To conclude, it is only with a renewed sense of humanity and solidarity that
we, the Security Council and the entire international community, will be able to
support the Syrian people in these circumstances. Political will is necessary now
more than ever to end the suffering that Syrians are enduring. The political solution
to this conflict therefore needs to be the top priority of all stakeholders. Humanitarian
assistance is not, and should not, replace our shared responsibility to that end.
We are living in unprecedented times of fear, suffering, indifference and
uncertainty. Let us do our best to get all stakeholders to adhere to a national
ceasefire, facilitate humanitarian access, release the detainees, abductees and
information on missing persons to their families and work with determination to
achieve the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people. Children and teachers need
to go back to school safely. Hospitals, schools and other critical infrastructure need
to be respected, Civilians need to be protected from harm, food insecurity, diseases
and violence, and humanitarian access needs to be guaranteed. Above all, in the
midst of a deadly pandemic, we need to be able to see the reality and prevent a
catastrophic outcome.
20-113697/28

S/2020/866

Annex IV
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Estonia to
the United Nations, Gert Auväärt
We thank Acting Assistant Secretary for Humanitarian Affairs Rajasingham
for his briefing. We also extend gratitude to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and its humanitarian workers, who currently provide aid to
7.2 million people inside Syria.
Unfortunately, widespread instability continues to undermine that tremendous
humanitarian response. According to the Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/813),
violations of the Idlib ceasefire agreement have increased and extremist armed
groups continue to target Turkish-Russian joint patrols.
Furthermore, regime-held areas in the southern parts of Syria still suffer from
continuing kidnappings and repression. Estonia demands the release of all arbitrarily
detained people, especially women and children.
The fragile security situation is coupled with the outbreak of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19). Across Syria, at least 2,500 people have been infected with
the virus. As testing remains low, the actual number of infections is probably
much higher.
It is worth noting that COVID-19 has already directly affected the Syrian
political process, as the Constitutional Committee talks were postponed after three
cases among the Committee’s members were diagnosed in Geneva earlier this week.
At the same time, inside Syria, the people in overcrowded internally displaced
persons camps are the most vulnerable to the virus. Estonia requests all parties to
allow unimpeded humanitarian access to those areas.
Answering to our Russian and Chinese colleagues on the issue of sanctions,
I repeat once again that there is absolutely no evidence that European Union (EU)
sanctions are hindering the humanitarian response in Syria. Food, essential goods
and medical supplies are not subject to EU restrictive measures. The sanctions target
only specific individuals who support the Syrian regime.
As such, after nine years of war, the Syrian regime bears the primary
responsibility for the deteriorating humanitarian situation. The findings of the
Secretary-General’s board of inquiry implied that earlier this year, similarly to other
independent investigations throughout this long, well-documented war.

8/28

20-11369

S/2020/866

Annex V
Statement by the Deputy Political Coordinator of the Permanent
Mission of France to the United Nations, Wadid Benaabou
[Original: French]
I thank Mr. Rajasingham for his briefing. As he pointed out, the coronavirus
disease pandemic continues to spread, including in the north-west and north-east.
We know that the reality of the pandemic is probably even more alarming than the
figures he quoted, as the testing capacity is very low.
In that context, an immediate cessation of hostilities and a humanitarian
pause, in accordance with the terms of resolution 2532 (2020) and the appeals of the
Secretary-General and his Special Envoy, are more essential than ever. They are all
the more necessary as the truce in the north-west remains fragile.
We cannot say it often enough: respect for international humanitarian law is
an obligation incumbent on all parties. I am thinking in particular of the protection
of civilians, including humanitarian and medical personnel, as well as civilian
infrastructure. France will continue to strongly support all efforts to prevent and
punish violations of human rights and international humanitarian law.
Our collective priority today is to respond to the emergency and meet the evergrowing humanitarian needs not only in Syria, but also in Lebanon, where the needs
of Syrian refugees and host communities are exacerbated by recent developments.
The instrumentalization of humanitarian assistance must stop. All parties, in
particular the Syrian regime, must ensure safe and unhindered humanitarian access
to all those in need of assistance.
France regrets the closure of the Bab Al-Salam border crossing and the lack of
consensus within the Council to reopen the Al-Yarubiyah border crossing, at a time
when the spread of the pandemic and worsening food insecurity make the delivery of
aid to the north-east and north-west even more essential. However, we cannot ignore
the consequences of the adoption of resolution 2533 (2020): humanitarian operations
in the north-west are now more costly, higher risk and less timely.
In conclusion, only a political solution in line with resolution 2254 (2015) will
put an end to the humanitarian tragedy and bring lasting stability to the country. As
long as a credible political process is not firmly under way, France and the European
Union will not finance reconstruction. Finally, the Council is aware of our positions
on the lifting of sanctions and normalization. They remain unchanged.

20-113699/28

S/2020/866

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Germany to the
United Nations
I make this statement on behalf of Belgium and Germany, the humanitarian
co-penholders. We would like to thank Acting Assistant Secretary-General Ramesh
Rajasingham for his briefing.
In July, civil society briefer Amany Qaddour asked us, the Security Council,
to share the risk humanitarian aid workers are exposed to — the risk of displacement,
violence, insecurity and, I may add, infectious diseases — and not to simply pass it
down to those who already absorbed so much and in many cases sacrificed their lives
in the process (S/2020/758, annex II). One week ago we remembered these victims
on World Humanitarian Day. Syria, sadly, is at the top of the list of the deadliest
places for humanitarian workers.
We bow our head to those who gave their lives fulfilling humanitarian duties —
but do we follow Ms. Qaddour’s recommendation? Do we live up to humanitarian
expectations, for instance, delivering aid via the most direct routes?
In his most recent bimonthly report, the Secretary-General gave a first
assessment of the consequences of the closure of Bab Al-Salam:
“The first cross-border aid delivery dispatched to northern Aleppo via Bab
Al-Hawa under the new resolution was subject to the anticipated challenges,
resulting in a more costly, higher risk, less timely and, ultimately, less effective
humanitarian response.” (S/2020/813, para. 51)
And in this first convoy, only seven trucks experienced neither the impact of combat
activities nor harsh winter conditions on poor roads. Warehouses are still full because
enough inventory had been stocked beforehand, but this will change. The numbers
of trucks will have to increase significantly and the challenges and risks will grow
further. The number of Syrians in need of humanitarian assistance and protection
is growing.
Years of war, mismanagement and oppression, now exacerbated by the
economic crisis in neighbouring Lebanon, have aggravated the economic crisis in
Syria. This has led to an additional 1.4 million people becoming food insecure over
the past six months, while the most recent projections estimate that another 2 million
are at risk of becoming food insecure: the total number could exceed 11 million soon.
Furthermore, the spread of the coronavirus disease across the country is
increasing exponentially. Testing capacities remain very low, so most cases may go
unnoticed. The numbers we hear about may only represent the tip of the iceberg.
The destruction of health facilities and the shortage of health workers dramatically
imperil any response.
All this indicates that more, not less, humanitarian access is needed, today
and tomorrow. The countries that lobbied against cross-border access have to engage
actively to improve crossline access. Consistent, safe and unimpeded access is
urgently needed — and not only a spectacular one-time delivery via costly and timeconsuming routes, such as Erbil- Damascus- Qamishli. What is needed is distribution
to all people and health-care facilities, and not the regime deciding who is worthy of
receiving aid and who is not.
As of the end of August 2020, we have to acknowledge that cross-line
assistance to the north-west is still not working and that many health stations in the
north-east are still lacking most basic goods.
10/28

20-11369

S/2020/866

As humanitarian co-penholders we stress again that the closing of Al-Yarubiyah
in January and the closing of Bab Al-Salam last month contradict humanitarian logic.
We have pushed as much as we could to find a solution guided by the humanitarian
imperative and to keep those crossings open. The burden of responsibility lies with
those countries that have systematically limited humanitarian access through the
cross-border modality. We hope that they carefully listen to the consequences just
described by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. We hope that
they will also try to contribute to diminishing the humanitarian impact of having
closed those crossings.
The Allouk water station is another example of how humanitarian arguments
are defied. Ramesh Rajasingham just explained the latest problems. There is simply
no excuse for denying access to water to millions of men, women and children.
Doing this during the hot summer months and in the middle of a pandemic is even
more inhumane. We ask all parties who bear responsibility to find a sustainable
solution and to guarantee a constant supply of water for the region.
Protection issues sadly persist not only for those in arbitrary detention or
who are still missing, but also for those who have become victims of air or ground
offensives. The numbers have significantly increased over the past months. We call
on all parties to maximize restraint and consider the humanitarian repercussions of
military actions. We condemn the recent attacks of terrorist groups. Let me again
underline that any response should comply with obligations under international law,
including international humanitarian law.
Finally, only a political settlement in line with resolution 2254 (2015) can put
Syria back on track towards peace. So the news this morning that the talks in Geneva
could resume was very good.

20-1136911/28

S/2020/866

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the
United Nations, Dian Triansyah Djani
We thank Acting Assistant Secretary-General Ramesh Rajasingham for his
updates on the humanitarian situation in Syria.
With over 11 million people already in need of humanitarian assistance, my
delegation is deeply concerned about the increased suffering of the Syrian people
due to the economic fragility and the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, particularly with various hostilities in some areas of the country, as stated
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/813).
My delegation also remains alarmed by the growing number of people in Syria
who are food insecure.
A targeted and sustained humanitarian response is key to addressing these
challenges. We are pleased that, despite difficult circumstances, the United Nations
continues to provide humanitarian assistance throughout Syria. It is important that
the aid meet the priority needs of the people.
Allow me to highlight the following points.
First, with regard to the importance of prompt, rapid, safe and unhindered
humanitarian access, we urge all the relevant parties to take all appropriate steps to
promptly facilitate safe and unhindered delivery of humanitarian assistance for all
civilians in need.
My delegation takes note of the report of the Secretary-General regarding the
first cross-border aid delivery under resolution 2533 (2020), of which the operations
have become more costly, less timely and higher risk. Indonesia appreciates the
ongoing efforts to ensure that these operations continue with minimal impact on the
Syrian people and looks forward to receiving more details and information on this
issue. We wish to also encourage key parties, particularly the Syrian authorities and
the United Nations agencies, to continue and strengthen their coordination in order
to increase the cross-line deliveries.
Secondly, with regard to the Allouk water station, my delegation wishes to
specifically address this issue since the water station, which provides a water supply
to almost half a million civilians, has been disrupted many times. People in Hasakah
governorate, including people in the Al-Hol camp, are continuously facing a crucial
water crisis. The severe water shortages faced by those vulnerable communities,
against the background of the threat of a COVID-19 outbreak, is indeed disturbing.
We commend the United Nations and its partners for their efforts to address this
issue and scale up water trucking. However, it is crucial to ensure a sustainable and
a long-term solution to this problem. Indonesia encourages the United Nations to
continue advocating for a sustainable agreement among all the relevant parties on
the facilitation of access to water as a basic service, in accordance with international
humanitarian law.
Thirdly, my delegation urges all parties to the conflict to immediately cease
all forms of violence. We have stressed this over and over again. All parties to the
conflict must respect the ceasefire agreement and do everything in their power to
protect civilians. The fragile humanitarian conditions in Syria should not be met
with additional hostilities. The international community must secure all efforts
to assist the Syrian people and prevent another humanitarian tragedy. Millions of
Syrian people cannot bear more devastation or distress.

12/28

20-11369

S/2020/866

Before concluding, on the Constitutional Committee, my delegation is pleased
to note that the third session of the Committee in Geneva is resuming. We wish to
extend our support to all the Committee members and Special Envoy Pedersen, and
we wish them all the very best in moving the discussion forward.

20-1136913/28

S/2020/866

Annex VIII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Niger to
the United Nations, Niandou Aougi
I thank Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham for his briefing. I also warmly welcome the
representative of Syria.
The humanitarian situation in Syria remains dire, and actions need to be
stepped up to alleviate the hardship that millions of Syrians have been enduring for
almost 10 years now. A decade of war, the collapse of the economy and the effects of
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic have further complicated the already
precarious living conditions of many Syrians. In this respect, allow me to touch upon
the following points.
First, we commend the efforts of the Syrian Government in continuing its
collaboration with the United Nations and other organizations in the fight against
the spread of the pandemic and in ensuring the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
My delegation echoes the call of the Secretary-General on the parties to allow and
facilitate the rapid and unimpeded passage of impartial humanitarian relief for all
civilians in need, wherever they are located.
Secondly, my delegation remains concerned about the recent increase in
hostilities in spite of the Turkish and Russian ceasefire agreement. We reiterate the
call of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy for an immediate nationwide
ceasefire in Syria and an all-out effort to combat the pandemic.
However, my delegation would like to stress that the call for a ceasefire and
the need for a common and collective effort in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic
should not distract us from the fight against terrorism, especially as evidence shows
that terrorist groups are trying to take advantage of the current situation. Whether in
Syria or in the Sahel, Governments, in partnership with the international community,
should have the right to continue the fight against terrorism on their territories, in
compliance with international human rights law and international humanitarian law,
especially with regard to the protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure.
Thirdly, in an effort to build confidence, the Niger calls for a large-scale and
unilateral release of detainees, as well as more meaningful action in the cases of
missing persons, by all belligerents. Additionally, ensuring that all detainees get
necessary medical care and that deserved clarification be given to the families of
missing persons will be another step to that end.
Fourthly, we condemn the repeated disruption of the Allouk water station,
which serves Syrians in Hasakah governorate, including internally displaced
persons who are already living in hardship conditions, especially during the
COVID-19 pandemic.
In conclusion, according to Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, about 30 per cent of Syrian food transits through the port of Beirut. With
the blast of 4 August, and as the humanitarian crisis deepens in Syria and the region,
there is an urgent need to take the necessary steps to guarantee access to food,
essential medical supplies and medical assistance around the country, in keeping
with resolution 2533 (2020). Hence, we also reiterate our call for humanitarian
relief from all unilateral economic measures that may hinder the Government’s
ability to effectively fight this pandemic and which will complicate the delivery of
humanitarian assistance.

14/28

20-11369

S/2020/866

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King
I thank Acting Assistant Secretary-General Rajasingham for his briefing.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines remains alarmed by the dire humanitarian
situation in Syria. The amalgamation of conflict, economic downturn and the effects
of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has considerably intensified the
humanitarian emergency and the scale of human suffering.
The cross-border mechanism therefore remains a critical component of the
humanitarian response, and we continue to support its operation. We take note of
the most recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/813), which highlights,
among other matters, that cross-border aid deliveries face considerable challenges,
including having to travel longer distances. It is evident that the mechanism must
be strengthened and optimized to ensure its effectiveness in providing timely, safe,
sustained and unimpeded humanitarian access, in coordination with the Syrian
Government and in line with the guiding principles of humanitarian assistance. The
scaling up of the cross-line modality must also be prioritized to assist in filling the
existing gaps.
Syria’s declining socioeconomic situation is a cause for concern. Millions are
now food insecure, with millions more on the brink. Basic commodities are out
of reach owing to hyperinflation, and as a result, many Syrians have resorted to
negative coping mechanisms. Amid the challenges, COVID-19 cases are on the rise
with nearly one third of all active cases requiring hospitalization. Syria’s health care
system was already in a fragile state prior to the emergence of the pandemic, and a
major outbreak of the virus will undoubtedly be devastating to the country.
On this point, we yet again appeal for the lifting of all unilateral coercive
measures imposed on Syria. These measures undermine the country’s capacity to
fight the pandemic and further burden the moribund economy.
We echo the Special Envoy’s call for a nationwide ceasefire to end the
violence, preserve critical civilian infrastructure and enable humanitarian actors
to effectively carry out their important work. We urge the parties to the conflict
to respect the ceasefire in the north-west and exercise maximum restraint. We also
remind the parties that all military and counter-terrorism activities must comply
with the fundamental principles of armed conflict.
The Allouk water station continues to face numerous interruptions, leaving
almost half a million civilians without its vital supply, including those residing in the
densely populated Al-Hol camp. A sustainable solution to this increasingly troubling
issue must be found, especially in consideration of the pandemic.
Reconstruction is inextricably linked to the improvement of the country’s
humanitarian situation. It is also a necessary requirement for the safe, dignified and
voluntary return of refugees and internally displaced persons. We therefore continue
to encourage members of the international community to contribute to the country’s
reconstruction efforts.
The humanitarian situation is distressing, and it will not improve in the
absence of a political resolution to the conflict. The well-being of the Syrian people
is paramount. They deserve peace and stability. The international community must
continue to engage constructively towards a political solution with the Syrian people
at the forefront.

20-1136915/28

S/2020/866

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Mission of South Africa to the
United Nations
I would like to thank Acting Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs Ramesh Rajasingham for his frank and insightful briefing on the humanitarian
situation in Syria. I also extend South Africa’s sincere gratitude and appreciation to
the United Nations humanitarian agencies, partners and personnel for their tireless
efforts in ensuring that the people of Syria be provided with the essential assistance
they so desperately require.
In that regard, we call on the international community to assist in this effort
by contributing to the humanitarian programmes aimed at helping the Syrian people.
I would also like to pay tribute to those humanitarian workers who have given their
lives in the course of assisting the Syrian people.
Since the beginning of this year, 20 aid workers have been killed, making
Syria the most insecure country for aid workers for the third year in a row, with
national aid workers being the most affected. More must be done to ensure the safety
and security of humanitarian aid workers.
As we heard this morning, the humanitarian situation in Syria continues to be
of concern, with Syrian civilians, particularly children, many of whom have known
nothing but conflict, continuing to endure the worst aspects of this dire situation.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has further significantly
impacted the economic and humanitarian situations. The effect of over nine years
of conflict on critical infrastructure, including the health, education, water and
sanitation sectors, has eroded Syria’s capacity to fully respond to this pandemic.
The risk to refugees and internally displaced populations are of particular
concern, given their cramped quarters and limited access to necessary water and
sanitation services.
In this regard, the continued disruption of service at the Allouk water station
is deeply troubling, as the station is the primary source of clean water for over
460,000 people in the Al-Hasakah governorate, including Al-Hol camp. South
Africa therefore calls on the parties to ensure that water services are fully restored
and a long-term sustainable solution found to ensure that shortages and disruptions
no longer occur.
Additionally, South Africa calls on all parties to respect their obligations
under international humanitarian law and international human rights law for the
protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure, such as schools, health facilities
and water-reticulation facilities.
It has now been over a month since the cross-border humanitarian assistance
programme was reduced to just one border crossing, at Bab Al-Hawa. We appreciated
the lengths gone to by the United Nations and its partners in making every effort to
ensure that people in need feel minimal impact as a result of this reduction.
However, we must also remain cognizant of the increased challenges this
has brought about, making humanitarian operations in the north-west more costly,
risker and less timely. South Africa calls on all actors, in particular the Syrian
Government, to increase cooperation with humanitarian agencies and work
towards the improvement and enhancement of all modalities, including cross-line
assistance programmes.
We note with appreciation the efforts for increased cross-line deliveries in the
north-east and north-west of Syria, and call on all parties to continue these efforts.
16/28

20-11369

S/2020/866

South Africa reiterates its call for the safe, unimpeded and impartial delivery
of humanitarian aid and assistance to all who require it, in line with the provisions
of international humanitarian law.
In the light of the continuing humanitarian situation and the significant impact
of the COVID-19 pandemic in all parts of Syria, the imposition of unilateral sanctions
only further worsens the economic and humanitarian situation in the country. In this
regard, we request the Secretary-General to include in his bi-monthly reports to the
Security Council an overview of the effects and impact of unilateral sanctions on the
humanitarian situation in Syria.
In conclusion, the situation in Syria can be resolved only through negotiations
and mediation. South Africa calls on all parties to exert every effort towards the
full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). In this regard, we are pleased to hear
that the discussions of the Constitutional Committee in Geneva, suspended due to
positive COVID-19 cases among a few of the participants, will resume today.

20-1136917/28

S/2020/866

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the
United Nations, Kais Kabtani
I thank Acting Assistant Secretary-General Ramesh Rajasingham for
his briefing.
My delegation also takes note of the latest report of the Secretary-General on
the humanitarian situation in Syria pursuant to relevant Security Council resolutions
(S/2020/813).
Recent reports suggest Syria is currently faced with a harrowing coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) situation. As it stands, the pandemic is rising exponentially in
a way that is threatening the most vulnerable and halting the smooth conduct of the
much-needed, much-awaited work of the Constitutional Committee in Geneva.
Moreover, millions of Syrians are slipping into deep poverty and food
insecurity as a result of the economic freefall, thereby making a dire humanitarian
situation actually worse.
We are deeply disturbed by the humanitarian and socioeconomic disaster in the
making in Syria as a consequence of the COVID-19 pandemic fallout and economic
collapse. It is therefore urgently necessary to address vulnerability, fragility and the
drivers of instability in order to mitigate the worsening humanitarian crisis.
Tunisia believes that focus should be placed on five key priorities: the ceasefire,
humanitarian access, health care, food security and rehabilitation of critical public
services. And I would like to further elaborate on these priorities.
First, ending hostilities and restoring calm throughout Syria are both
urgent prerequisites and long-term goals to effectively cope with the humanitarian
emergency brought about by COVID-19 and put Syria on the path of sustainable and
lasting peace.
We remain deeply disturbed by the fragile security situation across Syria and
the impact it has had on the physical integrity of civilians, including women and
children, as well as on civilian infrastructure.
In recent weeks, tensions and unrest have grown more tangible in several
parts of northern and southern Syria. Furthermore, international humanitarian law
and ceasefire violations have regrettably not abated, notwithstanding the appeal of
Special Envoy Pedersen for a nationwide ceasefire and the understandings on the
de-escalation zone in Idlib.
We reiterate our call on all parties to exercise the utmost restraint, de-escalate
tensions and protect civilians and civilian objects in all circumstances. The Syrian
people cannot withstand a new wave of widespread hostilities.
Ultimately, a political process that is firmly on track and enables a just,
Syrian-led, Syrian-owned and United Nations-facilitated political solution in line
with resolution 2254 (2015) would resolve the humanitarian crisis and bring peace
and prosperity to the Syrian people.
Secondly, I recall the importance of a needs-based, vulnerability-based,
whole-of-Syria approach to humanitarian assistance using all access modalities. We
welcome the resumption of cross-border operations from Bab Al-Hawa into northwest Syria in implementation of resolution 2533 (2020), as well as the scaling-up in
overall humanitarian relief from Damascus in the first half of 2020, including into
the north-east. We also take note of the progress in planning the cross-line mission
to Atarib in north-western Syria.
18/28

20-11369

S/2020/866

The challenges arising from the use of a single border crossing, pursuant
to resolution 2533 (2020), highlight the need for commitment, cooperation and
dialogue among the relevant parties in order to maintain safe, timely, unhindered
and sustained humanitarian access into the north-west.
Thirdly, a systematic focus on the underequipped and underresourced Syrian
health-care system becomes ever-more necessary to avert a catastrophic spread
of the disease. It is critical to step up efforts related to adequate funding, scaling
up of testing capacity and provision of medical supplies, as well as support for
humanitarian partners and protection of medical and humanitarian workers.
Fourthly, the alarming rise in food insecurity, aggravated by inflation,
massive poverty and unemployment, underscores the need for sustainable assistance
for livelihoods, as well as for strengthening safety nets and building long-term
resilience. We appreciate, in this respect, the scaled up assistance by the World Food
Programme to millions in need throughout Syria, taking into account, in particular,
the economic impact of COVID-19.
Fifthly, there is a need to rehabilitate critical public services, such as hospitals,
schools and water, electricity and sanitation supplies. Tunisia is deeply troubled
by the recurring, yet unresolved, issue of disruption to clean water and electricity
supplies as a result of hostilities, which is limiting access to such basic services
for innocent Syrians and hindering core sanitation and hygiene measures against
COVID-19.
We stress that it is critical to rehabilitate electrical lines and water pipes as
part of any sustainable solution to this issue, while reiterating our call on parties to
respect their obligations under international humanitarian law. At the same time,
the rehabilitation of shattered hospitals and schools, following nearly a decade
of conflict, is a moral imperative in order to make the lives of children and other
vulnerable Syrian populations modestly better and focus on the true battle of saving
lives and future generations.

20-1136919/28

S/2020/866

Annex XII
Statement by the Political Coordinator of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Rodney Hunter
I very much thank the Acting Assistant Secretary-General for his briefing
today. There can be no doubt, based on his assessment, that the Syrian people need
more United Nations humanitarian aid now more than ever, and still the Al-Assad
regime is failing to step up to meet its responsibility to provide humanitarian
assistance in accordance with the principles of humanity, neutrality and impartiality.
At this time of significant humanitarian need, the welfare of millions of
Syrians remains at the mercy of the political calculations of the Al-Assad regime
and the Russian Federation. Due to the callous and inhumane Russian and Chinese
vetoes earlier this summer, United Nations humanitarian access via the cross-border
modality is forced to trickle into Syria from the single remaining crossing point at
Bab Al-Hawa. And despite their assertions to the contrary, we have seen no sustained
improvements in the regime’s provision of cross-line access. Russia and China’s
refusals to reauthorize the Al-Yarubiyah crossing continue to have a profound impact
on the lives of Syrians in need.
We are deeply saddened by reports from UNICEF earlier this month that eight
children under the age of five died in Al-Hol in less than a week. We understand that
four of those deaths were caused by malnutrition-related complications.
I know that we all talk about things like this in the Security Council all the
time, and I worry that sometimes our words lose their meaning because we talk about
such horrifying events just in our normal statements. But these were real people;
these were real children; they were real lives that were cut short. They were never
given the chance to become what they should have become. They were never allowed
to recognize their potential, that they had no choice over the situation that they had
been put into. These deaths were completely preventable — had the thousands of
camp inhabitants still received the life-saving combination of cross-line deliveries
from Damascus and cross-border aid deliveries from Al-Yarubiyah.
Each of us needs to ask herself whether the deaths of these eight innocent
children could have been spared had the Council been able to keep Al-Yarubiyah
open. For the United States, the answer to that question is very clear: yes. The
Security Council has to do better.
The United States is also concerned by the reports we are receiving about
a massive coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak in the Damascus region and
elsewhere in regime-controlled areas. There are no reliable statistics from Syrian
authorities in Damascus and no transparency, in general, from the Al-Assad regime
on the scale of the outbreak. There is no clear picture of how the Syrian Government
is using the COVID-19 assistance it has been receiving from the international
community. Nor has the regime conducted any significant public health campaign or
outreach to prevent the spread of the coronavirus.
Therefore, we call on the Syrian authorities to immediately grant full and
transparent access to the United Nations and international non-governmental
organizations to collect statistics and determine the scale of the pandemic in
Syria. Until that happens, the Syrian people will continue to suffer while they
and the rest of the world have no real idea about what is going on inside the
Syrian Government’s territory.
The coronavirus is absolutely exacerbating the Syrian humanitarian crisis.
Of the more than 1,600 confirmed cases of coronavirus reported, dozens of health
workers across Syria have tested positive. This complicates humanitarian efforts.
20/28

20-11369

S/2020/866

The United States stands with the Syrian doctors and other health-care and
humanitarian professionals, including the volunteer White Helmets, who are serving
on the front line of the pandemic to protect their communities. The brave men and
women of the White Helmets remain in our thoughts as they put their lives in danger
to help others. Rest assured that the United States will continue to do everything in
its power to provide humanitarian assistance and support to all the Syrian people
in need.
In north-east Syria, the United States is closely monitoring the operating
status of the Allouk water station. The United States has been very clear with all
sides, including with the Turkish authorities, that restricting access to water and
other basic services is unacceptable. We encourage the United Nations to provide
technical assistance to address the water station’s operations, because it is imperative
that water be permitted to flow at levels that adequately meet humanitarian needs,
particularly in the midst of a pandemic. The United States will continue engaging
with the relevant parties to achieve a sustainable solution.
In north-west Syria, the recent airstrikes by Russia and ground movements
by Syrian forces in Idlib province are of serious concern. The continuation of the
5 March Turkish-Russian ceasefire agreement is fundamental to a lasting political
solution to the conflict. Notably, the continuation of the Idlib ceasefire is more
essential now than ever since resolution 2533 (2020) forced the United Nations to
shift its operations from Bab Al-Salam and reach the entire displaced population
through Bab Al-Hawa alone.
Renewed military hostilities could have a profound and crippling impact on
United Nations aid deliveries from Bab Al-Hawa, and there is no backup option for
United Nations cross-border assistance to flow into the country if Bab Al-Hawa
is closed.
Therefore, every single member of the Council must commit to ensuring that
Bab Al-Hawa remains open. To that end, the United States urges Turkey and Russia
to contain all escalatory incidents, continue cooperation on the implementation of
the 5 March memorandum of understanding and restore calm in Idlib.
The Al-Assad regime must also heed the calls of Special Envoy Pedersen to
mitigate the spread of the coronavirus by releasing detainees who are being unjustly
held in horrific conditions.
Seven years ago, on 21 August 2013, the Al-Assad regime launched a horrific
chemical attack with the nerve agent sarin on the Ghouta district in Damascus that
killed more than 1,400 Syrians, many of them children. On this solemn anniversary,
the United States reiterates our resolve to prevent further use of those deadly
weapons and to hold the Al-Assad regime accountable for its heinous crimes against
the Syrian people.
The United States is committed to the future of the Syrian people — all of the
Syrian people. Every Syrian child should have an opportunity to live up to his or her
highest potential. Instead, they and their parents worry whether they will live until
their next birthday. That is wrong. The United States will continue to work towards
a peaceful future for all Syrians, and we know the rest of the Council will as well.

20-1136921/28

S/2020/866

Annex XIII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to
the United Nations, Pham Hai Anh
I would like to thank Acting Assistant Secretary-General Ramesh Rajasingham
for his briefing. My delegation takes note with concern of the information provided
in the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/813) and the further updates by
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs today.
It is sad that we can grow accustomed to listening to these disturbing
reports and numbers every month and still do nothing to help stop the deterioration
of the humanitarian situation in Syria. Viet Nam is deeply concerned over the
insurmountable difficulties faced by the Syrian people as well as the increasing
challenges to meeting their basic needs.
There is no easy way to report the number of civilians killed and injured.
Indeed, 369 is the number for this reporting period, half of them women and children,
many of whom were killed or maimed by explosive devices.
Zero damage to educational facilities in the reporting period is a good sign
but needs to be sustained. It is our great concern that the fragile health-care system
and overburdened indispensable health workers continue to be attacked, killed or
injured by the hostilities and by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Catastrophic
consequences cannot be avoided if the health-care system is not protected
and strengthened.
We are troubled by the worsening development of COVID-19 in Syria
and its impacts on the already dire humanitarian situation in the country. This
enemy threatens millions of Syrians in all areas by limiting humanitarian access,
obstructing the humanitarian response and worsening the socioeconomic crisis and
the economy’s ability to recover. In addition, the pandemic has also been hindering
dialogue and negotiation efforts to find a long-term solution to the suffering of the
Syrian people. Just a few days ago, the long-awaited talks within the framework of
the Constitutional Committee were, unfortunately, put on hold.
Water and food are critical to the survival of human beings. We continue to
be greatly concerned about the increasing food insecurity and repeated incidents
that cause water shortages affecting millions and hundreds of thousands of
people, respectively.
Viet Nam would like to stress the following points.
First, at this time it is important to ensure timely, safe and unimpeded
humanitarian access in order to facilitate effective humanitarian operations to all
parts of Syria. A sustainable, calm environment is greatly needed. Insecurity and the
increasing violence and unrest in the north-west and the north-east, as well as other
regions, need to be addressed to ensure that humanitarian aid reaches the people in
need in a timely manner and in adequate quantity.
We reiterate our support for the call by the Secretary-General and the Special
Envoy for a nationwide ceasefire and call on the parties to fully respect international
humanitarian law, particularly the obligations to protect civilians and civilian
objects, and to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
Regarding the implementation of resolution 2533 (2020), we welcome the steps
taken by the United Nations and its implementing partners in addressing logistical
challenges in order to maintain the provision of assistance into north-west Syria.
We take note of the increase in cross-line deliveries to the north-east and encourage
22/28

20-11369

S/2020/866

the Government of Syria and the relevant parties to continue their cooperation in
that regard.
Secondly, with regard to the humanitarian response, Viet Nam appreciates the
efforts of United Nations agencies and international partners and donors in providing
support to the Syrian people. We would also like to pay tribute to all humanitarian
workers on the ground for their continued dedication in the face of great difficulties.
We once again reiterate the importance of strengthening Syria’s COVID-19
preparedness and response capability by providing the necessary technical assistance,
medical supplies and personnel, as may be required. Early response can go a long
way, including by improving testing capacity and implementing basic measures to
avert a major outbreak.
We also would like to call on all concerned parties to address the reported
issues regarding the situation in camps for internally displaced persons. The water
shortage caused by the disruption of the Allouk water station, affecting nearly half a
million people in Hasakah, requires a timely and sustained solution.
Last but not least, we call for continued international support for Syria in all
areas and by all means in accordance with its needs.
The humanitarian situation in Syria demands a long-term solution that brings
about sustainable peace and development for all Syrian people. It is our firm belief
that the only way to achieve this is to pursue a comprehensive political solution, in
line with resolution 2254 (2015) and in full accordance with international law.

20-1136923/28

S/2020/866

Annex XIV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic to the United Nations, Bashar Ja’afari
[Original: English and Arabic]
Over the past years, the Governments of some States members of the Security
Council have dealt with the humanitarian situation in my country with blatant
selectivity. That selectivity has manifested itself, and continues to be manifested,
in their politicized focus on certain areas to protect the remnants of the terrorist
organizations that control them. That selectivity is also aimed at preventing the
Syrian Arab Army and its allies from liberating them from terrorism. At the same
time, those Governments deliberately overlooked the catastrophic humanitarian
conditions experienced by Syrians in other areas occupied by the American and
Turkish forces and the crimes committed by their tools of proxy separatist militias
and terrorist organizations.
I will be focusing in my statement today on the areas that were termed in the
deliberations of the Council as areas located in north-eastern Syria and which have
been dubbed by the United States Administration as areas east of the Euphrates.
The suffering of those areas has not been limited to the afflictions resulting from
the criminal practices of the terrorist organization the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham, or to the results of the crimes of the illegal international coalition that wreaked
havoc and devastation in the region and paved the way for the occupation and looting
of Syria’s resources, including oil, gas, antiquities and agricultural crops. Rather, the
suffering of the Syrian people in those areas was exacerbated in quantity and quality
as a result of the crimes of the American and Turkish occupation.
Today, as has been the case for more than 20 days now, more than 1 million
Syrian civilian in Hasakah city and its surrounding areas — in north-eastern
Syria — are facing water deprivation and thirst as the Turkish regime continues to
commit its crimes, using water as a weapon of war to punish the people of the city,
including women, children and the elderly, because they refuse occupation and hold
on to their country.
With the blessing of the American Administration and its tools, the Turkish
occupation forces and their proxies have cut off the pumping of drinking water
from the Allouk station and the wells feeding it more than 16 times and for varying
periods, the last of which extended for more than 20 days, which resulted in the
suffering of our people in Hasakah. That city has so far continued to suffer from
thirst due to the extreme climate conditions and the health threats associated with
the spread of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
On behalf of the Government of my country, I have addressed many relevant
official letters to the Council and to His Excellency the Secretary-General.
Unfortunately, we have not seen from the Council any concrete steps to stop these
prescribed atrocities and gross violations.
While we express our thanks and gratitude to the Secretary-General for his
prompt response and his good offices to end the suffering of our people in Hasakah
and to ensure that drinking water is re-pumped to them urgently, we condemn the
failure of the Turkish regime and its tools to respond as promptly as required, and
we deplore the positions of Mr. Lowcock, who is supposed to represent the human
face of the United Nations. Mr. Lowcock, instead of condemning the crimes of
the Turkish occupation in his briefings, has previously, before this very Council,
thanked the Turkish regime for its facilitation in sending a technical team to repair
the Allouk station, ignoring the fact that the Turkish regime bombed the station and
24/28

20-11369

S/2020/866

attacked its workers, expelling them, as it launched what was called a “peace spring
operation”. He also ignored the fact that this station is a civilian facility that provides
necessary drinking water to more than 1 million Syrian civilians and that bombing
it or cutting off its water supply is a barbaric act, a war crime and a crime against
humanity under international humanitarian law, including the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War. That crime requires
urgent action from the United Nations to put an end to this occupation and end
the suffering of the people of Hasakah from water deprivation and thirst. I would
have expected Mr. Lowcock to head a humanitarian demonstration in front of the
Turkish Permanent Mission protesting the deprivation of the people of Hasakah city
of drinking water.
We have the right to ask: if Mr. Lowcock is biased and incapable of taking
professional, objective and credible positions, why did the so-called humanitarian
co-penholders in the Council not take action to hold meetings and adopt at least one
presidential statement condemning Erdoğan’s targeting of the Allouk civilian water
station and his use of water as a weapon to punish civilians?
These self-proclaimed co-penholders and those behind them are clearly loyal
to NATO and its aggressive policies, which show zero respect for international
law, the Charter of the United Nations and human rights. That disrespect has
been demonstrated on an ongoing basis, as no voices were raised when attacks
by the American occupation forces caused severe damage to the Euphrates and
Baath dams, energy and water plants and to the famous suspension bridge in Deir
ez-Zor, in addition to other civilian facilities. Nor were their voices raised when,
on 27 March 2017, the illegitimate coalition air force targeted a vehicle carrying a
team of technicians supervising the Euphrates dam and volunteers from the Syrian
Red Crescent as they were trying to reach the dam to repair the damage caused by
the United States bombing and prevent its collapse. That sinful attack led to the
death of Firas Al-Hussein, a Syrian citizen who was a humanitarian volunteer in the
Syrian Red Crescent, while the rest of the team were injured. None of my Western
colleagues in the Council at the time, nor at any other time — I do not have the
time to enumerate them now — uttered a single word about the American air force
targeting humanitarian workers.
Two days ago, the so-called international coalition acknowledged its
responsibility for killing 1,377 civilians during its hostilities, considering them as
collateral damage. Of course, the numbers exceed this number exponentially, but the
matter will pass unnoticed so long as Germany and Belgium are the two entrusted
humanitarian co-penholders in the Council. Therefore, international law has become
like the gentle lamb whose care is entrusted to a herd of wolves.
Today Erdoğan is committing these crimes in joint complicity to implement
the Western project based on targeting and destroying civil and service structures
and the institutions of the Syrian State. If the Council thinks that our words do not
show the reality on the ground, we challenge it to prove the opposite and take steps
to hold the countries that are occupying parts of my country accountable for their
crimes against Syria and the region in general.
The Syrian State and Syrian humanitarian organizations have honourably
assumed their responsibilities in the face of the Turkish regime’s crime of cutting
off drinking water to the residents of Hasakah. Drinking water has been provided
to our people there to the extent possible, but the needs exceed all expectations
and capabilities owing to the Turkish and American occupation of the northern and
eastern areas of Syria.

20-1136925/28

S/2020/866

Syria warns of the continuation or recurrence of this disaster and demands
that the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the European Union
countries and leaders wake up from their irresponsible slumber and show respect for
the moral and legal foundations on which this international Organization is based.
In continuation of the policies of some Governments hostile to my country,
on 24 August terrorist organizations blew up the gas pipeline feeding the Syrian
electric power stations, causing a general blackout all over Syria.
That terrorist attack, perpetrated by the terrorist groups supported by the
American troops in the Al-Tanf occupied area, is merely a link in the chain of
economic terrorism that has become the dominant title of the current phase. This
economic terrorism is practiced by some Governments of the States Members of
the Organization vis-à-vis my country by imposing unilateral coercive measures,
including the so-called Caesar Act, and through the crimes that those Governments
commit directly or through their tools of separatist militias and terrorist organizations
to plunder oil, gas, antiquities, wheat and agricultural crops and destroy civilian
facilities and infrastructure.
All of those crimes aim to suffocate Syrian citizens and deprive them of
their basic requirements of food, medicine, gas and electricity, obstructing the
reconstruction process, preventing the return of the displaced and exerting greater
pressure on the Syrian Government to make political concessions, especially since
that terrorist bombing coincided with the commencement of the third round of the
Constitutional Committee in Geneva.
I would like to draw the Council’s attention to a study published a few
days ago by the Center for a New American Security, funded by the United States
Government. This study is authored by Nicholas Heras, a researcher at the Center
who has also worked with the Pentagon. It calls on Washington to weaponize wheat
to starve civilians in Syria in order to reduce food supplies and pressure the Syrian
Government and Russia to make political concessions that serve United States
interests in the region. This twisted logic of using wheat as a weapon to punish
civilians is akin to Erdoğan’s use of water as a weapon to punish civilians.
Some of the Governments of Council Member States have slaughtered
international humanitarian law in their policies towards my country just as they
slaughtered its biological father — international law — before it. Nothing remains
before the Council, except the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, which
a number of Member States still uphold and defend. The question here is, does the
Council want the provisions of our Charter to fail this test too?
Finally, in response to what the United States representative has stated
about the situation in Al-Hol camp, we stress the responsibility of the American
Administration, its terrorist militias and some European Governments for the
current situation in the camp. That is in view of the American occupation of that
area and the refusal of some European Governments to repatriate their thousands
of semi-human trash who were sent illegally to my country as terrorists without
borders and their families. We have demanded this over and over. Separatist militias
of the Syrian Democratic Forces, which are proxies of the American occupation, are
trying to take advantage of the issue of inhabitants of Al-Hol camp to feign some sort
of recognition, then concluding suspicious cheap deals and using them as political
media blackmail.

26/28

20-11369

S/2020/866

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the
United Nations, Feridun Hadi Sinirlioğlu
First, I would like to thank Acting Assistant Secretary-General Rajasingham
for his briefing.
As we recently marked World Humanitarian Day, we pay tribute to all
humanitarian workers for their sacrifice. These unsung heroes do a remarkable job
each and every day, especially for the Syrian people.
Resolution 2533 (2020) is a devastating blow for Syria, which is on the brink of
a widespread coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak, with a severely weakened
health infrastructure.
The loss of the Bab Al-Salam crossing point interrupted direct access to parts
of northern Aleppo. Unfortunately, the Security Council failed to reauthorize the
most direct, effective and highly monitored route to reach 1.3 million people. Since
the closure of the Bab Al-Salam crossing point, my Government, together with the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, is striving to respond to the
immense humanitarian needs in the north-west.
We have been working to increase the capacity for Bab Al-Hawa crossing
point. However, access from Bab Al-Hawa will be limited and the United Nations
will need to address the additional costs and challenges related to longer distances.
Let me repeat once again that the so-called cross-line access is not an option for the
north-west and can never replace cross-border humanitarian deliveries.
On the pandemic front, the means and measures to combat a possible outbreak
is insufficient. The Al-Assad regime and its backers have conducted at least 530
attacks on hundreds of health facilities and destroyed the basic infrastructure of
the country.
It is estimated that Syria has the capacity to treat only 6,500 cases of COVID-19,
due to its limited health-care capacity. As of today, at least 60 doctors in Syria have
lost their lives to COVID-19. A high number of fatalities among health-care workers
is an important indicator of widespread communal infection and lack of protective
equipment and training. Yet, due to a lack of reliable information, we do not know
the severity of the situation in regime-controlled areas.
Our humanitarian partners emphasize that, due to medical aid channelled in
from Turkey, north-west Syria is the best-prepared region to mitigate the effects of
an outbreak. However, the rapidly rising number of cases since the first COVID-19
case was recorded in the region is concerning. In addition, the lack of access to water
and sanitation exacerbates the effects of the pandemic.
The Security Council has listened to the lies of the regime representative on
the Allouk water station. Now let me set the record straight — water pumps serving
the station operate on electric power from the Tishrin Dam, which is under the
control of the terrorist organization Kurdistan Workers’ Party/People’s Protection
Units (PKK/YPG). Since last November, electricity to the Allouk station has been
regularly and deliberately cut by the PKK/YPG.
Thanks to our repeated démarches towards those who have influence on
the PKK/YPG, electricity flow to Allouk has been resumed, and the pumping of
water from the station has been recently restored. However, its sustainability and
the provision of water to Al-Hasakah at full capacity depends on the uninterrupted
supply of electric power. We are ready to work with the United Nations in order to
find a durable solution.
20-1136927/28

S/2020/866

The Secretary-General reports that insufficient potable and farming water
supply in Al-Bab also affects water access for the local population and the ability
to maintain health and hygiene standards. We should not let terrorist organizations
and the Al-Assad regime use water resources as a weapon to further weaken the
Syrian people for their separatist and malicious agendas. We should be vigilant
against attempts by the regime and the PKK/YPG to gain legitimacy by exploiting
the pandemic as a pretext.
The PKK/YPG seeks to consolidate its power throughout the north-east by
oppression and economic incentives, such as so-called oil contracts and legislation
to confiscate property. Let me be clear — Turkey will never condone such attempts.
We continue our efforts to preserve the ceasefire in Idlib, despite violations
by the regime. Idlib is the last refuge for Syrians fleeing Al-Assad, and it should be
protected at all costs. As always, Turkey reserves the right to use force to respond to
any attack by the regime or radical groups. Maintaining the ceasefire is essential for
improving the humanitarian situation, facilitating the return of internally displaced
persons to their homes and reviving the political process.
The only way to end the Syrian conflict is through the United Nationsmediated political solution process, in line with resolution 2254 (2015). With that
understanding, we have been focusing on the stabilization of the situation in Idlib and
the establishment of a credible, balanced and legitimate Constitutional Committee.
We welcome the convening of the third session of the Constitutional Committee
on 24 August in Geneva. Turkey will spare no effort to ensure the success of the
Committee, which is a milestone in the political process. We expect the international
community to support the Committee’s viable functioning and to not allow the
regime to backtrack.
Last week marked the seventh anniversary of the 2013 Ghouta chemical
attack, where the Al-Assad regime massacred hundreds of civilians in a single day.
The horrifying images still haunt us to this day. That was neither the first nor the last
time the murderous regime used chemical weapons against its own people.
In each and every incident in Syria, the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) has arrived at the same stark conclusion: the regime is
responsible for chemical attacks against civilians. The report (S/1867/2020) of the
OPCW’s Investigation and Identification Team on the three chemical attacks that
took place in March 2017 in Ltamenah is just the latest documentation of the evergrowing record of the Syrian regime’s crimes against humanity.
I will not respond to the regime representative’s lies and fabrications. I wonder
how they can continue to believe that they can deceive the international community
with their lies. We believe that they will be held accountable for their heinous crimes,
and their atrocities against the people of Syria will be recorded in the darkest pages
of history.

28/28

20-11369
