S/2020/1236

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 December 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 18 December 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Judge Carmel Agius, President of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals, and Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, as well as the statements delivered
by the representatives of Belgium, China, the Dominican Republic, Estonia,
France, Germany, Indonesia, the Niger, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, South Africa, Tunisia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Viet Nam, in connection with
the video-teleconference on “The International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals” convened on Monday, 14 December 2020. Statements were also delivered
by His Excellency Mr. Čedomir Backović, Assistant Minister of Justice of Serbia,
and by the representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Rwanda.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of the members of the
Security Council dated 7 May 2020 (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, these
briefings and statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Jerry Matthews Matjila
President of the Security Council

20-17547 (E) 231220 250121

*2017547*

S/2020/1236

Annex 1
Statement by the President of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, Judge Carmel Agius
[Original: English and French]
It is my sincere pleasure to address the Security Council once again to
present the seventeenth progress report of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals (IRMCT). While I regret that we are once again unable to
gather in person, I am very honoured to meet with members today, on the eve of an
auspicious occasion for the Mechanism and also for the Council.
Next Tuesday, 22 December 2020, will mark 10 years since the Security Council
adopted resolution 1966 (2010), by which the Council established the Mechanism.
Although the Mechanism did not commence operations until 1 July 2012, with
respect to the remaining functions of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR), and until 1 July 2013 regarding those of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), its inception in 2010 was a truly significant moment.
Resolution 1966 (2010) acknowledged the vital contributions made by the two
ad hoc Tribunals to international criminal justice, accountability and the rule of law,
and sought to build upon them. It symbolized the determination of the international
community to continue fighting impunity for serious violations of international
humanitarian law and to see the work of the ICTR and the ICTY through until
the very end, thereby ensuring that their precious legacies would be strengthened
and safeguarded.
On that day almost exactly 10 years ago, the members of the Security Council
therefore came together to take the bold step of creating a new kind of judicial
institution, which was unique in its purpose, scope and structure and would help
close the impunity gap after the ad hoc Tribunals had gone. While it was not the firstever residual court, the brand new Mechanism was the first entrusted to complete
the substantive judicial caseload of its predecessors and ensure that a number of
remaining fugitives would be brought to justice.
Remarkably, it was mandated to do so from two branches on different
continents, with a roster of 25 independent judges working predominantly from their
own countries. Other institutions have been established that mirror the Mechanism
in certain respects. However, back in 2010 that was a novel approach within the
United Nations system, and more generally.
It is particularly special for the Mechanism to reach this anniversary during a
year marking the United Nations own seventy-fifth birthday. Milestone events such
as these remind us of our raison d’être and allow us to take stock of the progress we
have made, as well as how much more remains to be done.
By doing so they encourage us to reaffirm the values that unite us and underlie
our daily work, thereby providing fresh impetus for renewed efforts and further
refinements. The Mechanism is, as always, proud to form a small part of the bigger
story of the United Nations and to be able to contribute to its broader aims. On this
occasion, the Mechanism also examines its own record of performance, especially in
view of the Council’s favourable review of its progress this year, which culminated
during the reporting period in the adoption of resolution 2529 (2020).
From the early days of transitional arrangements and double-hatting to
navigating the closure of the ad hoc Tribunals and finding its feet as a stand-alone
institution, the Mechanism has certainly covered much territory over the years.
In addition, we have managed a considerable workload and consolidated the best
2/43

20-17547

S/2020/1236

practices of two disparate institutions. Throughout, we have remained mindful of
the imperative to continually strive for better, more harmonized and more efficient
ways of operating within the parameters of our specific mandate. Let me assure the
Council that our quest for improvement will not cease.
There is also some satisfaction in marking the Mechanism’s tenth birthday at
the end of 2020, a year that has tested us more than any other and has allowed us to
demonstrate our dedication and resilience and that intrinsic aspect of our nature I
mentioned earlier — innovation.
Indeed, the Mechanism recognized at the outset of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic that, as a court of law with fundamental responsibilities to
accused, detained and convicted persons, as well as victims and witnesses, it was
essential to keep functioning. While in-court proceedings were initially affected,
work on cases continued around the clock and the Mechanism prepared for the various
pandemic-related scenarios that could unfold. It responded by identifying creative
solutions that utilize and expand upon the distinctive features built into its legal
framework, such as our familiarity with remote working methods and provisions
that allow for hearings by remote participation of judges, parties and witnesses.
That flexible approach enabled the Mechanism to remain operational and
smoothly resume in-court proceedings once certain restrictions were eased, leading
to a number of significant results during the reporting period. That the Mechanism
was able to effectively overcome the many challenges of 2020 is a testament to its
maturation as an institution, as well as the outstanding commitment of its judges and
staff, whom I thank sincerely.
The report before the Council provides ample evidence of the progress made
in relation to the Mechanism’s judicial caseload, despite the ongoing global health
crisis. Notably, the appeal hearing in the case against Ratko Mladić was held at the
Mechanism’s Hague premises in late August, with four of the five judges of the
Appeals Chamber participating by video-teleconference from their own countries.
Judicial deliberations and judgement preparation have since continued apace and the
case is expected to conclude in May 2021.
Soon afterwards, in September, in-court proceedings resumed in the case
against Jovica Stanišić and Franko Simatović, with the Trial Chamber hearing the
final five witnesses for the Simatović defence. The evidentiary hearings concluded
in October, and judgement is likewise expected by the end of May 2021, once final
trial briefs have been filed and closing arguments made.
At the Arusha Branch, the trial in the case against Maximilien Turinabo and
others was finally able to commence on 22 October, following similar preparations,
and the presentation of witnesses for the prosecution has now concluded. The defence
phase will commence in the first part of 2021, with the trial judgement also expected
in May.
I wish to alert the Council also to a very recent update in another case. Last
week, on 8 December, the single judge seized of the contempt case against Petar Jojić
and Vjerica Radeta issued a public decision reiterating the previous request to Serbia
to comply with its obligation to transfer the accused to the seat of the Mechanism in
The Hague without delay. The single judge decided to remain seized of the matter
with a view to ascertaining Serbia’s compliance with his decision within 90 days.
In addition to that activity in existing cases, important events took place in
relation to fugitives indicted by the ICTR. New pretrial proceedings commenced
in the case against Félicien Kabuga, who was transferred to the United Nations
Detention Unit in The Hague in October following his arrest earlier in the year. His
20-175473/43

S/2020/1236

initial appearance took place on 11 November, during which a plea of not guilty was
entered on his behalf.
Furthermore, the case against fugitive Augustin Bizimana was formally closed
during the reporting period, following the filing in October of a Prosecution motion
to terminate the proceedings based on proof of the accused’s death. Now only six
ICTR fugitives remain, and one of them is expected to be tried by the Mechanism.
As the Council will later hear from Prosecutor Serge Brammertz, the search for
those individuals continues to be a top priority.
Following those developments, the Mechanism is poised to conclude a
significant proportion of its pending judicial caseload by the end of May next year.
It is almost with a sense of déjà vu that I say that because, were it not for COVID-19,
the Mechanism would have been able to conclude the existing proceedings in 2020,
as anticipated in December 2019.
Nevertheless, rather than to wish for something different, we must continue
to mitigate the challenges as best we can and proactively address the reality of our
current circumstances. I can confirm that the Mechanism is prepared for what lies
ahead. Our judges and staff are aware that the coming months are critical and have
been spurred on by the achievements of the reporting period. We are ready to exert
all efforts to ensure the completion of the relevant cases by the projected dates, with
full regard for the rights of our accused persons.
In connection with the previous point, I wish to emphasize that the Mechanism
continues to do its utmost to ensure the safety and well-being of all persons under
its supervision, including those in the United Nations detention facilities here in
The Hague and in Arusha, as well as the 50 convicted persons serving sentences in
15 Member States. As can be seen in the report before the Council, the Mechanism
takes those responsibilities extremely seriously and maintained a system of
heightened vigilance during the reporting period, owing to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Under the excellent stewardship of our new Registrar, Mr. Abubacarr
Tambadou, the strict measures in place at our detention facilities have been effective
to date in protecting our detained persons from exposure to the virus. Such measures
are of course a supplement to the medical care already available, and our facilities
are subject to inspections by independent monitoring bodies such as the International
Committee of the Red Cross. In addition, detainees are free to avail themselves of
the Mechanism’s comprehensive detention-related complaints procedure and raise
concerns before the Chamber seized of the relevant proceedings.
Separately, in order to ensure that the Mechanism’s responsibilities vis-à-vis
convicted persons continue to be optimally fulfilled, I issued three further orders for
COVID-19 updates from enforcement States during the reporting period, the most
recent of which extended the reporting period from every 14 days to every month,
unless urgent circumstances require otherwise, in recognition of the potential
burden of having to provide fortnightly updates during a time when resources are
already stretched.
I take this opportunity to express the Mechanism’s wholehearted gratitude to
each of the enforcement States for their conscientious responses to the pandemicrelated orders, as well as their generous cooperation with, and support for, its core
mandated activity more generally. In particular, I would like to praise Belgium,
which became our fifteenth enforcement State in September. The Mechanism
looks forward to being able to share further news in the near future regarding other
enforcement-related developments.

4/43

20-17547

S/2020/1236

The enforcement of sentences is only one area in which the Mechanism has
benefited immensely from the active cooperation of States since it commenced
operating. It has been said before, but bears repeating — the support of Member
States is crucial to the Mechanism’s ability to effectively discharge its functions,
and we will continue to rely on their valuable assistance in the months and years
to come, not only in relation to enforcement-related activities but in other areas as
wide-ranging as the tracking of remaining fugitives or securing a viable budget that
will allow us to conclude our work. An additional issue that I have highlighted on
previous occasions is the relocation of the nine acquitted and released persons, who
are still waiting in a safe house in Arusha.
While the Mechanism will do everything within its power, it is only with
the continued help of Member States that such matters will be resolved in a way
that furthers the Mechanism’s — and thereby the Security Council’s — aims. In
that respect, the arrest of Félicien Kabuga by French authorities was an invigorating
example of what the Mechanism can achieve with the collaboration and committed
efforts of States and other stakeholders.
Following that breakthrough, the Mechanism was also most gratified to note
the terms of resolution 2529 (2020), in which the Council urged all States to intensify
their cooperation with, and render all the necessary assistance to, the Mechanism
regarding the remaining ICTR fugitives, as well as the protracted situation of the
nine individuals in Arusha.
The Mechanism is deeply thankful to the Security Council, not only for that
most recent expression of support but for all the support provided since the Mechanism
was brought into being 10 years ago. The Mechanism is mindful that it owes its very
existence to the members of the Council. With the continued backing of Member
States and with our dedicated judges and staff ready to meet the challenges of the
times, the Mechanism has every reason to be hopeful that it will make important
headway during the coming reporting period and ultimately succeed in fulfilling
its mandate.

20-175475/43

S/2020/1236

Annex 2
Statement by the Prosecutor of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Serge Brammertz
[Original: English and French]
I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to remotely address the Security Council
about the activities of the Office of the Prosecutor of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. My written report (see S/2020/763) provides
details about our activities and results during the reporting period in relation to our
strategic priorities. Today I would like to highlight a few important issues.
At the outset, I would like to bring to the Council’s attention the continued
commitment of the staff of the Office of the Prosecutor, who remain fully focused
on completing our important work despite the disruptions and difficulties resulting
from the global coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The past nine months
have been a test for all of us. Yet my Office has maintained full business continuity
and is achieving important results inside and outside the courtroom.
I would also like to express my appreciation to President Agius and Registrar
Tambadou. As principals, we have worked closely together this year to lead the
Mechanism through the challenges it has confronted. I can say without hesitation
that cross-organ cooperation is at its highest level in years.
In relation to our trials and appeals, I am pleased to report that in-court
proceedings recommenced in late August, only five months after the pandemic
forced the Mechanism to shift to remote working. My Office presented its oral
appellate arguments in Mladić, and we are now awaiting the judgment in that case.
In Turinabo et al., my Office expeditiously presented its witness evidence
in only six weeks, consistent with the directions of the single judge. We are now
preparing to respond to the defence cases and then make our final submissions. The
presentation of evidence in the Stanišić and Simatović retrial has been completed.
The Prosecution team is working quickly to prepare its final trial brief and closing
oral arguments.
In our newest case, Kabuga, our work has proceeded well. By August, only
two and a half months following the arrest, we established a team in Kigali to
prepare the case for trial. We are in the process of contacting witnesses, and the team
is reviewing the evidence collected. Travel restrictions and other pandemic-related
restrictions are posing challenges that we are working to overcome.
The prosecution is also meeting its pretrial obligations. The initial appearance
of Kabuga was held on 11 November in The Hague. Disclosure of material to the
defence is already under way. We will file a request for leave to amend the indictment
by 15 January and will adhere to further deadlines set by the pre-trial judge.
My Office would like to extend its gratitude to the Government of Rwanda
for its strong cooperation in relation to the Kabuga case. Our requests for assistance
are being promptly and fully answered, and we are being granted swift access to
witnesses and documentary records. The efforts of Rwandan authorities are having
a direct and positive impact on the expeditious preparation of that case for trial.
With regard to my Office, we remain firmly focused on completing the
remaining ad hoc judicial activity as quickly as possible. We look forward to receiving
judgments in three cases by the end of May 2021, which will mark important steps
towards the achievement of our goals.

6/43

20-17547

S/2020/1236

With respect to the remaining fugitives indicted by the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), my Office has viable leads and is implementing our
strategies, with a particular focus on Protais Mpiranya, who will be tried by the
Mechanism upon his arrest. In the last three years, my Office confirmed the death of
Augustin Bizimana and located two other fugitives.
The Council knows the story of one of them — Félicien Kabuga. As I reported
to Council members earlier this year (see S/2020/527, annex 2), my Office identified
Kabuga’s likely location following an intensive analysis of telecommunications and
other data. Thanks to efficient cooperation from French authorities, Kabuga was
arrested just a few months later on 16 May 2020.
However, the story of the other — Fulgence Kayishema — is that he remains at
large following South Africa’s failure to provide effective cooperation over the past
two and a half years. My Office alleges that Kayishema, the local police inspector,
played an important role in the 16 April 1994 massacre at Nyange Church. In the
days leading up to the massacre, 2,000 Tutsi civilians — women, men, children and
the elderly — sought refuge in the church.
Initially, militias surrounded the church and launched an attack, including by
throwing hand grenades into the packed building. While many were wounded and
killed, the refugees resisted, forcing the attackers to retreat. Determined to murder
those innocent civilians, local leaders, including Kayishema, brought a bulldozer to
the church grounds. In an act of unimaginable brutality and sacrilege, the bulldozer
was used to demolish the church with the refugees still inside. More than 1,500 were
crushed to death. Survivors who escaped were hunted down and killed.
Kayishema fled from justice and remained a fugitive for years, but almost
three years ago my Office finally located him. Relying on records and sources,
my Office concluded in early 2018 that Kayishema was living in Cape Town. That
was confirmed by South African authorities via INTERPOL in August 2018. We
immediately submitted an urgent request for assistance to South Africa seeking his
prompt arrest.
We were therefore surprised to be informed that because Kayishema had
been granted refugee status in South Africa, he could not be handed over to the
Mechanism. The excuse was withdrawn months later and replaced with a new
argument that South Africa lacked a legal basis to cooperate with the Mechanism.
After 16 months of intense negotiations, in December 2019, South Africa
finally submitted the United Nations arrest warrant for execution, which a local
magistrate approved. However, by then Kayishema could no longer be found. It is
important to note that my Office has reliable information that Kayishema was present
in South Africa as late as October and November 2019, only a few weeks before South
Africa reported in the Security Council that the arrest operation was unsuccessful.
Little has improved since then. A year ago, after the failed arrest, my Office
submitted an extensive request for assistance detailing information that we required to
continue the pursuit of Kayishema. Our request has yet to be satisfactorily answered.
Two months ago in October, it was agreed that my Office would send a
technical team to Pretoria to finally receive the requested material. The Foreign
Affairs and Justice Ministries convened a number of joint meetings with responsible
officials, but the Department of Home Affairs, which has responsibility for key
information, did not attend as scheduled.
My Office was then again requested to send last week another mission to
specifically meet with the Department of Home Affairs and receive the outstanding
documents. To our great surprise, on the last day of the mission, Home Affairs
20-175477/43

S/2020/1236

representatives informed us that Kayishema’s refugee file and fingerprints do not
exist. That is difficult to understand.
I report those facts to explain why, despite all my Office’s efforts, Kayishema
remains at large. The situation raises many questions. How can it be that South
Africa refused to arrest Kayishema two and a half years ago based on a refugee file
that, it is now claimed, does not exist?
Why did the authorities not take obvious measures after being informed
that an internationally wanted fugitive indicted for genocide was present in their
country? Despite a United Nations warrant calling for Kayishema’s immediate
arrest, South African authorities did not provisionally detain him or put him under
any surveillance to prevent his escape.
Yet what remains most important is that we move forward and finally secure
Kayishema’s arrest. Let me therefore make this request today to the representative
of South Africa to empower operational services — particularly police and
prosecutors — to work directly with us on a day-to-day basis and truly give them
his Government’s full political and diplomatic support, as well as the resources they
require to help us.
I am prepared to visit Pretoria in the new year to discuss our further cooperation
and agree on a clear joint strategy and operational arrangements. That would also
send the right message to other capitals.
I previously mentioned my Office’s efforts to engage with Zimbabwean
authorities, and I intend to travel to Harare soon for further discussions. To move
cooperation in the right direction, we would expect to see a more proactive approach
by the Zimbabwean task force. In that regard, effective investigations would need
to begin with the acknowledgment that a fugitive is known to have sheltered in
Zimbabwe and has deep, long-standing connections with Zimbabwean persons.
Similarly, my team and I will need to return to Kampala to engage in open
and frank discussions about the urgent steps needed to remedy long-standing issues.
Authorities have acknowledged that a fugitive obtained an official Ugandan passport,
but our requests for investigation records and access to persons of interest have not
been answered after more than a year.
My Office is determined to account for the remaining fugitives as quickly
as possible so that our tracking activities can finally be brought to an end. I know
the Council fully shares and supports that goal. But the absence of effective
cooperation continues to set back our work and prevent the completion of this critical
residual function.
As my Office works to resolve the challenges we face, the firm support of
the Council will be vital. Member States should understand that, when my Office
requests their cooperation, we are acting with the authority given to us by the
Security Council. All of us owe nothing less to the victims and survivors of the
1994 genocide.
My Office’s third strategic priority is to assist national jurisdictions
prosecuting international crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda.
We also provide support to authorities searching for persons still missing as a result
of the conflicts.
I would now like to briefly update the Council on three important developments.
First, the arrest of Félicien Kabuga has brought renewed attention to continuing
national efforts to prosecute alleged génocidaires. Arrests conducted by Belgian and
Dutch authorities in September and October, respectively, demonstrate both that
8/43

20-17547

S/2020/1236

international cooperation is essential and that justice can be achieved in courtrooms
around the world. My Office continues to urge full cooperation with the work of the
Prosecutor General of Rwanda as he seeks to account for hundreds more fugitives
who remain at large.
Secondly, my Office continues to strengthen our direct support to national
prosecutors in the countries of the former Yugoslavia. As a result of our efforts, a
number of important complex case files have been transferred to Croatia and Serbia.
During the reporting period, we also handed over to Montenegrin authorities a
requested dossier concerning more than 15 suspects who can now be investigated for
serious crimes, including sexual violence.
Those developments present an important opportunity for the States concerned
to clearly demonstrate their commitment to full accountability, particularly with
respect to senior- and mid-level suspects who have enjoyed safe haven and impunity
up to now. My Office will continue to engage directly with our counterparts to
support further investigations and prosecutions. Diplomatic support from the
European Union and other partners will remain critical.
Lastly, I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate the importance of the
search for missing persons in the former Yugoslavia. My Office continues to work
closely with the International Committee of the Red Cross and national missing
persons authorities. We can report that our efforts have produced significant results.
Through that cooperation between international and national organizations,
just a few weeks ago a new mass grave for Kosovo Albanian victims was found at
Kizevak, Serbia, where exhumations are now under way. Similarly, in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, assistance from my Office contributed to locating four new grave sites
during the reporting period.
More than two decades after the end of the conflicts, 10,000 families are still
waiting to learn the fate of their loved ones. Accounting for all missing persons is a
humanitarian imperative.
In conclusion, my Office is pleased that courtroom proceedings have now
resumed and congratulates all Mechanism staff for making this possible despite the
COVID-19 pandemic. We are undertaking all efforts to expeditiously complete our
work and look forward to the delivery of three judgments in the first half of next year.
The search for the remaining six fugitives indicted by the ICTR continues to
be a critical priority. My Office is grateful for the strong support it receives from
some Member States, but we are deeply concerned that the lack of cooperation from
others significantly hinders our efforts. In order for that work to be successfully
completed, it is critical for the Security Council to send an unmistakable message
that Member States should treat the matter as an urgent priority and offer my Office
their full cooperation.
We are grateful for the continued support of the Council in all of our efforts.

20-175479/43

S/2020/1236

Annex 3
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Belgium to the
United Nations, Philippe Kridelka
[Original: French]
I thank Judge Carmel Agius and Prosecutor Serge Brammertz for their written
reports and enlightening briefings.
Today I would like to address three points — the efforts of the Mechanism to
discharge its important mandate in the challenging environment caused by the health
crisis; the essential cooperation between the States Members of the United Nations
and the Mechanism; and the importance of our duty to remember future generations.
First of all, I would like to underscore that Belgium remains very committed
to the mandate of the Mechanism, whose work it continues to fully support. After his
arrest in May, Félicien Kabuga’s initial appearance in The Hague in November gave
hope to the survivors and relatives of the victims of the genocide in Rwanda, who
continue to call for justice. I therefore welcome the establishment of an investigative
team within the Office of the Prosecutor to ensure that the procedural steps ahead
of a trial can be swiftly taken. Established 10 years ago by the Security Council,
the Mechanism continues to play a fundamental role in the process of reconciliation
between communities, both in Rwanda and in the countries that emerged from the
former Yugoslavia.
In that context, my country welcomes the measures taken by the Mechanism,
to the extent possible, to continue effective and efficient operations despite the
constraints associated with the coronavirus disease pandemic. We welcome the fact
that hearings in the various cases were able to resume in August thanks to the use
of video-teleconferencing and properly equipped rooms. Through those efforts,
the Mechanism meets its priority of completing ongoing judicial proceedings in a
timely and efficient manner, while taking into account the procedural safeguards
and fundamental rights of the persons under its care.
My second point concerns the effective implementation of the Mechanism’s
mandate, which relies on good cooperation with the States Members of the
United Nations. It is in this spirit that Belgium recently agreed to take over the
execution of the sentence imposed on a convicted person.
While the cooperation provided by States to the Mechanism remains
generally satisfactory, there are still exceptions. Such exceptions are unacceptable
because they are not in compliance with international obligations, such as, first and
foremost, the execution of arrest warrants. Therefore, following the decision of the
Appeals Chamber of 24 February in the Prosecutor v. Jovo Ostojić and Vjerica
Radeta contempt case, Belgium calls on Serbia to make every effort to ensure that
the two accused are arrested, placed in detention and transferred to the Mechanism
without delay.
Furthermore, it is unacceptable that requests for assistance from the Office of
the Prosecutor concerning the six fugitives from the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda remain unanswered. In that regard, I would like to recall paragraph 3 of
resolution 2529 (2020), adopted in June, which continues to urge
“all States, especially States where fugitives are suspected of being at large,
to intensify their cooperation with and render all necessary assistance to
the Mechanism”.

10/43

20-17547

S/2020/1236

Belgium supports the Prosecutor’s call for South Africa to respond decisively
and without delay to the requests for assistance addressed to it. We also call on the
other States concerned to provide all assistance required so that the fugitives can be
quickly arrested and transferred.
In conclusion, I would like to refer to the situation in the countries of the
former Yugoslavia. Although we welcome the progress made, it remains inadequate
and varies greatly from one country to another. Regional judicial cooperation has
remained marginal for years. Moreover, the denial of genocide and war crimes and
the glorification of war criminals persist, which are not only contrary to the values
and principles of the United Nations and the European Union but also undermine the
memory of the hundreds of thousands of victims of the Balkan wars. Those practices
must stop. Moreover, care must be taken to preserve for future generations the truth
about the most serious crimes committed so as to prevent their recurrence.

20-1754711/43

S/2020/1236

Annex 4
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Geng Shuang
[Original: English and Chinese]
China thanks President Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for their briefings
on the recent work of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
Under the leadership of President Agius, the staff of the Mechanism have
made every effort to overcome the impacts of the coronavirus disease. Since August,
in-court proceedings have resumed and judicial activities have been well conducted.
China commends the Mechanism for its efforts.
During the reporting period, the Mechanism officially commenced pre-trial
proceedings against Mr. Kabuga, one of the main suspects in the Rwandan genocide
of 1994. That shows the resolve of the Mechanism to combat impunity and its efforts
to advance the proceedings without delay. China commends the efforts of all parties,
especially those of the Office of the Prosecutor.
Pursuant to Security Council resolutions, the Mechanism is a small, temporary
and efficient structure, whose size and function will diminish over time. We hope
that the Mechanism will continue to carry out its work in accordance with Council
resolutions, in particular to advance and complete all pending cases based on the
projected timelines provided in the progress report. In doing so, it is important for
the Mechanism to reasonably allocate budgetary resources to guarantee the priority
of judicial activities.
China hopes that, going forward, the Mechanism will continue to improve
its work by implementing the recommendations made by the Council’s Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals and the United Nations Office of Internal
Oversight Services. We also hope that the Mechanism will work with the countries
concerned to properly resolve the relocation of acquitted and released persons.
In conclusion, I wish to take this opportunity to thank Viet Nam, Chair of the
Council’s Informal Working Group on International Tribunals, and the Office of the
Legal Affairs of the United Nations for their efforts in coordinating the Council and
the Mechanism.

12/43

20-17547

S/2020/1236

Annex 5
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Dominican Republic to
the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
We thank Judge Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for their enlightening and
detailed briefings.
We must congratulate President Agius, Prosecutor Brammertz and their
entire team for their efforts to ensure the continuity of the work of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals during these extraordinarily difficult
times. Their resilience has been crucial and outstanding, as reflected in the briefings.
We also welcome Registrar Tambadou and congratulate him on his appointment.
We trust that the Secretary-General has chosen an excellent professional whose
contributions will be of great value to the work of the Mechanism.
The Dominican Republic welcomes the considerable progress made in judicial
activities during the reporting period, in particular in the Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladić,
Prosecutor v. Stanišić and Simatović, Prosecutor v. Félicien Kabuga and Prosecutor
v. Augustin Bizimana cases. We urge the Mechanism to continue its work to meet the
deadlines for the completion of those cases. Justice for the victims of the cases being
handled by the Mechanism should not be delayed further.
The foreign policy of the Dominican Republic is based on fundamental
principles that prioritize the protection of human rights. In that regard, we note with
regret that the issue of relocating individuals who have been acquitted and released
has not been resolved. We call on the international community to cooperate with the
Mechanism and find the best solution to the situation.
In the same regard and after listening to Prosecutor Brammertz, we
underscore the importance of cooperation. As Members of the United Nations, and
in particular as members of the Security Council, we must bear in mind and honour
our obligation to cooperate with the Mechanism so that it can fulfil the mandates
given by the Council.
The reprehensible crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia and in Rwanda
continue to haunt not only the survivors and their families but everyone who knows
what happened there. Completing the work of the tribunals that have provided justice
for the thousands of victims is critical for demonstrating the Council’s commitment
to combating impunity.
As today’s meeting will be the last for the Dominican Republic with Judge
Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz, I would like to wish them all the best in the recent
extension of their mandates. We urge the other members of the Council, as well as
the incoming members, to strengthen the cooperation between the Mechanism and
States — all united by the common goal of dispensing justice.

20-1754713/43

S/2020/1236

Annex 6
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Estonia to
the United Nations, Gert Auväärt
I thank Judge Carmel Agius, President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and Prosecutor Serge Brammertz for the detailed
progress reports submitted to the Security Council and for the informative briefings
provided today.
Estonia commends the work of the Mechanism and welcomes the continuation
of its mandate, which was established by the Council 10 years ago as a small,
temporary and efficient structure. We welcome the reappointment of Mr. Serge
Brammertz as Prosecutor of the Mechanism, as well as the reappointment of 25
judges and of Judge Carmel Agius as the Mechanism’s President, along with the
appointment of Abubacarr Tambadou as Registrar.
Estonia notes with appreciation the continuation of the Mechanism’s judicial
activities and the significant progress made, despite the current extraordinary
circumstances, to advance the caseload during the reporting period, both in The
Hague and Arusha, while minimizing the possible exposure of personnel and
other individuals to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). We note that the in-court
proceedings previously postponed due to COVID-19 restrictions have resumed
in the Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladić, Prosecutor v. Stanišić and Simatović and
Prosecutor v. Turinabo et al. cases. We also note the transfer of Félicien Kabuga to
the Mechanism’s custody and the subsequent commencement of the new pre-trial
proceedings in his case.
Estonia would like to commend the President of the Mechanism for the steps
taken to ensure its supervisory responsibility with regard to detained persons,
including requiring regular updates from enforcement States on convicted persons
and detention facilities in Arusha and The Hague.
We welcome the continued efforts of the Office of the Prosecutor of the
Mechanism to build the capacity of national judiciaries for prosecuting war crimes
and its continued cooperation with the International Committee of the Red Cross,
pursuant to the memorandum of understanding. We also welcome the launch of
the new court database that houses all public judicial documents related to the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda and the Mechanism, and appreciate that it has been made available in
several languages.
International criminal justice and the fight against impunity rely on collective
efforts. While welcoming the arrest of Félicien Kabuga in May of this year, Estonia
remains concerned about the challenges that the Office of the Prosecutor of the
Mechanism continues to face in relation to cooperation with national authorities in
apprehending the remaining fugitives. The success of the Mechanism depends on
the cooperation of Member States, who bear that ultimate responsibility and have
a legal obligation to cooperate fully with the Mechanism in its effort to track and
arrest the fugitives.
Therefore, Estonia strongly urges Member States, especially States where
fugitives are suspected of being at large, to intensify their cooperation with the
Mechanism and to arrest and surrender all of the remaining fugitives.

14/43

20-17547

S/2020/1236

Annex 7
Statement by the Legal Adviser of France to the United Nations,
Diarra Dime Labille
[Original: English and French]
I thank President Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for their reports and
briefings. We welcome their reappointment under resolution 2529 (2020), which
renews the mandate of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals
for two years. We also welcome the appointment of Mr. Abubacarr Tambadou as
Registrar. We assure them of France’s full support for their efforts to combat impunity
and preserve the legacy of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.
In order to carry out all of its activities on two continents, the Mechanism
must have adequate financial resources. By contributing more than $4 million per
year, France actively plays its part. In return, it is incumbent upon the Mechanism
to continue the concerted efforts of the two Branches, at The Hague and in Arusha.
The reporting period was marked by the health crisis. However, pending
legal proceedings have moved forward, given that three important rulings — in the
Prosecutor v. Stanišić and Simatović, Prosecutor v. Turinabo et al. and Prosecutor
v. Ratko Mladić cases — could be issued as early as the end of the first half of 2021.
We welcome the adaptability demonstrated by the Mechanism‘s three organs and its
staff in order to ensure the continuity and coherence of their activities.
The trial in the Prosecutor v. Félicien Kabuga case is also expected to
begin next year. Following his arrest in France — the result of close international
cooperation — that trial will be another important moment for the victims, national
reconciliation in Rwanda and international criminal justice. We have taken note of
Mr. Kabuga’s initial appearance on 11 November at The Hague, where the accused
was temporarily transferred pending a new judicial decision. Our priority remains
ensuring that justice is served as soon as possible. We know that the Prosecutor’s
team based in Kigali is fully mobilized to move proceedings forward.
Following the confirmation of the death of Mr. Augustin Bizimana, it is of the
utmost importance that the six suspects still at large be brought before the courts.
To that end, we once again urge States to cooperate fully with the Mechanism, in
accordance with their international obligations. We regret that some partners still
refuse to do so, in spite of the numerous appeals from the Prosecutor and many
Member States, relayed in the Council.
With regard to cases referred to national jurisdictions, France reaffirms its
full mobilization to bring the Prosecutor v. Laurent Bucyibaruta case to a conclusion
within a reasonable time frame. In particular, our objective remains to ensure
that no crime of genocide will go unpunished, which has notably resulted in the
strengthening of the judicial resources devoted to the prosecution of participants in
the genocide of Tutsis in Rwanda who reside in France. The creation of the National
Anti-Terrorist Prosecutor’s Office on 1 July 2019, as a specialized prosecutor’s office
that includes responsibility for combating crimes against humanity and war crimes,
has allowed for the allocation of two additional prosecutor’s posts.
Finally, no lasting reconciliation can take place without the acknowledgement
of crimes and responsibilities. We consider unacceptable the denial of crimes and
the glorification of those who are responsible for genocide and war crimes and have
been convicted by international criminal tribunals after impartial and independent
proceedings. In a year commemorating the terrible events related to the conflicts
of the 1990s in the Western Balkans, we renew our call to all those responsible to
refrain from statements denying the crimes committed.
20-1754715/43

S/2020/1236

Annex 8
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Germany to the
United Nations, Christoph Heusgen
Germany will continue to support the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals, both politically and financially. We consider it essential for the
legacy of the institution that the Court complete its activities in good order and with
sufficient means, as has been done to date.
We commend the Court on the way forward this year. In particular, we are
delighted to see that, through creative means, the Mechanism was able to commence,
resume and conclude the in-court hearings that had previously been postponed due
to the coronavirus disease pandemic. In the light of the various challenges posed by
the pandemic, we also appreciate the efforts undertaken by the Mechanism to ensure
the health of those in its custody.
We remain deeply concerned about the denial of genocide in the situations
under the jurisdiction of the Mechanism. History is not to be twisted so that it fits
into today’s political narratives. A common understanding of the historic facts is
fundamental for much-needed reconciliation and improving neighbourly relations.
We urge political leaders to actively work on promoting reconciliation and ensuring
accountability for war crimes.
We would like to highlight once again the crucial contribution the Mechanism
makes to our common fight against impunity. We renew our congratulations to the
Office of the Prosecutor for its extraordinary work regarding the arrest of Félicien
Kabuga. The detention of Kabuga is a visible example of what can be achieved when
Member States and the Mechanism work together. Unfortunately, in some concrete
cases, cooperation with the Mechanism is not as it should be.
We would like to congratulate President Agius on the efforts made to minimize
delays caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. Thanks to those efforts, the remaining
cases originating from the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia appear to
be on track. To further minimize delays, we call on all the relevant States to respond
to requests for assistance issued by the Office of the Prosecutor in a timely manner.
We are very disappointed to hear that Serbia has decided not to implement the
arrest warrants for Jovica Stanišić and Franko Simatović. They have been indicted for
extremely serious crimes. We urge Serbia to implement the decision of the Appeals
Chamber and extradite both men to the jurisdiction of the Mechanism. Justice for
crimes of war has to be — and will be — served. That is also a major concern if a
country wants to become a member of the European Union.
In 2020 we commemorated the twenty-fifth anniversary of the genocide in
Srebrenica — a stark reminder of the essential role of the Mechanism. Despite the
constructive work conducted by the Mechanism, the issue of war crimes remains an
open wound in the Western Balkans. We note with grave concern a rise in incendiary
rhetoric and historical revisionism regarding war crimes and their perpetrators in
the region.
I have also previously highlighted the fact that, in Republika Srpska, there
is a university dormitory named after Radovan Karadžić, which is something that
has not been condemned by everyone here. I would urge the representative of Serbia
to address that and follow in the footsteps of President Vučić, who actually went
to Srebrenica and paid tribute to all of the victims. It would also be good to hear a
condemnation of the fact that Karadžić is experiencing a revival in Republika Srpska.

16/43

20-17547

S/2020/1236

In previous meetings, we heard the representative of Serbia complain that
Ratko Mladić was unwell. We looked into the matter and did not hear anything from
the International Committee of the Red Cross. Mr. Mladić is in very good health.
We are more concerned about the 8,000 dead in Srebrenica and their families, as we
should be.
On the Mechanism’s work relating to Rwanda, resolution 2529 (2020)
underscored the importance of finding a solution for the resettlement of the nine
acquitted and released persons presently residing in Arusha, who are unable, or
afraid, to return to their country of citizenship. We are encouraged to hear that
efforts to that end have been enhanced and a strategy is being prepared. Germany
urges all States called upon by the Prosecutor to implement requests made by the
Mechanism to assist in the apprehension of fugitives for whom arrest warrants have
been issued. As members of the Council, we also bear a particular responsibility.
It is not only a legal but also a moral obligation to hold accountable those who
are responsible for such horrific crimes. My plea is that the representative of South
Africa report about this meeting back home to ensure that everything is done by all
institutions, including the Ministry of the Interior, so that when Prosecutor Serge
Brammertz visits South Africa next month he will not leave empty-handed.

20-1754717/43

S/2020/1236

Annex 9
Statement by the First Secretary of Indonesia to the United Nations,
Iis Widyastuti
I would like to thank Judge Carmel Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for their
reports, as well as for their briefings today. Despite the challenges of the coronavirus
disease pandemic, my delegation is reassured of their commitment and efforts to
adapt and to ensure the continued implementation of their respective mandates. I
will focus on three issues today.
First, I will address the operational aspect of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. We are pleased to note the Mechanism’s
continued efforts, under the leadership of Judge Agius, to further enhance the
efficiency, effectiveness and transparency of its operations. It is crucially important
for the Mechanism to continue making headway in line with the recommendations
of the Office of Internal Oversight Services and resolution 2529 (2020). We are also
encouraged by the Mechanism’s efforts during this challenging time to resume its
functionality, including with regard to in-court activities and its responsibility to
supervise accused, detained and convicted persons.
Secondly, I will turn to the progress in Mechanism’s activities. Indonesia
appreciates the progress that the Mechanism has achieved, thanks to the dedication
of its President, judges, Prosecutor and all staff members in carrying out its essential
residual functions while mitigating the impact of the pandemic. We are pleased to
note that the Mechanism was able to restart its core judicial activity, which was
postponed due to the pandemic, at The Hague as well as at the Arusha Branch. We
look forward to its further achievements despite these unprecedented and difficult
times. The pandemic shall not hamper the Mechanism’s priority to conclude its
mandate in a timely and efficient manner.
That brings me to my final point, which concerns the cooperation of States.
We recall that States are required to cooperate with the Mechanism, including
by complying with orders and requests for assistance in relation to cases before
it. We note the ongoing efforts of the Prosecutor to locate and arrest the six
fugitives indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda who remain
at large. Therefore, we would like to call on relevant States to intensify cooperation
with, and render assistance to, the Mechanism, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions. Félicien Kabuga’s arrest was a success story of
cooperation between the Mechanism and Member States that needs to be replicated.
We need to make sure that no one can escape justice and, at the same time, render
justice to the victims and survivors.
As this is our very last intervention on this file, I would like to express
our delegation’s sincere appreciation to the Assistant Secretary-General for Legal
Affairs and his team for their cooperation and excellent work. We also extend our
best wishes to the Chair of the Council’s Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals, Ambassador Dinh Quy Dang, as well as his hard-working team, in steering
the Group as it moves forward.
I would like to reaffirm Indonesia’s commitment to strengthening the rule of
law and promoting justice by supporting the work of the Mechanism in order to put
an end to impunity and ensure accountability.

18/43

20-17547

S/2020/1236

Annex 10
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Niger to
the United Nations, Niandou Aougi
[Original: French]
Allow me first of all to congratulate Judge Carmel Agius and Mr. Serge
Brammertz, President and Prosecutor, respectively, of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, namely the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda and the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, for the
presentation of their detailed biannual report.
It must be said that, in addition to reflecting the will of the international
community to continue the work of the ad hoc Tribunals to advance international
criminal justice, the establishment of the Mechanism undoubtedly responds to the
need to maintain international peace and security.
By adopting resolution 2529 (2020) in June, the Security Council reaffirmed
its determination to combat impunity for serious international crimes and the need
to bring all persons indicted by the International Criminal Tribunals for Rwanda and
the former Yugoslavia to justice. To that end, Member States should provide their
full support to that commitment through good cooperation with the Mechanism, in
accordance with the principles that guided its establishment.
We further welcome the renewal by the Secretary-General of the mandate
of the President of the Mechanism, the appointment of a new Registrar and the
reappointment, via resolution 2529 (2020), of the Prosecutor, all for a period of
two years. We also wish to express our support for the actions of the President
and other senior officials taken to mitigate the impact of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic on the staff and work of the Mechanism. In that connection,
my delegation expresses its gratitude to the judges for their dedication in carrying
out their duties and continuing courtroom proceedings without hesitation despite the
COVID-19 pandemic.
My delegation also encourages the Mechanism to continue to discharge all
its responsibilities with regard to the human rights of the detained persons under
its care.
We commend the Mechanism for the progress made, including on the
amendment of protective measures and monitoring the enforcement of sentences, the
protection of victims and witnesses, the search for the remaining fugitives indicted by
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and assistance provided to national
jurisdictions, as well as the Mechanism’s own internal management measures.
In conclusion, we reiterate our appreciation of all the staff of the Office of
Internal Oversight Services and encourage them to take steps to implement the
recommendations of the Informal Working Group on International Tribunals, as set
out in resolution 2529 (2020).

20-1754719/43

S/2020/1236

Annex 11
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Gennady Kuzmin
[Original: Russian]
At the outset, allow me to welcome President Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz.
We have closely studied their reports; however, today we wish to address the issues
that are not reflected in the reports, rather than those that are.
The status of the province of Kosovo has not changed since the adoption of
resolution 1244 (1999); however, the reports lack any mention of that fact when
referring to Kosovo. We therefore request that such a reference be added and an
official corrigendum to the report be issued.
Moving on, in resolution 2529 (2020) the Security Council indicated the
need to uphold the rights of persons held in custody, including the right to medical
attention. Nevertheless, the report fails to inform us on how those rights are
being implemented.
The health of General Ratko Mladić is of particular concern. We have learned
from media reports and statements by Serbian representatives that Mladić’s defence
lawyers and family members are literally fighting for his life. The Mechanism’s
leadership and judges are rejecting all their petitions, claiming that they do not
fall within the interests of justice, thereby impeding access to medical records and
ignoring medical conclusions provided by independent doctors. Meanwhile, Ratko.
Mladić himself has no opportunity to implement his right to consult with a doctor of
his choice under rule 48 of the rules of detention.
That is not only a matter of the health of an accused individual in custody.
Rather, the question is: how long can the Security Council turn a blind eye to the
use of inhumane methods of treatment by one of its subsidiary bodies? Is the aim
to deliver a definitive guilty verdict against yet another Serb by all possible means,
regardless of human rights standards and considerations of humanity?
Unfortunately, almost all of the verdicts pronounced by the predecessor of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals — the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) — and for that matter by the Mechanism
itself, were predetermined in advance. Let us preserve at least a shred of dignity and
not breach the rights of detainees. We continue to hear reassurances that Mr. Mladić
has been provided with all the necessary medical attention and health care and that
he is supposedly capable of appearing in court. If that is the case, then what is the
problem with having him undergo an independent medical examination before those
court sessions are scheduled?
Russia has continuously advocated for expediting legal proceedings, but not
at any cost. In that context, Judge Nyambe provided a very telling dissenting opinion
regarding the decision of the Appeals Chamber dated 14 August. Judge Nyambe stated:
“I would thus vacate the Appeal Hearing as scheduled, and adjourn the
proceedings such that an international team of medical professional expert
doctors can come to The Hague to examine Mr. Mladić at a medical facility
for such amount of time and manner as is needed to reach a professional
conclusion as to his medical and mental state so as to be able to generate
a report and participate in a Competency Review Hearing to determine his
ability to meaningfully participate in further legal proceedings, and give an
assessment of his medical and mental state for purposes of establishing his
fitness and capacity for legal proceedings.”
20/43

20-17547

S/2020/1236

We therefore strongly urge the Mechanism’s leadership to grant Mr. Mladić
access to independent doctors of his own choosing in order to undergo a complete
medical screening and examination, including an assessment of whether he retains
his cognitive functions.
The Mechanism’s predecessor, the ICTY, has a very poor reputation when it
comes to observing the rights and upholding the health status of accused and detained
Serbs, 12 of whom died either during their trials or while serving their sentences. We
hope that the Mechanism will not inherit the cruel practices of the ICTY.

20-1754721/43

S/2020/1236

Annex 12
Statement by the Counsellor of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to
the United Nations, Diani Jimesha Prince
I thank Judge Agius, President of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals, and Prosecutor Brammertz for their comprehensive briefings.
We congratulate Judge Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz on their reappointments. We
also congratulate Mr. Abubacarr Tambadou on his appointment as the Mechanism’s
new Registrar.
As we approach the tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1966 (2010),
which established the Mechanism, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reaffirms its
unwavering support for that important pillar of the international criminal justice
system. The critical role that the Mechanism continues to play in the fight against
impunity for mass atrocity crimes and its contribution to reconciliation is irrefutable.
The Mechanism has also substantially developed jurisprudence and continues its
effective and efficient work in other practical aspects, such as witness support and
protection and multifaceted assistance to Member States.
We continue to applaud the Mechanism’s commitment to maintaining
operational continuity while ensuring the health and safety of staff, witnesses and
persons in detention, despite the challenges resulting from the coronavirus disease
pandemic. We are pleased to note that courtroom proceedings have resumed, with
the implementation of special arrangements, and we commend the Mechanism’s use
of virtual processes in its adjusted working methods.
The Mechanism’s success is greatly dependent on the full cooperation of
Member States, without which the Mechanism cannot achieve the Security Council’s
vision of being a small, temporary and efficient structure. The arrest of Félicien
Kabuga in May after 23 years as a fugitive is a testament to the effectiveness of
international cooperation, which is the only path towards the tracking, apprehension
and prosecution of the remaining six fugitives of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda.
International cooperation also enables the search for missing persons and the
enforcement of judgments, as well as assisting with witness protection and relocation.
On the point of witness relocation, there remains the unfortunately unresolved matter
of those individuals who have been acquitted and released and are currently residing
in Arusha, Tanzania. It is our hope that a sustainable solution will swiftly be found,
and we welcome the Registrar’s proactive efforts in that regard.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines emphatically denounces all forms of genocide
denial and the glorification of convicted war criminals. Genocide denial promotes
dangerous ideologies, impedes the fight against impunity and hinders reconciliation.
It further delegitimizes, and shows wanton disregard for the suffering of, the victims
of such horrendous crimes, the facts of which have been incontrovertibly determined.
The recognition, education and remembrance of painful periods in history are critical
in preventing the re-emergence of hateful rhetoric and ensuring that such crimes are
never repeated.
The Mechanism continues to effectively fulfil its obligation to uphold the
principles of international law, even in the face of a global health crisis. However, that
is a shared responsibility, and we urge Member States to intensify their cooperation
with the Mechanism. We must remain committed to the pursuit of international
justice and the protection and strengthening of the rule of law.

22/43

20-17547

S/2020/1236

Annex 13
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of South Africa
to the United Nations, Xolisa Mabhongo
At the outset, I wish to thank President Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for
their comprehensive reports and their presentations to the Security Council today. We
congratulate them on their reappointment. South Africa believes that the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals is carrying out commendable work, and
we note the significant efforts to continuously improve its functioning.
As pointed out in the President’s report (see S/2020/763), the coronavirus
disease has had a far-reaching impact on the Mechanism’s operations. In that respect,
the Mechanism and its staff are to be commended for their commitment to ensuring
that it remains operational during these difficult times.
We acknowledge the noteworthy coordination between the Prosecution
and certain States that resulted in the arrest of Félicien Kabuga in France. That
underscores the importance of international cooperation to prevent suspects from
evading arrest.
While we have encountered a number of challenges in providing assistance to
the Mechanism, we wish to underscore that South Africa is deeply committed to its
international obligations in that regard and stands ready to fulfil them.
We have taken note of the remarks by the Prosecutor this afternoon. We assure
Council members that the recommendations made by the Prosecutor will receive the
necessary attention by our Government.
Regarding the most recent interaction between the Prosecutor and South
Africa, I can report that the matter is being escalated to the highest authorities. A
visit by the Prosecutor to South Africa will be welcome and will be in line with the
escalation of that matter. Therefore, South Africa will continue to cooperate with
the Prosecutor. We reaffirm our determination to continue all efforts to trace and
surrender the fugitives from justice.

20-1754723/43

S/2020/1236

Annex 14
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the
United Nations, Tarek Ladeb
I thank President Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for their briefings and
for the eighteenth progress report (see S/2020/763) of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
As the Mechanism is soon to mark the tenth anniversary of its creation, it is
worth recalling the significant contribution it has made to accountability for core
international crimes. The Mechanism was not created as simply an annex of the ad
hoc International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia. It is a successor court vested with different residual
functions and ad hoc functions, namely, the tracing of remaining ICTR fugitives,
hearing remaining appeals, holding retrials and conducting contempt cases.
The work of the Mechanism remains all the more pertinent amid the resurgence
of pernicious ideologies that deny genocide and glorify convicted war criminals. As
has often been argued, behaviours change in the shadow of the court. It is therefore
critical that the Mechanism continue to cast that shadow by bringing suspects to trial
so as to deter would-be perpetrators and counter revisionist narratives.
To that end, the Mechanism must continue to rely on the full and swift
cooperation of States and enjoy the support of the Security Council so that the six
remaining suspects currently at large, including major fugitive Protais Mpiranya, are
not shielded from justice.
Tunisia appreciates continued efforts by the principals of the Mechanism,
despite the impact of the coronavirus disease, to bring more effectiveness and
efficiency to the administration and operation of the Mechanism, guided by the
Security Council’s vision of it as a small, temporary and efficient institution, the
functions and size of which will diminish over time.
We recall the recent significant developments following the transfer of
suspect Félicien Kabuga to, and his initial appearance before, the Mechanism in
The Hague, as well as the judicial closing of the Augustin Bizimana case. We salute
Serge Brammertz’s prosecutorial efforts, which enabled that breakthrough in the
judicial caseload of the Mechanism.
We take note that a final decision as to the location of Félicien Kabuga’s trial
remains to be made. We are confident that the Mechanism will be able to identify
appropriate ways that best serve the effectiveness and fairness of its trials, while
taking into consideration questions and concerns that may arise with regard to the
health and overall detention conditions of the suspects.
We commend the flexible measures and working arrangements undertaken by
the Mechanism to ensure both physical and virtual business continuity across duty
stations, allowing it to adapt to the pandemic as it evolves while closely monitoring
the safety of staff and non-staff personnel. We express satisfaction at the resumption
of the in-court hearings that were previously affected by the pandemic and take note
of the reasonably adjusted projections for the completion of the remaining trials and
appeals. We stress the importance of adhering to the newly anticipated timelines as
closely as possible so as to maintain the requisite focus on the expeditiousness of the
Mechanism’s core mandated activities.
Finally, identifying a permanent solution to the issue of persons who were
acquitted or released by the ICTR and who currently reside in a safe house in Arusha
remains an unresolved and weighty issue. We recall the stipulations of resolution 2529
24/43

20-17547

S/2020/1236

(2020) on the importance of finding expeditious and durable solutions, including as
part of a reconciliation process, which would help further downsize the work of the
Mechanism and provide a sustainable outlook for the persons concerned.

20-1754725/43

S/2020/1236

Annex 15
Statement by the Legal Counsellor and Deputy Legal Adviser of
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations, Amy Townsend
I would like to start by thanking the President, His Honour Judge Carmel
Agius, and Prosecutor Brammertz for their briefings to the Security Council today,
and we welcome their reappointment to the Mechanism.
On this day 25 years ago, the Dayton Peace Agreement was signed in Paris.
Today we remember the victims of that bitter conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and celebrate 25 years since its end. The International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), and now the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, has brought justice to the victims and tirelessly pursued those responsible
for this dark chapter in European history.
I would like to reiterate the United Kingdom’s unwavering commitment to the
Mechanism and reaffirm our willingness to assist it wherever possible in fulfilling
its mandate and implementing its vision of being a small, temporary and effective
organization. We would like to take this opportunity to praise the work undertaken
by the Mechanism and the results that have been achieved so far.
Throughout this reporting period, the coronavirus disease continued to affect
the entire world. We would like to commend the Mechanism on its valiant efforts
to continue international justice even in the face of the challenges of the pandemic.
While there are some delays to cases, the efforts of the Mechanism have ensured that
many of them will be concluded in first half of 2021. The Mechanism has taken a
huge step in showing that impunity is not and will not be allowed to prevail.
We welcome the Mechanism’s increased presence within Rwanda, which fully
displays its commitment to continuing its work at full speed despite the challenging
operational environment. We also welcome the renewed drive by the Mechanism to
build upon the success of the arrest of Félicien Kabuga in order to bring the remaining
alleged génocidaires to justice. We are pleased to see that legal proceedings against
Kabuga are being taken forward, working closely with the Government of Rwanda.
We would like to praise the Mechanism as a force for good. Its work is a reminder
of how international justice can be achieved through international collaboration. We
call on all Member States to assist the Mechanism; it is our collective responsibility
to seek justice for victims, and our obligation under the Charter of the United Nations
to cooperate with the Mechanism.
We commend the Mechanism’s efforts to progress and minimize delays in the
Mladić and Stanišić & Simatović cases. We note the progress made between countries
of the Balkans region in the transfer of cases. However, regional judicial cooperation
in the Western Balkans remains inadequate, which has direct implications for
achieving justice for victims. Furthermore, we echo the Prosecutor’s call to countries
in the former Yugoslavia to register criminal convictions entered by the ICTY and
the Mechanism into domestic criminal records, honouring the commitments that
they made when they signed the joint declaration on war crimes at the 2018 London
Western Balkans Summit and committed themselves to
“recognizing and respecting verdicts from international and domestic courts
relating to war crimes and other atrocity crimes”.
The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned at the fact that the glorification
of war criminals and denial continues. It is reprehensible that individuals and
groups continue to deny those events and in some cases glorify the perpetrators and
26/43

20-17547

S/2020/1236

instigators of those heinous acts. The United Kingdom will continue to condemn
denial and glorification in all its forms. The road to reconciliation is difficult, but we
must accept the truth of the past to move forward.
The year 2020 has been significant for us all, but it has also been a year that
we have remembered. Earlier this year we marked one of the gravest anniversaries
in European history, 25 years on from the Srebrenica genocide. Today we mark
the anniversary of the end of the conflicts in Bosnia and Herzegovina. And it was
only last year that we commemorated the twenty-fifth anniversary of the events in
Rwanda. After 25 years, we want those who suffered as a result of these events to
know that they remain at the forefront of our thoughts: the survivors, the victims
and those still missing and their families remain a priority for the United Kingdom.
As time moves on, we must all recommit to ensuring that impunity does
not prevail. There is no time for complacency. There is still more work to be done
by the Mechanism in relation to the awful events that took place in Rwanda and
the territories of the former Yugoslavia, and States must continue to support it in
that work.

20-1754727/43

S/2020/1236

Annex 16
Statement by the Minister Counselor for Legal Affairs of the United
States of America to the United Nations, Mark Simonoff
I thank President Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for their briefings.
We are grateful for their hard work and for the unwavering commitment of the
judges, attorneys and staff in Arusha and The Hague, as well as in field offices in
Kigali and Sarajevo, in their pursuit of justice for the victims in Rwanda and the
former Yugoslavia.
We are pleased that Prosecutor Brammertz and President Agius have been
reappointed to their positions and that Abubacarr Tambadou has been appointed as
the new Registrar. Mr. Tambadou had an impressive record as Attorney General of
the Gambia, and we understand that he is already making a valuable contribution to
the Mechanism’s work. We also welcome Pierre St. Hilaire, the new head of fugitive
tracking, whose work we have also been impressed with.
We are pleased to hear that the Mechanism was able to make progress on
its judicial caseload despite the ongoing coronavirus disease pandemic, which
continues to affect us every day. The progress made since the most recent briefing
(see S/2020/527) is commendable given the circumstances.
We are impressed to hear about the steps taken to allow the Mechanism’s
work to continue in both its Branches and are glad that the Mechanism is able to hold
hearings in a way that does not jeopardize the health and safety of those involved.
We thank President Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for those efforts and for their
commitment to justice in these extraordinary times.
After the historic arrest of Rwandan businessman Félicien Kabuga, who
was indicted for genocide, crimes against humanity and other serious violations of
international humanitarian law, it is good to hear that he has successfully passed into
the Mechanism’s custody and that pre-trial proceedings have begun.
These developments, which are taking place after Kabuga spent 26 years at
large, demonstrates the continued relevance and impact of the Mechanism and its
work. We support its efforts to ensure that justice is meted out for Kabuga’s alleged
role in the horrific acts perpetrated in Rwanda.
We will continue to support the Mechanism’s efforts to apprehend the
remaining six Rwandans still wanted for their roles in the 1994 genocide. The United
States continues to offer rewards of up to $5 million for information that leads to the
arrest, transfer or conviction of any of the remaining fugitives. We strongly urge all
countries to cooperate fully with the Mechanism and bring these people, wanted for
some of the worst crimes in history, to justice.
We further congratulate the court for successfully holding the appeal hearing
for Ratko Mladić. As we all know, General Mladić served as the commander of
the Bosnian Serb Army during the genocide of Bosnian Muslim men and boys in
Srebrenica, and his forces raped women and girls, shelled and sniped the civilian
population of Sarajevo and brutalized Muslim and Croat prisoners — all with
the horrifying objective of permanently removing Bosnian Muslims and Bosnian
Croats from Bosnian Serb-claimed territory. We welcome the Mechanism’s work to
adjudicate General Mladić’s responsibility for grave crimes committed during the
war and await the results of the Mechanism’s judgment as soon as possible.
Similarly, we commend the Mechanism’s progress on the retrial of Jovica
Stanišić and Franko Simatović on charges of crimes against humanity and war

28/43

20-17547

S/2020/1236

crimes for their alleged roles in the unlawful, forcible removal of non-Serbs from
Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina.
With regard to the contempt proceedings in the Turinabo and Jojić and Radeta
cases, we are relieved that trial proceedings were finally able to commence, despite
attempts to interfere with witnesses and efforts to undermine court proceedings.
We also commend the Mechanism’s efforts to support national judicial efforts,
from the Balkans to Rwanda. Those proceedings remain vital to ensuring that the
pursuit of justice will not end even as prosecutions at the Mechanism conclude. We
note Rwanda’s progress in continuing to try cases related to the genocide and urge
Balkan States to improve their cooperation across national systems.
We remain extremely concerned about the Mechanism’s reporting about
genocide denial, the non-acceptance of historical facts and the glorification of war
criminals. We must do more to fight such rhetoric, particularly in the Balkans, and
we condemn efforts by political leaders to distort historical facts and to use their
platforms to increase divisions and exacerbate tensions.
We welcome the Mechanism’s recent progress in increasing transparency and
education regarding its work, including the launch of the unified judicial database
in September, additional workshops for educators and the public streaming of court
sessions. Those efforts are a valuable contribution to establishing a public record of
the crimes committed.
We must recommit to protecting civilians during armed conflict and holding
those who violate international humanitarian law accountable. The Mechanism has
been an important part of this work, and we continue to support its efforts on behalf
of victims.

20-1754729/43

S/2020/1236

Annex 17
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
I thank Judge Carmel Agius, President of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, and Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of the Mechanism,
for presenting their seventeenth reports. I take this opportunity to congratulate the
President and the Prosecutor on their reappointment by the Secretary-General and
the Security Council, respectively. I also congratulate Mr. Abubacarr Tambadou on
his appointment as the Registrar of the Mechanism.
I welcome the representatives of Serbia, Rwanda, Croatia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina to today’s meeting.
We take note of the progress made in the judicial activities of the Mechanism
during the reporting period, especially as compared with the previous one. Most
notably, under the leadership of Judge Agius, the Mechanism was able to resume
in-court hearings and implemented rigorous measures to maintain the health and
safety of its staff, witnesses and detainees and other persons under the supervision
of the Mechanism.
The case of Mr. Félicien Kabuga was added to its docket following his arrest,
sending a strong message that those who are alleged to have committed grave crimes
cannot evade justice.
The launching of the Mechanism’s unified judicial database to bring together
all public records of the ad hoc Tribunals, and the Mechanism is expected to facilitate
public access to their jurisprudence and aid research, study and greater transparency.
We welcome the President’s determination and priorities to implement
resolution 2529 (2020), including by providing a clear projection of timelines for the
completion of its judicial activities and other residual functions, strengthening close
collaboration among the main organs of the Mechanism and fostering high staff
morale and performance.
Looking forward, we encourage the Mechanism to continue implementing
meaningful steps to adhere to its schedule of completion, realizing the
Security Council’s vision of the Mechanism as a
“small, temporary and efficient structure, whose functions and size will
diminish over time”.
We cannot overemphasize the importance of a strong relationship and
cooperation between the Mechanism and concerned States. We take note of the
close cooperation between the Mechanism and enforcement States in monitoring the
situation of the coronavirus disease that might affect prisoners serving sentences.
We encourage considerations to give enforcing States greater responsibility in
supervising the enforcement of sentences after the Mechanism ceases to exist.
It is the State that bears the primary responsibility for fighting and preventing
heinous crimes. Further efforts should be made in building national capacity and
assisting States to exercise their responsibility. We therefore welcome the assistance
provided by the Office of the Prosecutor to national authorities with regard to the
cases that are referred to them.
We acknowledge the challenges that the Mechanism faces with regard to
the search for remaining fugitives and the relocation of acquitted and released
persons. Forging stronger direct communication with the relevant States to identify
challenges that might hinder cooperation and to work out durable solutions must be
30/43

20-17547

S/2020/1236

a high priority for the Mechanism. We encourage the relevant States to show their
support for the Mechanism by stepping up cooperation and assisting the Mechanism
where needed.
In conclusion, Viet Nam reiterates its firm commitment to the work of the
Security Council in upholding the Charter of the United Nations and international
law in the maintenance of international peace and security.

20-1754731/43

S/2020/1236

Annex 18
Statement by the Assistant Minister of Justice of Serbia,
Čedomir Backović
I thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to speak to the
Security Council on Serbia’s behalf.
This is the second time this year that we are considering the regular sixmonthly reports of the President and the Prosecutor of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals in an open video-teleconference. This is strong
evidence of the great risk of the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), and I
thank the President and the Prosecutor for their efforts to acquaint us with the work
of the Mechanism in these extraordinary circumstances.
We in Serbia adjusted to these circumstances, too, and advised the Mechanism
immediately after the outbreak of the pandemic that we were going to cooperate and
continue with the supervision of persons on parole under the conditions specified
in the decisions of its Trial Chambers. To that end, the question of communication
limitations has been resolved, and Serbia considers its cooperation with the
Mechanism one of its key obligations, the fulfilment of which is among its priorities.
Serbia’s results in this field stand out when compared to those of the other
countries of the region, in respect of cooperation with both the Mechanism and the
domestic judiciary. Let me point out that Serbia has enabled unrestricted access by
the Office of the Prosecutor of the Mechanism to all evidence, documents, archives
and witnesses, and that cooperation with those organs is proceeding smoothly. All
the requests have been attended to, and only those of more recent date are under
consideration. Replies are forwarded to the Office of the Prosecutor, the Trial
Chambers and the secretariat of the Mechanism, while witnesses are exempted from
the obligation to keep State, official and/or military secrets on a regular basis. With
regard to the remaining cases, first-instance proceedings are currently under way
in the retrials of Franko Simatović and Jovica Stanišić and in the appeal case of
Ratko Mladić.
Serbia has aligned its laws with the relevant standards, making cooperation
possible and exception-free, including in matters recognized by the Security Council
as serious international crimes under the statute of the Mechanism. My country’s
commitment to combating impunity is also reflected in the number and rank of
the accused persons whom it surrendered to the Tribunal. It has been our duty to
prosecute those responsible regardless of the national, ethnic or religious status of
the perpetrators or the victims. The persons surrendered include the President of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, a President of Serbia, a Federal Deputy Prime
Minister, a Deputy Prime Minister of Serbia, three former Chiefs of the General Staff
of the Army of Yugoslavia, a former Head of the State Security Agency and many
army and police generals. That was not requested of any other State that emerged
from the former Yugoslavia, even though the reasons were many. What there was
not much of, to be exact, was political will. Now, is the non-selective cooperation
of my country sufficiently appreciated? That is a call that each one of those present
here must make.
With respect to the request to Serbia to surrender Vjerica Radeta and
Petar Jojić for obstruction of justice, let me bring to the Council’s attention once
again the fact that an independent Serbian court rejected the request by a legally
valid — final — decision.
The independence of the judiciary is one of the basic principles of a democratic
society. Serbia is such a society, and there is no way in which that decision could
32/43

20-17547

S/2020/1236

have been influenced. It is instructive, though, that the decision was brought in
accordance with article 1 of the statute of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, on “Competence of the International Tribunal”, which reads:
“The International Tribunal shall have the power to prosecute persons
responsible for serious violations of international humanitarian law committed
in the territory of the former Yugoslavia since 1991 in accordance with the
provisions of the present Statute.”
Accordingly, it is evident that obstruction of justice does not belong under “serious
violations of international humanitarian law”.
The extension of the operating period of the Mechanism until June 2022 brings
into focus the issue of the consideration of those cases that remain unresolved. After
all, the Mechanism’s mission is not only to end the remaining cases but also to
address all questions still in dispute. My country will continue to insist that all key
issues unaddressed in its cooperation with the Mechanism be resolved.
In resolution 2422 (2018), the Mechanism is encouraged to consider a
conditional regime of early release. The latest report informs us that the Office of the
Prosecutor is seriously concerned over the fact that the vast majority of the persons
convicted have been unconditionally released after serving only two thirds of their
sentences. Let me reiterate the position of my country in that regard: the “concern”
is in fact a call for introducing unjustified changes into the work of the Mechanism.
The institution of conditional release is a legal achievement of civilized
society. The previous Presidents of the Tribunal and the Mechanism decided this
matter without interference by the Office of the Prosecutor. Of course, the President
has the right to consult whomever he may deem relevant. Yet the interference by the
Office in the sense of requesting changes in the Mechanism’s Rules of Procedure and
Evidence is unacceptable.
This is all happening at a time when several Serbian citizens have made
requests for early release after having served two thirds of their sentences. So far, a
reply has been received to only one of those requests, and it has been rejected. Others
are still waiting for a reply. Such important decisions related to human rights and
the destiny of the convicted persons and, by extension, of their families must not be
trated as a game of three-card monte. The completion of the work of the Mechanism
and its budget are technical problems, not an excuse for sluggishness on its part. In
legal systems all over the world, the “silence of the administration” is perceived as a
procedural-legal institution concerning untimely decision-making, that is, failure to
institute an act that is bound to produce multiple legal consequences.
The personal position of President Agius of non-belief in the rehabilitation of
persons convicted by the Tribunal does not rest on the teachings of penology, yet it
does end up producing consequences. In my opinion, no judge, even the President of
the International Residual Mechanism, should have such liberty in decision-making.
His only control mechanism is the founder of the Mechanism, the Security Council,
and it must act.
Serbia has done its best to reply quickly and effectively to the request for
expression of interest in connection with early release. Under the newly introduced
practice, the President of the Mechanism contacts the country to which a convicted
person is to return, and in March, May and November 2020 Serbia received
three requests for Radivoje Đorđević, Sreten Lukić and Vlastimir Đorđević. It
replied instantly.
In view of the failure of the competent organs of the Mechanism to provide
answers regarding the conditional regime of early release, let me point out once
20-1754733/43

S/2020/1236

again the importance of Serbia’s initiative launched in 2009 related to serving
sentences imposed on its citizens by the Tribunal in Serbia. Notwithstanding the
convincing arguments that we have continually made to highlight the importance
of the initiative, we have to date received no reply from the Security Council. The
following are some of the arguments.
The armed conflicts on the territory of the former Socialist Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia ended more than two decades ago; the opinion of the SecretaryGeneral contained in paragraph 121 of the report (S/25704) adopted along with the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) statute on 3 May 1993 to
the effect that convicted persons should serve sentences outside of the territory of
the former Yugoslavia was a reasonable position at the time when the territory was
engulfed in armed conflict; today, though, that position is anachronistic and, in the
light of the manner in which sentences are enforced, generates harmful consequences
both for the convicted persons and their families.
In addition, Serbia is a today democratically developed country and a candidate
for European Union (EU) membership; its system of sentence enforcement is aligned
with international standards in the area and is sometimes more progressive than
those in some EU member States.
Many of Serbia’s penitentiaries were built recently and are suitable for the
enforcement of the sentences imposed for war crime offences, while the country
has the legal basis for the enforcement of the sentences imposed for the criminal
offences laid down in the statute of the Mechanism.
Serbia’s Government has agreed to have the organs designated by the Tribunal
or the Mechanism carry out supervision of the enforcement of sentences.
The importance of the initiative is particularly relevant now in the light of
recent developments. Under Polish law, for instance, Sreten Lukić, sentenced by the
Tribunal, will have completed two thirds of his sentence by January, and the Polish
authorities intend to transfer him immediately upon that completion to some other
country to continue to serve the rest of the sentence or to return him temporarily
to the United Nations Detention Unit (UNDU) in Scheveningen. Is it not only too
obvious that it would be in everybody’s best interest to transfer him to serve the rest
of his sentence in Serbia?
A person who has fulfilled the conditions for an early release, Sreten Lukić is
being additionally punished by the above-mentioned procedural obstacles and a long
wait for a reply to his request. In view of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, his transfer
to another prison or the Scheveningen UNDU without the possibility to establish
contact with his family would be tantamount to additional, inappropriate punishment.
Once again, Serbia is ready to take up the obligation, as well as the
responsibility, in this and in all other cases, for the enforcement of sentences and is
agreed to have relevant supervision. The competent Serbian institutions are ready to
provide clear guarantees that convicted persons will not be released early short of a
decision by the Mechanism.
Another point is worth mentioning. Unfortunately, the treatment of persons
serving sentences imposed by the Tribunal varies from country to country. Neither
the Tribunal nor the Mechanism has managed to set general standards that would be
respected by all. Instead, each country in which the convicted persons serve their
sentences upholds its own principles. Consequently, the treatment is significantly
better in developed countries, as they attach greater importance to resocialization
and their higher standards are reflected in all aspects of life, including the conditions
under which the sentences are served.
34/43

20-17547

S/2020/1236

I would like once again to bring to the Council’s attention the failure to heed
the provisions of the Updated Statute of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia of September 2009. Paragraph 1 of its article 24, on penalties, states:
“The penalty imposed by the Trial Chamber shall be limited to
imprisonment. In determining the terms of imprisonment, the Trial Chamber
shall have recourse to the general practice regarding prison sentences in the
courts of the former Yugoslavia.”
The Updated Statute is widely available on the Tribunal’s website.
Nevertheless, the Tribunal and the Mechanism imposed life sentences on the Serbian
citizens Stanislav Galić, Ljubiša Beara, Vujadin Popović and Zdravko Tolimir and
a first-instance life sentence on Ratko Mladić. Life sentences were also imposed on
Milan Lukić and Radovan Karadžić, persons of Serbian nationality but not Serbian
citizens. At that time, Serbia provided for a sentence of up to 40 years in prison for
the most serious crimes. The only conclusion to be drawn from this punishment
policy is that the Tribunal imposed the said sentences contrary to its own statute.
No mechanism is provided for the appeals procedure. The decisions made by the
Tribunal contrary to its founding act resulted in far-reaching consequences, that
is, sentences of many years imposed without recourse to legal remedy and absent
any instruction in that regard. Some of the persons on whom life sentences were
imposed — Tolimir and Beara — died while serving the sentences, which makes
the need for the resolution of this legal nonsense even more apparent, all the more
so now since the imposition of the first-instance sentences on Franko Simatović and
Jovica Stanišić and the second-instance sentence on Ratko Mladić is expected to
take place in May 2021.
Another issue of exceptional importance to my country is the fate of the
Tribunal’s archives. We submitted a large number of documents to the Office of the
ICTY Prosecutor, the defence teams and the ICTY Trial Chambers. We believe that
the documents submitted to the Prosecutor of the Tribunal, and subsequently the
Mechanism, and not used as evidence in the proceedings should be returned to the
authorities that submitted it. Our belief is predicated on the fact that the proceedings
have been completed and that Serbia will not destroy the documents, will keep them
in a proper way and will fully respect the standards of document safekeeping and use.
No concrete reply has yet been received to that request. The officials of the
Mechanism continue to ignore our proposals. The return of the documents is of
paramount importance not only because of the responsibility that we all have for
documenting the events that took place in the former Yugoslavia in the 1990s, but
also because of the enormous amount of material and the need to enlist the help
and assistance of many Serbian institutions. It is not a simple task, and it has been
continually postponed pending the completion of the Mechanism’s work. The issue
of the ICTY Information Centre in Serbia and the legacy of the Tribunal should not
in any way be confused with the return of the documents.
A standard part of the six-monthly reports, including this one, deals with the
denial and glorification of war crimes. In each report mention is made of public
appearances by persons, sometimes expressly named, who have served sentences
imposed by the Tribunal. It is not clear why. The job of the Office of the ICTY
Prosecutor is completed once a judgment is handed down. After they serve their
sentences, those persons cannot be further sanctioned on any basis or denied a
personal or civil right. The position of the Office on the denial and glorification
of war crimes is therefore irrelevant and selective, just as it is replete with political
messages, which is well beyond the bounds of its competence.

20-1754735/43

S/2020/1236

The importance of regional cooperation in the field of war crimes is essential
for prosecuting all suspects effectively, irrespective of the country in which they
reside. The international legal framework, namely, the international agreement on
cooperation in criminal matters, has long been amended by memorandums, bilateral
agreements and protocols among the Ministries of Justice and the Prosecutor’s
Offices of the countries of the region.
Between May and November, the Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and
Herzegovina submitted to the Office of the War Crimes Prosecutor of the Republic
of Serbia 27 requests for assistance, 11 of which were responded to, while 16 are still
being considered. In the same period, the Office of the War Crimes Prosecutor of the
Republic of Serbia submitted 67 requests to the Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, 21 of which were responded to, while responses to 46 are still awaited.
Between May and November, the Office of the War Crimes Prosecutor of the
Republic of Serbia submitted to the State Attorney’s Office of the Republic of Croatia
55 requests for assistance, nine of which were responded to, while no response has
been received for any of the other 46 such requests. The State Attorney’s Office of
the Republic of Croatia submitted to the Office of the War Crimes Prosecutor of the
Republic of Serbia 12 requests for assistance, seven of which were responded to,
while five are still being considered.
In that connection, mention should be made that, after the Regional
Prosecutors’ Conference held in Belgrade in 2019, the representative of the State
Attorney’s Office of the Republic of Croatia presented in her letter of 2 October 2019
the position of her Office that its prosecutors acting in matters of war crimes should
be exempted from regional training courses carried out jointly with the Prosecutor’s
Offices of other countries. She said that she was guided by the fact that Croatia is
an EU member State and a signatory party to the conventions implemented under
its criminal legislation and that, in view of the fact that its legislative solutions are
different, its prosecutors need a different training. She also invoked a statement
of the Mechanism to the effect that it would help regional Prosecutor’s Offices of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro and Serbia to strengthen their capacities. The
State Attorney’s Office of the Republic of Croatia is left out, which, in her opinion,
is a further indication that Croatian prosecutors should be exempted from regional
training courses.
The Office of the War Crimes Prosecutor of the Republic of Serbia remains
committed to strengthening cooperation with the Mechanism, which is one of the
basic activities it engages in under the strategic documents in force in Serbia — the
National Strategy for the Prosecution of War Crimes and the prosecutorial strategy,
as well as the Chapter 23 action plan. The cooperation was very extensive in the
reporting period, and a number of working meetings were held, including conference
calls due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The most recent meeting was held at the level
of Chief Prosecutors in October and focused on category II matters, which had
also been the subject of discussion at the regional conference in Sarajevo in 2019.
The Office took over the prosecution of a category II case, while the receipt of
unredacted statements from the Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina is
awaited following the changes in protection measures.
Cooperation with the Mechanism continues through joint projects. One
such project was launched last November with the participation of a number of
representatives from the Office of the War Crimes Prosecutor and the Mechanism
and the inclusion of a thorough analysis of category II cases, assistance requests,
regional cooperation, the cases in which evidence is ceded, documents, information
and the cases in which witness testimonies are ensured.

36/43

20-17547

S/2020/1236

Let me point out that the Office was very active in the period from May to
November and issued three indictments, taken over from the prosecution agencies of
Bosnia and Herzegovina within the framework of regional cooperation. Two of the
indictments refer to the commission of offences that accounted for a large number of
casualties, while one was issued in a complex case with a large number of offences
and casualties in which a high-ranking person was indicted. Furthermore, another
indictment was issued last July, but it was dismissed due to insufficient evidence.
The prosecution is now expected to come back with stronger evidence. Five more
cases are to be taken over as soon as complete evidence is received from regional
prosecution agencies. In one case a decision of the Mechanism is awaited following
a request to change protection measures. The main trial is ongoing before firstinstance courts in 15 cases against 37 persons, and three convictions were handed
down under the indictments issued by the Office in the same period.
Fifty-four persons are currently being investigated by the Office of the War
Crimes Prosecutor of the Republic of Serbia in eight cases. Two investigations
were initiated in the period from May to November, and the others date back to the
previous period. The investigation of unknown perpetrators was initiated in 11 cases.
The investigation of 134 persons in 30 cases has been ceased, mainly because the
defendants are at large and their whereabouts are unknown.
One of the priorities in the work of the Office is a solution to the issue of the
large number of missing persons. In view of the importance of the issue, alongside
the Commission on Missing Persons of the Government of the Republic of Serbia,
the Office is regularly engaged in the pursuit of solutions to outstanding matters
at the bilateral and regional levels and, to that end, a representative of the Office
took part in a working meeting held on 23 October between the Commission and its
Croatian counterpart.
It is hard to understand why my country’s efforts to resolve certain questions,
also presented in the Council, are met with official indifference. It sometimes seems
that we are being convened here only for an informal meeting of interested parties
and that the real decision-making takes place elsewhere. That does not benefit
the Mechanism, and it is demeaning for the United Nations and disruptive of the
international legal order. The only way to bridge the differences, overcome the
impasse and embark on the path to addressing the initiative of my country is to
get the Security Council actively engaged in this matter and provide answers and
solutions, which we have long awaited.

20-1754737/43

S/2020/1236

Annex 19
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to the United Nations, Sven Alkalaj
At the outset, let me congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We wish you every success in
performing your duties during these unprecedented circumstances caused by the
spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
I would also like to thank the President and the Prosecutor of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for their respective reports and for
today’s comprehensive briefings. We are grateful that the Mechanism continued to
make progress in its work during the reporting period and continues to function
despite the COVID-19 pandemic.
We note the continued progress made by the Mechanism in fulfilling the
remaining activities of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
We wish to underline the importance of successfully concluding the mandate of the
Mechanism in an efficient manner and within a reasonable time frame, which is
crucial for justice and reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the region.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has had an impact on the actions and
activities of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals since the
Security Council last met on this topic (see S/2020/527). I would like to inform
Council members that the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in
coordination with the authorities of both entities and the Brčko District of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, has taken all responsible measures in combating the spread of
COVID-19. The overall situation with the spread of the coronavirus disease, as
well as the introduction of adequate measures to suppress the epidemic, has had a
significant impact on the work of judicial institutions in the country. The work of the
Prosecutor’s Office and the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which mostly deal with
the still unfinished and most complex war crimes cases, was particularly affected.
I would like to inform members that the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, at its session held on 24 September 2020, adopted a revised national
war crimes processing strategy. The adoption of this decision was recognized by
the Security Council, and we are very grateful for its support. The revised strategy
is important for our judicial institutions to make additional efforts and conclude all
unresolved war crimes cases. It is also a step towards strengthening the rule of law
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as stated in the opinion of the European Commission
issued in May of 2019. The implementation of the revised strategy will send a very
strong message that impunity will not, and must not, be allowed. It is also important
for reconciliation and progress in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as in the Western
Balkans region.
I would like to remind you, Mr. President, that over the years the cooperation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina with the ICTY and its successor, the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, has been stable and complete, as evidenced by
its reports. In the same vein, we remain committed to actively contributing to the
Mechanism’s efforts to accomplish its mission. We would also like to reiterate our
commitment to its work and to call on all Member States to meet their obligations
and contribute to the smooth running of the Mechanism.
We would like to express our gratitude for the support of the European
Union, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the
United Nations Development Programme in terms of strengthening the human and

38/43

20-17547

S/2020/1236

material resources of judicial institutions prosecuting war crimes and in terms of
general capacity-building.
Bosnia and Herzegovina reiterates the importance of consistent cooperation
among the prosecutors’ offices and the competent authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and neighbouring countries, Croatia and Serbia, in accordance with
the principles of international justice and the rule of law, which is crucial for the
investigation and prosecution of war crimes.
Finally, I would like to emphasize that Bosnia and Herzegovina remains
committed to investigating, prosecuting and punishing all persons responsible for
war crimes, regardless of their nationality, political or other affiliation. We would also
like to emphasize that witness protection is of the utmost importance for all judicial
institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina. This is most important for reconciliation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as our path towards membership in the European
Union, the main foreign policy goal, which has broad consensus among all political
parties in the country. Keeping in mind that we recently marked the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the end of the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the signing of the
Dayton Peace Agreement, we are fully committed to continuing to strengthen the
rule of law, human rights and economic development.
We will continue to work to strengthen the justice system in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Full justice means more trust, stability and progress.

20-1754739/43

S/2020/1236

Annex 20
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Croatia to the
United Nations, Ivan Šimonović
I would like to thank The Honourable President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Judge Agius, as well as Prosecutor Brammertz
for their briefings today and for their recent reports. I also congratulate them on
their reappointment.
The reporting period was marked by the coronavirus disease pandemic.
We recognize that this global health crisis affected the Mechanism’s work and
caused unfortunate delays to the estimated timetable. We wish to commend the
Mechanism for remaining operational and continuing to carry out its mandate,
while safeguarding the health and safety of its staff members, non-staff personnel
and those in detention facilities. However, the important work of the Mechanism in
bringing justice to thousands of victims is not yet complete. The commemoration of
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Srebrenica genocide earlier this year reminded us
all of the importance of holding its perpetrators to account.
Croatia takes note of the progress described in the most recent reports and
supports the ongoing efforts of the Mechanism to complete its remaining trials and
appeals efficiently and thoroughly. We still await judgement in the trial of Jovica
Stanišić and Franko Simatović, as well as appeal an judgement in the Mladić case. It
is extremely important that the judgements in both cases not be delayed any further.
The trial of Slobodan Milošević lasted so long that he died before a verdict could be
rendered and contribute to a better understanding of the dominant role of his regime
in conflicts and atrocity crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia. Verdicts in the
Stanišić and Simatović and Mladić cases are the last opportunities to make it up to
the extent possible.
In addition, we would like to emphasize that, in the contempt of court
proceedings against Petar Jojić and Vjerica Radeta, the latest decision by the Court,
which was rendered only a few days ago, is clear. Serbia has to execute the arrest
warrants and related transfer orders against the accused. And we underline once
again the need for Serbia to fully cooperate with the Mechanism.
Croatia remains committed to the continuing cooperation with other countries
in the region on matters related to war crimes. In that respect, we appreciate the
positive developments in cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina, which resulted in
the transfer of some cases to the Croatian judiciary. Croatia hopes to achieve the same
progress with Serbia in due time as well. Croatia is still awaiting Serbia´s response
to its invitation from September 2019 to the fourth and final round of negotiations,
which we hope will result in the finalization of the draft text of a bilateral agreement
on processing war crimes. The invitation was renewed in November this year.
Croatia will continue its staunch support for the European and Euro-Atlantic
perspective of the region, based on individual merit and fulfilment of all criteria.
In that context, we underline the importance of effective handling of domestic
war crimes cases without discrimination, including through meaningful regional
cooperation and full cooperation with, and support to, the work of the Mechanism.
The search for missing persons and mortal remains is one of Croatia´s top
priorities. It is not just a political issue; it is a humanitarian imperative. After more
than 25 years since the end of the war, Croatia is still searching for 1,869 missing
persons. Strengthening cooperation among countries in the region with the aim of
clarifying the fate of the missing persons is of the utmost importance. In recent
years, certain steps forward have been made regarding the cooperation with Bosnia
40/43

20-17547

S/2020/1236

and Herzegovina and Montenegro, but when it comes to the cooperation with Serbia
there is still no real progress in resolving this open issue. We hope that the recent
meeting of officials responsible for the search for missing persons in Croatia and
Serbia is a step in the right direction towards more meaningful bilateral cooperation
on this topic.
Croatia remains a strong supporter of international criminal justice
mechanisms and believes that the Mechanism and other international courts are
crucial cornerstones of the international rules-based order. Therefore, we will
continue to offer our full support to the remaining work of the Mechanism, with the
hope that the long-overdue justice in remaining cases will be fully served soon.

20-1754741/43

S/2020/1236

Annex 21
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Rwanda to the
United Nations, Valentine Rugwabiza
I thank President Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for the useful briefings.
We appreciate the good cooperation between the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals and the Government of Rwanda. Today’s briefing, as previous
ones, is a reminder to the Security Council that victims are still waiting for justice.
The Government of Rwanda takes note of the transfer of Mr. Kabuga to the
Mechanism and his initial appearance. Now that Mr. Kabuga is in the custody of the
Mechanism, Rwanda expects from the court efficient proceedings and for the trial to
commence and conclude swiftly in order to finally render justice, 26 years after the
genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda and 23 years after Mr. Kabuga was indicted by
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda in 1997.
A constant of all reports by the Mechanism to the Security Council in the
past two years is the lack of cooperation from some Member States with the Office
of the Prosecutor in apprehending remaining genocide fugitives, which the Council
has mandated that the court bring to justice. It is quite troubling that some Member
States continue to fail to honour their legal obligations to cooperate with the
Mechanism in bringing to justice genocide fugitives. The Office of the Prosecutor
has struggled to obtain the cooperation of Member States in apprehending fugitives,
even where there were clear leads and evidence of their presence in those countries.
The pronouncements of commitment to international law and justice are not credible
unless matched by action. Rwanda will not tire in seeking justice for the more than 1
million souls exterminated during the genocide against the Tutsi in 1994.
Two other issues stand out in the Mechanism’s report that call for the attention
of the Council.
With regard to the issue of genocide denial, the Office of the Prosecutor has
regularly reported on genocide denial. The court has expressed its grave concern in
that regard and called for urgent attention to those issues by the Council. Action must
be taken by the Council to condemn genocide denial and hold to account cases of
contempt of the court and attempts to revise witnesses’ testimonies.
Finally, Rwanda disagrees with the characterization in the President’s report
on the issue of the resettlement of the nine acquitted and released persons. The report
states that
“the resettlement of the nine acquitted and released persons who are
presently residing in Arusha and are unable or afraid to return to their
country of citizenship remains unresolved. The present dilemma constitutes a
humanitarian crisis that profoundly affects their rights.”
The qualification of “humanitarian crisis” in reference to nine free men living
comfortably in villas paid for by the international community, in a residential area
of the touristic town of Arusha — with cleaning, cooking, communication and all
accommodation services, with freedom of movement and visits — is abusive.
Rwanda wishes to remind the Council that, in all meetings with the principals
of the Court, the Government has consistently made it clear that the nine Rwandans
acquitted and released by the Court are free to go back and live in Rwanda, should
they wish to do so. If they decide to do so, they will certainly not be the first
Rwandans to return to Rwanda and live side by side with all other Rwandans in the
enjoyment of their full rights. This has been the case for hundreds of thousands of
Rwandans, former refugees, combatants and former genocide convicts who today
42/43

20-17547

S/2020/1236

live peacefully side by side with genocide survivors, a testament to the success of
Rwanda’s unity and reconciliation.
That decision to return to Rwanda, however, is theirs to make. If, on the other
hand, they wish to live in other countries, that also is their full right, and they should
apply for asylum in their country of choice, as is the case for every asylum seeker.
What we find highly questionable is why those nine free persons, who are today
free men and have no ongoing proceedings with the court, should continue to be the
burden of the international community.

20-1754743/43
