S/PV.9020

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9020th meeting

Thursday, 21 April 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kariuki. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lamce
Mr. De Oliveira Freitas
Mr. Dai Bing
Mrs. Gasri
Mr. Biang
Mr. Korbieh
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Gallagher
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mr. Almazrouei
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Abyei (S/2022/316)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-32578 (E)
*2232578*

S/PV.9020

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Abyei (S/2022/316)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of South Sudan and the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. JeanPierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations; and Ms. Hanna Serwaa Tetteh, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Horn of Africa.
Mr. Lacroix and Ms. Tetteh are joining today’s
meeting via video-teleconference.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/316, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Abyei.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
developments pertaining to the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA), including its
support to the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism (JBVMM) as well as the progress made on
the design of the Abyei joint programme. I shall also
update the Council on the latest developments since
the publication of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/316).
The overall security situation in the Abyei
Administrative Area has remained calm, but the
trust deficit between the Misseriya and Ngok Dinka
communities remains of great concern. In line
with the Security Council’s acknowledgement last
December that UNISFA must intensify its support to
intercommunal dialogue, the Mission worked tirelessly
with the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan, as
2/18

21/04/2022

well as community leaders on both sides, to come to an
agreement on this dry season’s migration route. It was
disappointing that, at the last minute, the parties could
not agree on a number of key points, which resulted
in the cancelation of the intercommunal dialogue event
that UNISFA had organized in Entebbe.
Since last October, we have also seen incidents of
intercommunal violence. For instance, last week we
saw intercommunal violence that resulted in a total of
29 people killed, including two women, and 30 injured
from both communities. Those violent incidents
occurred in Noong/Annam, Kolom, Leul/Al Luo, and
the Amiet common market/Faydelzaraf areas. I wish to
convey our deepest condolences to the victims and the
families who were impacted. Those deaths and injuries
could have been avoided had there been more trust
between the two communities at all levels.
To address those incidents of violence, the Mission
continued its community engagement work, along
with more frequent and longer-range patrols. The
Force Commander/Acting Head of Mission engaged
the parties at capital and community levels. He also
encouraged the use of grass-roots conflict resolution
mechanisms involving traditional chiefs, youth, women
and girls.
However, it is first and foremost for the
Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan to renew
their engagement on the final status of Abyei. I welcome
the recent request for support from both parties towards
organizing the next meeting of the Abyei Joint Oversight
Committee. I call on the leaderships of the Sudan and
South Sudan to do their upmost to use that meeting to
move forward on the issue of Abyei.
Significant progress has been made in the
development of the Abyei joint programme, proposed
in the letter from the Secretary-General to the Security
Council dated 17 September 2021 (S/2021/805), since
my previous briefing to the Council (see S/PV.8887).
A team including representatives from the Department
of Peace Operations, the Development Coordination
Office and the United Nations country teams of
South Sudan and the Sudan are at an advanced stage
of consultations with women, youth, elders and other
community members to ensure that the peacebuilding
services proposed through the Abyei joint programme
will benefit the Misseriya and the Ngok Dinka in a
conflict-sensitive manner, and where the needs are the
greatest. I am encouraged by the political support for
22-32578

21/04/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.9020

the programme from the Governments of South Sudan
and the Sudan. I appeal for the Council’s continued
political support to the programme so that it can have a
lasting impact on peace in Abyei.

result of those events. Hundreds of humanitarian
workers were evacuated, and the people in the Area
are still deeply impacted by the significant decrease in
medical services.

On human rights, UNISFA continued to face
challenges documenting human rights violations and
abuses, due to its lack of human rights expertise.
However, it was encouraging that a team of human
rights officers was granted temporary visas to conduct
an assessment mission to Abyei last March. There was
also small but important progress with regard to the
parties’ obligations towards improving the meaningful
participation of women in decision-making — in the
Ngok Dinka community, a woman was appointed in
each of the 13 traditional courts.

Turning to UNISFA’s other mandated area,
namely, its support to the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism, there has been no progress on
re-operationalizing JBVMM team sites 11 and 12 and the
headquarters of Sector 1 in Gok Machar after UNISFA
was forced to relocate in 2021. A new JBVMM force is
present in the JBVMM locations that are operational,
and the force is ready to implement that important
mandate in all locations previously agreed between the
parties. It is key that the Government of South Sudan
continue its efforts to enable the return of the JBVMM
to those areas as soon as possible, as agreed during
the Joint Political and Security Mechanism meeting of
September 2021.

I am also pleased to inform the Council that,
during the reporting period, a rule-of-law team from
the Department of Peace Operations was able to
successfully conduct a four-week assessment for the
development of a rule-of-law support strategy. The
strategy, which is forthcoming, seeks to apply rule-oflaw tools and mechanisms to advance the Mission’s core
mandated tasks of increasing security and the protection
of civilians, in line with resolution 2606 (2021). The
strategy, which will be developed in consultation with
all the relevant United Nations entities, including via
the Global Focal Point for the Rule of Law, will also
inform any potential engagement by the Sudan and
South Sudan United Nations country teams in Abyei on
rule of law matters.
Unfortunately, there was no progress during the
reporting period on the deployment of the three formed
police units, as mandated by the Security Council.
Despite the continued efforts by the UNISFA leadership,
visas have not been granted to the three formed police
units or the additional individual police officers. We
continue to appeal for the Council’s continued support
on that matter.
The humanitarian situation in the Abyei Area has
deteriorated since I previously briefed the Security
Council. My humanitarian colleagues went from
servicing 103,000 vulnerable people during the most
recent reporting period to a stunning 240,000 currently.
That was largely owing to the violence between the
Twic Dinka and Ngok Dinka communities near Agok
in February and March, when 26 people were killed
and many were more injured. It is also very concerning
that two humanitarian workers lost their lives as a

I wish to end my remarks by strongly emphasizing
the need to ensure the safety and the security of
UNISFA’s peacekeepers as they carry out their
difficult mandate in a complex operating environment.
In the past two months alone, we saw three direct
attacks on UNISFA patrols, resulting in the injury of
one peacekeeper and one damaged vehicle and one
attack — just last week — which involved a rocketpropelled grenade. Such direct, serious violence against
United Nations peacekeepers must end immediately. I
call on the relevant authorities, consistent with their
obligations under the status-of-forces agreement, to
investigate those incidents as a matter of priority.
I would like to thank Major General Benjamin
Olufemi Sawyerr and the women and men in his
UNISFA team for their continued hard work, including
overseeing and supporting the successful and
challenging transformation of the mission into a United
Nations multinational peacekeeping force in just a few
months. The reconfiguration was in addition to their
other mandated tasks, which they continued to carry
out with sensitivity and determination. I would also
like to thank Major General Kefyalew Amde Tessema
and all Ethiopian peacekeepers for their contribution
and the commitment they demonstrated to peace and
security in Abyei over the years.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the Council
for its continued support to UNISFA and to seek
the Council’s support for the Secretary-General’s

22-325783/18

S/PV.9020

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

recommendation to extend the mandate of UNISFA for
a further period of six months, until 15 October.
The President: I thank Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Tetteh.
Ms. Tetteh: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to brief the Security Council for the first
time in my new capacity as the Secretary-General’s
Special Envoy for the Horn of Africa. The briefing
concerns progress in the implementation of resolution
2046 (2012), which relates to outstanding bilateral
issues between the Sudan and South Sudan and the
situation in South Kordofan and Blue Nile states.
This briefing is taking place in a context marked
by uncertainty and yet unresolved internal difficulties
following the coup in the Sudan on 25 October 2021,
which did not make it possible to plan any meetings
of the joint mechanisms between the Sudan and South
Sudan that were intended for the beginning of 2022. With
the removal of the civilian Government in Khartoum
that had been engaging its counterpart in Juba, the
momentum towards the resolution of outstanding issues
was suddenly stopped and the countries will have to
start reviewing them afresh — although, in my recent
visits to the Sudan and South Sudan, the Chair of the
Sovereign Council, General Al-Burhan, and his Deputy,
General Mohammed Hamdan Dagalo, informed me
that preparations were ongoing to engage their South
Sudanese counterparts on those matters, which has
been confirmed by the authorities that I met in South
Sudan. As mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2022/316), the reporting period also witnessed
significant violence last week between the Ngok Dinka
and the Misseriya in Abyei. If anything, it reminds us
of the need to focus on settling the final status of Abyei.
In South Sudan, President Salva Kiir Mayardit
made appointments to the command structure of the
Necessary Unified Forces on 12 April, which will pave
the way for the graduation and redeployment of forces
who completed their training as part of a new national
army. That followed an agreement on 3 April among the
President, First Vice-President Riek Machar and Fifth
Vice-President Abdelbagi, as commanders-in-chief
of the three-armed parties under the 2018 Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan. The development was the
outcome of Sudanese mediation efforts led by the
Chairperson of the Sudanese Sovereign Council,
General Al-Burhan, and his Deputy, General Mohamed
4/18

21/04/2022

Hamdan Dagalo. As a result, tension between
President Kiir and Vice-President Machar, which was
also manifested on the ground by fighting between
their troops in Upper Nile and Unity states and the
surrounding of Vice-President Machar’s residence in
Juba by military and national security personnel on
27 March, has been dissipated.
An obvious casualty of the coup in the Sudan was
the Joint Political and Security Mechanism (JPSM),
one of the rare mechanisms bringing the two countries
together to review outstanding political and security
issues. Its last meeting, from 8 to 9 September 2021 in
Juba, scheduled the next meeting for Khartoum in the
second week of January. Not only did the meeting not
take place, but action has not been taken on the other
decisions reached at the Juba sitting.
Regarding the call for the two countries to withdraw
their forces from the Abyei box by 31 December 2021,
the senior leadership I met in the Sudan insists that they
have withdrawn all their forces and called on South
Sudan to do the same for them to reactivate meetings
of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee (AJOC). That
assertion by the Government of the Sudan is challenged
by the Government of South Sudan.
The lack of progress on South Sudan’s commitment
made at the JPSM to mediate between communities in
Aweil towards the reactivation of the three dormant
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
locations is also of concern. No new date has been fixed
for the next JPSM meeting. However, I was pleased
to hear that the parties are in contact regarding the
organization of an AJOC meeting soon.
Thanks to the easing of restrictions imposed by
the coronavirus disease pandemic, I was able to travel
to both countries, not only to introduce myself to the
national authorities but also to engage with them in
person. In Khartoum, I met with the Chair and the
Deputy Chair of the Sovereign Council, the Acting
Minister of Defence and the Acting Minister for
Foreign Affairs from 17 to 19 April. Since 19 April,
I have been in Juba, from where I am addressing the
Security Council, and have had fruitful discussions
with the Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Minister of
Defence and the Minister for East African Affairs and
Deputy Head of the Abyei Committee. Unfortunately, I
have been unable to meet President Kiir, who is not in
the country at the moment.
22-32578

21/04/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

From those discussions, I have understood that
bilateral relations between the Sudan and South Sudan
are good. The two countries have continued to engage
in high-level visits on each other’s territory. Although
President Kiir’s last visit to Khartoum was in 2018,
Sudanese leaders have continued to visit Juba. On
17 March, General Al-Burhan was in Juba to address the
tensions between President Kiir and First Vice-President
Machar on account of their disagreement over the
sharing of positions within the leadership structure of
the future national army. The proposal he submitted
on 18 March, as Chairperson of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, was welcomed by President
Kiir. For its part, South Sudan continued to follow up
on the implementation by the Sudanese parties of the
Juba Peace Agreement, which it mediated. President
Kiir’s security adviser, Tut Gatluak, and other senior
South Sudanese ministers shuttled between Juba and
Khartoum throughout the reporting period in order to
facilitate a solution between the military and civilian
components of the transitional Government and prevent
the collapse of the agreement.
Although President Kiir and General Al-Burhan
did not dwell on the issue of Abyei, they agreed to focus
on cooperation along the border between the Sudan
and South Sudan, starting with an approach to peace
through the development of unitized oil fields, including
in the Abyei Area. Pending details to be worked out
by the respective foreign ministries of what unitization
entails, the hope is that the proposed approach to peace
may be a starting point — not only for addressing the
recurrent violence in the Abyei Area but also towards
the settlement of the final status of Abyei.
Khartoum also continued to play a positive role in
seeking peaceful means to resolve intra-party problems
experienced by South Sudanese parties. On 16 January,
it hosted the signing of an agreement, known as the
Kitgwang declaration, between the breakaway faction
of the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-Army
in Opposition (SPLM/A-IO) and the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement-in-Government. General Simon
Gatwech Dual and his deputy, General Johnson Olony,
signed for the SPLM/A-IO, while Mr. Tut Gatluak
signed for the SPLM-in-Government. The agreement
provides for amnesty for the Kitgwang faction, the
recommitment of the parties to the ceasefire agreement
under the Khartoum declaration of 2018 and the
establishment of a coordination office in Juba.

S/PV.9020

In the same spirit, South Sudan continued to exert
efforts to convince Abdul Wahid Al-Nur, leader of
a faction of the Sudan Liberation Movement/Army
(SLM/A), to join the Sudanese peace process. So far, the
efforts have not paid off. On 10 March, Minni Minawi,
leader of the other faction of the SLM/A and Governor
of Darfur state, visited Juba, ostensibly to meet with
Al-Nur. The meeting failed to take place, as Al-Nur
accused Minawi of supporting the coup of 25 October.
While recommitting to its unilateral cessation of
hostilities, SLM/A-Al Nur has reiterated its refusal to
join the Juba-mediated peace process for the Sudan and
renewed its call for an all-inclusive Sudanese initiative
that would comprehensively address the Sudan’s
multiple problems.
Let me now turn to developments concerning the
two areas of Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile. I note
with regret that efforts deployed by the South Sudan
Mediation Committee to facilitate the resumption of
negotiations between the Government of the Sudan and
the Al-Hilu faction of the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement (SPLM)-North have not been successful.
The Council will recall that the talks between them
were suspended on 15 June 2021 for two weeks so as
to allow the parties time to consult their constituencies
on the outstanding issues. The Al-Hilu SPLM-North
faction condemned the military coup and called on
its members to support the anti-coup demonstrations.
Meanwhile, the Malik Agar faction of the SPLMNorth, which was one of the signatories to the Juba
Peace Agreement with the Government of the Sudan,
has remained within the transitional institutions despite
the arrest, imprisonment and subsequent release of its
Deputy Chairman, Yasir Aman, by the military in the
aftermath of the coup.
Clearly, the coup has had a negative effect on the
bilateral relations that the two countries had started
deepening and are now trying to reboot. It is, however,
gratifying that, while each of them is still grappling
with its internal conflict, they continue to complement
one another in the search for peace and to build on the
progress achieved so far. They both emphasize the need
to scale up humanitarian assistance to their displaced
and vulnerable communities. They both recognize the
need for peace on their territories and in the region,
which should enable them to foster cooperation as
they entertain good-neighbourly relations. My Office
will continue to engage with the authorities of both
countries and, as appropriate, with key regional actors,

22-325785/18

S/PV.9020

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

including the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, to encourage them to
defuse tensions, advance the implementation of all
cooperation agreements and consolidate their improved
bilateral relations.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
thank my predecessor, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, for the
commitment he demonstrated to his role and to peace
and security in the region.
The President: I thank Ms. Tetteh for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Let me start by thanking Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix for sharing his update on the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA)
today. I also want to thank Special Envoy Tetteh and
congratulate her on the assumption of her new position.
We look forward to working with her in the course of
activities on the Horn of Africa.
As we prepare to consider UNISFA’s mandate
before 15 May, we are grateful to hear how UNISFA has
been dealing with all of the changes in the mission and
recent developments in Abyei. I would also like to take
this moment to welcome the presence of representatives
of the Sudan and South Sudan here today.
On behalf of the United States, I would like to voice
our continued strong support for UNISFA, and I thank
its personnel for their invaluable service in support
of peace, security and stability in Abyei. While the
mission is undergoing its reconfiguration into a new
multinational force, UNISFA remains dedicated to
carrying out its critical mandate to protect civilians and
facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance. Still,
we know there is a great deal of work ahead of us. Today,
therefore, I would like to discuss the need for renewed
diplomatic engagement in Abyei, the work United
Nations peacekeepers must do to address violence and
disinformation and the importance of UNISFA forces
having the access they need to complete their mission.
First, let us be crystal clear: the long-term solution to
this conflict can be worked out only through diplomacy.
We encourage all parties to renew diplomatic efforts to
achieve a peaceful and mutually acceptable resolution
of Abyei’s final status. We regret that there have been
no meetings of any joint institutions or mechanisms,
6/18

21/04/2022

including of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism,
since the last time the Council was briefed on the
situation in Abyei last year (S/PV.8887). It is simply
unacceptable to resign ourselves to the status quo. To
that end, we urge the appointment of a civilian deputy
head of mission for UNISFA, which would enable the
mission to better support the parties in their endeavour.
The United States welcomes the engagement by the
African Union to move us towards a solution.
Secondly, we are deeply concerned by the recent
violent clashes in Abyei in February and March, and we
thank the mission for quickly reacting to restore order
and increasing patrols. Going forward, we must improve
community relations on the ground. That is essential
to addressing security in Abyei. United Nations police
have a central role in engaging local communities
in their patrols and through awareness campaigns,
including on gender-based violence. That underscores
the mission’s need for more police to address criminality
and a civilian deputy head of mission to strengthen
dialogue with the parties, including on establishing the
joint police service. We once again reiterate our call for
the Sudan to issue visas for United Nations personnel
and a civilian deputy head of mission, as mandated by
the Security Council in 2019.
UNISFA should also further its support of
community dialogue and intercommunal reconciliation
through outreach to local peace committees and to
those who do not always understand what the mission
actually does. So often we hear that the local populations
have unrealistic expectations of United Nations
peacekeepers because they do not fully understand the
mission’s mandate. Additional community dialogue
and intercommunal reconciliation efforts will improve
trust and help prevent violence before it erupts. But
this cannot happen if the United Nations mission is
stonewalled in doing its work.
UNISFA has still not been able to return to the team
sites it had to abandon last year. Local communities
have threatened the mission, restricted its freedom of
movement and demanded its withdrawal. This is simply
unacceptable. This makes it difficult for the mission to
support the functioning of the Joint Border Verification
and Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM) in this area, as
the Security Council mandated it to do. Greater political
will by the parties to support the mission on this issue
will make a difference. We urge engagement with the
local communities to facilitate the smooth functioning
22-32578

21/04/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of UNISFA, the JBVMM and the redeployment of
UNISFA to the vacated team sites.
We also call on the Sudan to allow the mission access
to Athony airfield. This is a matter of peacekeeper
safety and security, and it is absolutely fundamental
that UNISFA have the ability to provide medical or
casualty evacuations if needed.
The United States looks forward to working
constructively with the Council to renew UNISFA’s
mandate. We will continue to partner with all Council
members, the Governments of the Sudan and of South
Sudan, the people of the region, and all stakeholders
to work towards the peace, security and prosperity of
the region.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I have the
honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the three
African members of the Security Council, namely,
Ghana, Kenya, and my own country, Gabon (A3).
I thank Ms. Hanna Tetteh, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Horn of Africa, and Mr. JeanPierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations, for their inspiring briefings. On behalf of
the A3, I congratulate Ms. Tetteh on her promotion to
the position of Special Envoy and reiterate our support
for her.
Our statement will focus on the political, security
and humanitarian situation. The A3 notes with interest
the continued strengthening of relations between the
Sudan and South Sudan, which should help resolve
outstanding issues, including the Abyei issue. Indeed,
the absence of strong administrative institutions,
particularly in terms of security and justice, is keeping
the territory in a state of permanently fragility. The
A3 urges the resumption of dialogue between the
Sudan and South Sudan with a view to accelerating
the implementation of the agreement on temporary
arrangements for the administration and security of the
Abyei Area, putting the interests of the people first.
We call on the parties to implement the
recommendations and conclusions of the Joint Political
and Security Mechanism (JPSM) and the Abyei Joint
Oversight Committee meetings. The A3 further
reiterates the need for the Sudan and South Sudan to meet
regularly and actively participate in the JPSM, which is
essential to easing tensions and promoting dialogue.
We commend the efforts of the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) in

S/PV.9020

organizing the intercommunal peace dialogue and
encouraging the participation of women and youth in
both the institutional administrative spheres and the
political process. More than 10 years after the creation
of UNISFA, it seems to us to be an imperative that the
final status of Abyei be defined, taking into account the
expectations of the populations. The facilitation role of
the African Union High-Level Implementation Panel
and the support of the international community remain
essential to this end.
On the security front, the A3 is deeply concerned
about the resurgence of armed violence and
intercommunal clashes in Abyei. We strongly condemn
the violence, particularly in the north-east between the
Misseriya and Ngok Dinka communities. These attacks,
as well as those that took place in Kolom, Mabok and
Dungop, must be investigated and those responsible
brought to justice.
The A3 calls on all parties to refrain from taking
any action that could exacerbate tensions. We urge
them to exercise the utmost restraint and cease all
hostile activities that could have an adverse impact on
the local population.
On the humanitarian situation, we are concerned
about the difficulties faced by the people of Abyei,
including limited access to basic services. In this
regard, the joint programme for Abyei sponsored by
the United Nations country teams for the Sudan and
South Sudan is to be commended. The completion of
projects aimed at restoring service delivery, including
access to water, health, education, communication and
basic infrastructure, is crucial to improving the lives of
the people.
The A3 also stresses the need to strengthen
humanitarian assistance. We condemn in the strongest
terms the armed attacks against UNISFA staff
and humanitarian workers. We express our sincere
condolences to the families of the deceased aid workers
in Abyei and call for urgent investigations to ensure
accountability. All measures must be taken to ensure
the protection of humanitarian workers and unhindered
humanitarian access.
We further urge both countries to comply fully
with the status-of-forces agreement and expeditiously
facilitate the administrative steps required for the
implementation of UNISFA’s mandate, including the
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
and its redeployment, as appropriate.

22-325787/18

S/PV.9020

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

We pay high tribute to the UNISFA personnel that
are carrying out their mandate despite the difficult
conditions. The Ethiopian contingent, whose mandate
recently ended, is to be commended for its commitment
in Abyei. We welcome the arrival of new contingents
from other troop-contributing countries.
International partners, in particular the African
Union and the United Nations, must be resolutely
engaged diplomatically and politically and support
dialogue efforts between the Sudan and South Sudan.
We remain convinced that achieving the final status
of Abyei is the key to a concerted and coordinated
withdrawal from UNISFA. In this regard, we call on
the authorities to intensify their consultations to make
progress on the seven indicators.
In conclusion, we reiterate our full support for
the Special Envoy for the Horn of Africa, UNISFA,
the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and all stakeholders for their efforts
on the ground aimed at finding a political solution to
Abyei’s status.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): At the outset, let me
thank Under-Secretary-General Jean Pierre-Lacroix
and Special Envoy for the Horn of Africa Hanna
Tetteh for their respective briefings on developments
concerning the United Nations Interim Security Force
in Abyei (UNISFA) and its support for the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM)
and progress in the implementation of resolution 2609
(2021). I also welcome the presence of the representatives
of the Sudan and South Sudan at today’s meeting.
Peaceful resolution of the final status of Abyei, in
conformity with the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
and the agreement on the Safe Demilitarized Border
Zone, remains fundamental to durable peace, stability
and development in the region. In this regard, we note
the lack of progress during the reporting period. While
the domestic political developments in the Sudan and
South Sudan have taken precedence over the final
status of Abyei, we hope that, in the coming months,
both the parties will move forward in the process for a
political settlement.
To this end, convening of the Abyei Joint Oversight
Committee is a priority, as highlighted at the Joint
Political and Security Mechanism meeting held in
Juba in October last year. The Committee, which was
mandated to meet every month, has not met since
November 2017. We support the ongoing efforts being
8/18

21/04/2022

made by the Africa Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development towards resumption of
these meetings. We also call for the implementation
of the decisions of the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism. Recent months have witnessed several
security incidents resulting in the killing of innocent
civilians. We believe that regular meetings of the
Committee are crucial for effective administration and
to address the security challenges in Abyei.
The continuing violent clashes involving the Ngok
Dinka and Misseriya communities are a matter of
concern. In that regard, we appreciate UNISFA’s efforts
in bringing together elders of the two communities. We
welcome the efforts to reconvene the joint traditional
leaders peace conference, which is now scheduled to
take place next month.
Regarding the mandate implementation of UNISFA,
the Mission has carried out key tasks including the
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism,
despite the operational and administrative challenges.
It is important that these be addressed by the Sudan
and South Sudan authorities in earnest. Those include
the operationalization of the Athony airstrip and the
issuance of visas for formed police units. We also call
for the establishment of Abyei Police Service. We note
with concern the attacks against UNISFA forces and
freedom of movement violations. In that context, we
underscore the importance of ensuring the safety and
security of peacekeepers.
We welcome innovative technological initiatives
such as the “smart camp” project to improve the Mission’s
performance. For the Mission’s sustenance and ability
to fulfil its mandate, all efforts need to be made for
better coordination with the host Governments. We note
that work in respect of quick-impact projects has begun.
Those projects should be implemented expeditiously.
We also welcome the progress made in the ongoing
process of the reconfiguration of UNISFA’s force.
India is committed to the peace, stability and
development of Abyei. In that regard, I would like to
mention that an Indian contingent of 570 peacekeepers
will soon be joining UNISFA, and its deployment is
already under way.
In conclusion, India’s long-standing and friendly
relations with both the Sudan and South Sudan have
stood the test of time. We are confident that both
countries will successfully resolve all outstanding
issues and continue to emerge stronger. On our part,
22-32578

21/04/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

we remain steadfast in our support for both Juba and
Khartoum in this journey.
Mr. Almazrouei (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. JeanPierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations, for his informative briefing. I also join my
colleagues in welcoming Ms. Hanna Serwaa Tetteh to
the Council and the delivery of her first briefing as
the Special Envoy for the Horn of Africa. We express
our support for her and for her important role. I also
welcome the representatives of the Sudan and South
Sudan to this meeting.
Today’s meeting is taking place in conjunction with
worrying developments in the Abyei area, including
continued intercommunal clashes and violence, attacks
against the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei (UNISFA) and other incidents that have
hampered UNISFA’s operations. Those developments
have negatively impacted the work of humanitarian
organizations, especially the killing of humanitarian
workers and the evacuation of nearly 800 aid workers
as a result of the recent clashes in Agok. Therefore, it is
essential that all measures be taken to ensure the safety
of humanitarian workers.
Addressing those worrying developments requires
efforts to promote dialogue and peaceful coexistence in
order to deal with the root causes of current tensions and
strengthen intercommunal relations. In that context, it
is encouraging that steps are being taken to address
those tensions, including through investigations and
the recent agreement for the cessation of hostilities
in South Sudan between two tribes. We also stress in
that regard the importance of establishing temporary
administrative and security mechanisms, as called for
in the 20 June 2011 agreement signed by both parties, in
order to ensure that those tensions are contained.
At the same time, we encourage UNISFA to continue
engaging on a regular basis with local communities
in order to ensure that their concerns are heard. We
believe that convening the joint traditional leaders
peace conference in May is an important step to that
end. We also welcome the mission’s efforts concerning
the implementation of quick-impact projects and the
participation of women in local peace processes and in
the settlement of disputes.
Regarding relations between the Sudan and South
Sudan, we are encouraged by the fact that the leaders
of both countries continue to support efforts to achieve

S/PV.9020

peace, which reflects the continuing improvement in
their relations. We are confident that building on that
progress will contribute to the reaching of a lasting
solution regarding the final status of Abyei.
We also welcome the meeting of the Joint Political
and Security Mechanism and its outcome document
and look forward to the resumption of the meetings of
the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee, with the support
of the African Union.
We recognize the important role of UNISFA in
a constantly evolving and challenging environment,
particularly in facilitating dialogue among communities,
and its support for the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM). In that context,
we would like to express our sincere appreciation to
all UNISFA personnel who have served in the mission,
and we welcome the new peacekeeping forces as well
as the Force Commander, who has already started his
engagement with local communities and the Sudanese
and South Sudanese Governments. We echo the
Secretary-General’s call for the re-operationalization
of the JBVMM Sector 1 headquarters in Gok Machar
and the two team sites.
In conclusion, we welcome the Secretary-General’s
recommendation to extend UNISFA’s mandate and
support for the JBVMM for an additional period of
six months, taking into consideration the views of
Khartoum and Juba when discussing the mandate
renewal as well as a renewed focus on engaging with
all local communities and utilizing the available tools
to reduce tensions.
Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I, too, thank
Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Hanna Tetteh for their briefings.
We also welcome the Special Envoy’s appointment.
Ms. Tetteh can count on France’s wholehearted support
in her new functions, as was the case previously. I, too,
welcome the participation of the representatives of the
Sudan and South Sudan in today’s meeting today.
I should like to stress three points: first, the efforts
of the Secretariat and troop-contributing countries
to reconfigure the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA). The mission is essential for
preserving the conditions that will allow for a settlement
of the status of Abyei and to protect civilians. In that
respect, the ongoing violence against civilians and
peacekeepers is concerning, and we call on the parties
to set up the necessary joint mechanisms necessary to
ensure stability in Abyei.

22-325789/18

S/PV.9020

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

21/04/2022

We encourage UNISFA and the United Nations
country teams in the Sudan and South Sudan to continue
with their peacebuilding activities. Local communities
must also be involved in those efforts. That represents
a priceless opportunity to resume dialogue and move
towards reconciliation.

enabled UNISFA’s deployment. I also thank Nigeria
and Force Commander Sawyerr, in addition to China,
Ghana, India, Kenya, the Russian Federation, Bolivia,
Mongolia, Namibia, Nepal, Pakistan, Peru, Rwanda,
Sierra Leone, Ukraine, Uruguay and all the contributing
countries that make UNISFA’s work possible.

We are disappointed that UNISFA has not yet been
redeployed to the three sites that it had to evacuate at
the end of 2021. We call on the Sudan and South Sudan
to ensure the security and free movement of UNISFA,
in keeping with their commitments under the statusof-forces agreement. South Sudan in particular must
ease tensions with local communities to re-establish
UNISFA’s support for the Joint Border Verification
and Monitoring Mechanism. Otherwise, the Security
Council will have to draw the necessary conclusions
when we next meet to discuss the renewal of the
mission’s mandate.

On that note, I would like to raise three issues.

The domestic and regional challenges that the
Sudan and South Sudan face are impeding the resolution
of the Abyei border dispute. They also make it more
difficult to carry out peacekeeping, as shown by the
renewal of the UNISFA contingents that is under way.
In that context, it is urgent to re-establish a democratic
transition in the Sudan, and we reiterate our support
for the facilitation efforts of the United Nations, the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development.
We encourage the States in the region to resolve
their disputes through dialogue, be it in Abyei, the
Al-Fashaqah triangle area or the Renaissance Dam or
with respect to the Tigray conflict. It is therefore vital to
avert any opportunistic exploitation of those situations
of vulnerability and to make use of the African Union’s
mediation efforts. In all those crises, the Special Envoy
has a role to play, and we fully support her.
Mr. De Oliveira Freitas (Brazil): Let me begin
by thanking Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and
Special Envoy Tetteh for their briefings, as well as
Special Envoy Onanga-Anyanga for his contributions.
I welcome the representatives of the Sudan and South
Sudan to this meeting.
I would also like to thank all the personnel of
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA) for the hard, essential work that they have
done so far and continue to do daily in the Abyei
Area. Special thanks should be expressed to Ethiopia
and the Ethiopian troops and staff officers who have
10/18

The first one is the long-term political settlement of
the status of the Abyei Area. Processes, timelines and,
most important, solutions to reach common ground will
advance only with fair, credible negotiations. Direct
contacts are key to those efforts. That is why we should
support not only additional talks between South Sudan
and the Sudan, but also further contacts between the
two parties at different levels. Domestic challenges in
each country should not derail the bilateral dynamics
that have led to friendlier relations in recent years. The
Sudanese and South Sudanese leaders may seize such
bilateral openness to make progress towards a political
settlement regarding Abyei.
The second issue that I will highlight is the
regional dimension of the negotiations. The SecretaryGeneral has appropriately encouraged the African
Union to intensify its mediation efforts. If the parties
are willing to resume the consultations of the Abyei
Joint Oversight Committee, the African Union has the
legitimacy to facilitate and support both the political
and the logistical aspects of it. It is encouraging to
note that the United Nations is poised to contribute to
those efforts, as the Secretary-General clearly stated
in his recent report (S/2022/316). If support from the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region is
available, a subregional dimension could be reinforced
and additional channels of negotiation could be created.
I would like to comment on a third issue, which
is the situation on the ground. The frequent cycles
of violence in the Abyei Area make humanitarian
assistance and the protection of civilians dangerous.
Moreover, it is extremely concerning that more
than 70 per cent of local children are out of school. That
figure sums up the local human rights situation, as well
as the substantial challenges that the local population
faces in Abyei.
We are encouraged by the fact that UNISFA
conducted a broad human-rights assessment in March.
22-32578

21/04/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The positive developments that enabled such scrutiny,
such as the issuance of visas, should be stimulated.
I conclude by stressing Brazil`s support to Special
Envoy Tetteh.
Mr. Gallagher (Ireland): Let me start by thanking
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his briefing and
by welcoming Special Envoy Tetteh. The Special Envoy
has assumed her role at a vital time for the Horn of
Africa. Her recent experience, working closely with
the African Union (AU), is welcome, as the AU has
a key role to play in helping to address many of the
region’s crises, not least in Abyei. Let me also welcome
the representatives of the Sudan and South Sudan to
the Chamber.
In addition, I would also like to pay tribute to
Ethiopia, whose peacekeepers have made an important
contribution to maintaining peace and security in Abyei.
Ireland echoes the Secretary-General’s appreciation
for the support and collaboration of the Sudan, South
Sudan and the new troop-contributing countries in the
reconfiguration of United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA). We urge all involved
to continue to work towards the deployment of
additional enablers in the coming months. UNISFA’s
reconfiguration should be considered an opportunity
to strengthen the mission, including its capacity to
support human rights in Abyei.
We welcome the recent issuance of temporary
visas for the long overdue deployment of two human
rights officers in Abyei. Their assessment of the
human rights situation highlighted concerns for
women’s and children’s rights, as well as barriers to
accessing justice and a lack of accountability. We call
on the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan to
facilitate the permanent deployment of relevant human
rights expertise.
We also call on the Governments of the Sudan
and South Sudan to now address other issues that
undermine UNISFA’s operational capability, including
the non-issuance of visas for police, and the lack
of progress towards the operationalization of the
Athony airstrip.
We are concerned by the ongoing impediments
to mandate implementation, including restrictions on
UNISFA’s freedom of movement. Such impediments
should cease immediately.

S/PV.9020

Most worrisome, however, are attacks against
the force, as referenced by Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix. Ireland condemns those incidents and calls
upon the authorities to investigate them. There must be
accountability for attacks against our peacekeepers.
As the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral told us, a solution to the final status of Abyei
is a prerequisite for peace. That requires the Sudan and
South Sudan to prioritize the issue and rapidly agree on
a process to find a political settlement. Unfortunately,
there has been no progress on that in the past six months.
We urge both parties to utilize and support the
existing mechanisms in order to make progress. Those
include the Joint Political and Security Mechanism and
the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee.
The demarcation of the border is an important part
of a final resolution to the situation. We call on South
Sudan to address the problems faced by UNISFA in
support of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism in Gok Machar and elsewhere.
We are deeply concerned by the high levels of
violence in Abyei, including recent attacks in Leu,
Noong and Amiet, in which more than 60 people
were reported killed or injured. That is a worrisome
escalation. The ongoing violence serves only to
exacerbate the very serious humanitarian situation
in Abyei and the lack of access to basic and critical
services for the population.
We hope that the traditional leaders’ peace
conference, planned for February this year, can be held
soon. We welcome the March talks in Juba between
the Sudan and South Sudan, and we urge a resumption
of dialogue.
We also welcome the recent efforts of the South
Sudanese authorities to forge peace between the Ngok
Dinka and the Twic Dinka. It is critically important
that all dialogue efforts benefit from the full and
unhindered participation of women and the inclusion
of young people, both of which are key to any inclusive
and sustainable peace.
In conclusion, in the interests of the people of the
region, I again call for all parties to find a peaceful
and lasting solution to the final status of Abyei and the
demarcation of the border.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-

22-3257811/18

S/PV.9020

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Pierre Lacroix and Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Horn of Africa Hanna Tetteh for their
informative briefings. I congratulate Ms. Tetteh on her
new appointment. Let me also take this opportunity
to thank Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga for his work in
the post.
We are pleased to note that, despite some recurrent
cases of intercommunal violence, which were swiftly
resolved by representatives of the Sudan and South
Sudan and the Blue Helmets, including the new
Nigerian command, the situation in Abyei has remained
generally stable in recent months.
It requires the joint efforts of the parties to
successfully promote an inter-Sudanese settlement. In
that regard, we welcome the fact that representatives
of the Sudan and South Sudan stepped up their
contacts during the reporting period, including at the
highest levels.
We also commend the fact that the parties
demonstrated readiness to establish mutually beneficial
cooperation, in particular on the joint exploitation of
the potential oil resources of the disputed Abyei Area.
We view the visit by the Chairperson of the Sovereign
Council of the Sudan, General Al-Burhan, to Juba on
18 and 19 March and his talks with the President of the
Republic of South Sudan, Mr. Salva Kiir Mayardit, as
an important step in that direction.
We also welcome the joint meeting in October
between the Joint Political and Security Mechanism
and the Joint Border Commission. We hope the dialogue
between Khartoum and Juba will facilitate agreements
on the final status of Abyei.
We consider the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA) an important factor in
ensuring stability. To that end, we believe that UNISFA
must strictly adhere to its mandate. The main aim of
the United Nations presence in the region is to maintain
security and to assist the Sudan and South Sudan in
their efforts to find a mutually acceptable resolution to
the border dispute.
We welcome the mission’s work to maintain dialogue
between the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya communities
with an emphasis on elaborating confidence-building
measures between them. The causes of the new
episodes of violence in Abyei should be analysed more
closely. We hope that the next joint peace conference of
traditional leaders will soon be held.
12/18

21/04/2022

We note that are still some issues concerning
the activities of the Blue Helmets and progress on
meeting the benchmarks in the work of the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM).
We continue to believe that pressure and accusations
will not solve those problems. We call on the leaders
of UNISFA to work further towards resolving those
issues with Khartoum and Juba. The positions of the
Sudan and South Sudan and the concerns they have
voiced must be closely taken into account. We hope that
this situation will be taken into account in the work on
the resolution of the Security Council on the UNISFA
mandate rollover.
As we see in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/316), the replacement of the Ethiopian troops in
UNISFA with new peacekeepers from other countries
is proceeding smoothly and moving towards its
conclusion. It is also important to ensure that the new
configuration is deployed in proper succession with the
work of the Ethiopian peacekeepers, who demonstrated
a high level of professionalism and bravery, and that
logistical problems are avoided.
We think that the ongoing presence in the region of
peacekeepers is still very important. In that connection,
we support the Secretary-General’s proposal to review
UNISFA’s mandate, including providing support for the
JBVMM for six months.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and Special
Envoy Tetteh for their briefings. China congratulates
Ms. Tetteh on her appointment as the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Horn of Africa and will
actively support her work. I also welcome the presence
of the representatives of the Sudan and South Sudan to
this meeting.
The security situation in Abyei has continued to
face challenges for some time now. Communal conflicts
and public security crimes have occurred from time to
time, while the joint police service for Abyei has not
yet been established. Nonetheless, it is heartening
that the Sudan and South Sudan have continued to
exercise restraint on the issue of Abyei. The United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA)
has cooperated with the Abyei Area administration,
local communities, the Sudan and South Sudan in
properly handling security incidents. The community
protection committees, established with the assistance
of UNISFA, have also played an important role.
22-32578

21/04/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Communal relations are the key to achieving longterm peace and stability in Abyei. China encourages
relevant communities to continue their dialogue, with
the assistance of UNISFA, in order to improve their
relations, properly resolve conflicts and differences
and achieve harmonious coexistence.
During the reporting period, the relationship
between the Sudan and South Sudan continued to
improve, which has established favourable conditions
for the stability of the Abyei region. Currently,
both countries are concentrating on advancing their
respective political processes. China encourages both
sides to leverage the role of joint institutions, such as
the Joint Political and Security Mechanism for Abyei,
exchange information and deal with emergencies in a
timely manner in order to maintain peace in Abyei.
The reconfiguration of the military component of
UNISFA is progressing in an orderly manner, and the
Ethiopian peacekeepers will be replaced by peacekeepers
from multiple troop-contributing countries (TCCs).
Over the past 11 years, Ethiopian peacekeepers have
actively fulfilled their mandates under extremely
difficult conditions and cooperated closely with the
Sudan, South Sudan and local communities, thereby
making important contributions to maintaining peace
in Abyei, which China highly commends.
As a new TCC to UNISFA, China has deployed a
helicopter unit in Abyei and will deploy a rapid reaction
force as soon as possible.
Pending the resolution of the final status of Abyei,
China supports in principle the renewal of the mandate
UNISFA and encourages the Sudan, South Sudan and
local communities to facilitate its operation by ensuring
the safety and freedom of movement of its personnel
and the smooth delivery of supplies to the mission.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): My delegation thanks Under-SecretaryGeneral Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Special Envoy Hanna
Tetteh for their briefings this morning. We would also
like to welcome the representatives of South Sudan and
the Sudan to today’s meeting.
The coup d’état in the Sudan in October last year
and the multiple challenges facing South Sudan have
unfortunately reduced the attention of the parties to the
situation in Abyei. However, the recent improvement
in relations between the two countries, which we
welcome, is an opportunity to relaunch the process

S/PV.9020

to reach a lasting agreement with regard to the border
dispute in Abyei, which should not exclude a priori
any mechanism for the peaceful settlement of disputes,
including the International Court of Justice if that
were the will of the parties. But it is only through
cooperation and joint efforts in forums, such as the
Joint Political and Security Mechanism and the Abyei
Joint Oversight Committee, that progress can be made
towards stabilizing the region. We, like other members,
regret that the Committee has not met for a number
of years.
The human rights situation in Abyei remains a
source of concern. Naturally, we welcome the issuance
of visas to two human rights officers to allow them
to conduct a long overdue evaluation in Abyei. Along
those lines, we call on the authorities of the Sudan and
South Sudan to allow the deployment of human rights
experts as part of the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA), in accordance with the
mandate granted by the Security Council.
Unfortunately, we note that clashes continue
between the communities in Abyei, in particular in
the Agok area. We recognize the efforts undertaken by
the authorities in South Sudan to try to reduce those
intercommunal tensions. While we recognize the
efforts undertaken to organize a joint peace conference
of traditional leaders, we regret that the differences over
the composition of the two delegations have prevented
the conference from being organized in accordance
with the scheduled timeline, that is, in February. We
urge UNISFA to continue promoting the necessary
peace talks with the full participation of young people
and women, as was already mentioned.
The safety of UNISFA staff is crucial. That is why
my delegation has condemned the armed attacks that
took place in March against UNISFA personnel. Those
acts of violence represent a threat to the United Nations
operations on the ground. We urge the authorities to
guarantee the safety and freedom of movement of
UNISFA personnel. Similarly, and in accordance with
their obligations under the status-of-forces agreement,
urgent investigations must be carried out to bring those
responsible to justice.
Finally, we acknowledge the reconfiguration
of UNISFA, with the incorporation of new troop
contributors. I wish to conclude by reiterating our
continued support for the African Union and its
mediation efforts and encourage it to continue its work.

22-3257813/18

S/PV.9020

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

21/04/2022

Mr. Lamce (Albania): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix and Special Envoy Tetteh for their
briefings today, as well as the representatives of the
Sudan and South Sudan for their presence.

on United Nations actors and all stakeholders to place a
sharp focus on implementing the women and peace and
security agenda in Abyei, including by engaging with
community stakeholders, women and youth.

At the outset, I would like to thank Ethiopia for its
leadership and engagement as the sole troop-contributor
to the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA) over the past decade. Ethiopia has made
a significant impact in supporting the safety and
security of the people in Abyei and has ensured that the
mission could carry out its functions, as mandated by
the Council.

At the same time, we echo the Secretary-General’s
call for the inclusion of human rights monitoring and
expertise in the mission. UNISFA urgently needs
permanent human rights experts to fill that void.

UNISFA is now at a critical point due to its
restructuring as a multinational mission. We thank all
the troop-contributing countries whose battalions or
personnel have already been deployed. This comes at
a vital time in Abyei, as new violence has broken out
and peacekeepers have increasingly been attacked and
injured in recent weeks.
We are deeply concerned about the recently renewed
violence that has resulted in humanitarian suffering
and displacement and has aggravated disputes between
communities in Abyei. Such intercommunal violence
risks reversing gains made towards achieving peaceful
coexistence in the Area. We urge the parties to show
political will, prevent an escalation of hostilities and
call for the immediate cessation of violence.
While there is no political will and no progress on the
political agreements and border demarcation between
Khartoum and Juba, the socioeconomic grievances of
the population need to be addressed. The various actors
and communities continue to mistrust each other.
Confidence-building measures are urgently needed and
must be implemented in a coordinated manner.
We commend the United Nations country teams
in the Sudan and South Sudan for improving their
coordination and cooperation in Abyei, reflecting
a one-United Nations approach that is imperative
in addressing the complex situation on the ground.
UNISFA should work closely with both country teams
in order to ensure that all United Nations actors on the
ground speak with one voice and act in harmony.
Albania applauds the first signs of participation
of women in Abyei. We cannot find sustainable
solutions when half of the population is excluded from
decision-making. It is high time to bring women into the
discussions and include them in project work. We call
14/18

Finally, we call on the Governments of South
Sudan and the Sudan to ensure that the mission and the
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
can carry out their mandates unimpeded. The Sudan in
particular needs to issue all visas requested by UNISFA
for its police components in order to allow the mission
to function and implement the mandate in full. We
very much hope that UNISFA, which is the only entity
providing law and order in Abyei, will operate in its
mandated full capacity.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Lacroix and Special Envoy Hanna
Tetteh for their insightful briefings. Like others, Norway
congratulates Ms. Tetteh on her new assignment and is
very much looking forward to engaging with her on her
important and broad Horn of Africa mandate. I am also
pleased to see that the representatives of the Sudan and
South Sudan are participating in today’s meeting.
Norway remains deeply concerned about the high
level of tension in and around Abyei. We call on the
Misseriya and Ngok Dinka to refrain from attacks
in connection with the seasonal migration. And
we appreciate all local initiatives aimed at conflict
prevention and resolution. Moreover, we appreciate
the Force Commander’s efforts to prevent and resolve
conflicts, in accordance with his mandate.
It is of the utmost importance that the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA)
remain fully operational and ready to use force when
required to protect civilians at risk of physical violence.
That includes the deployment of formed police units.
Furthermore, we urge the Sudan and South Sudan to
support the work of UNISFA.
Let me add three additional points to today’s
discussion on UNISFA and the situation in Abyei.
First, Abyei is a contested area with a very
troubled past. There is no doubt that UNISFA plays
an invaluable role in providing security and stability.
There is, however, no progress on the most contested
22-32578

21/04/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.9020

issue — whether Abyei will belong to the Sudan or
South Sudan.

including the mutual support for their respective
peace processes.

While that remains unresolved, the implementation
of joint mechanisms, as stipulated in the June 2011
agreement, is important. It will strengthen cooperation
and build trust between the communities on the ground.
We urge the parties to resume meetings of the Abyei
Joint Oversight Committee.

The United Kingdom is encouraged by the
latest joint session of the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism and the Joint Border Commission, held in
October. However, it is regrettable that such positive
developments have not led to tangible progress for
ordinary people in Abyei or to an agreement on a
political solution for the region. We therefore urge both
countries to organize a further meeting of the Abyei
Joint Oversight Committee, and we echo the SecretaryGeneral’s encouragement for the African Union to
intensify its mediation efforts in order to help facilitate
such efforts.

It is also critical that efficient visa procedures
be applied in order to ensure timely recruitment and
replacement of police and military personnel, as well
as human rights expertise and other civilian personnel.
In addition, it is critical that the Athony airstrip
be accessible.
Secondly, we value UNISFA’s continued efforts
to foster dialogue and trust among the communities
of Abyei. And we strongly encourage the Force’s
continued engagement in supporting women-led peace
initiatives, as well as its efforts to promote the rule
of law and human rights. Closer cooperation among
UNISFA, United Nations agencies and civil society
should be considered in that respect.
Finally, it is important to recognize that the current
impasse on the final status of Abyei reflects the
severe democratic challenges that mark the transitions
in both the Sudan and South Sudan. We encourage
the Governments of both countries to promote
inclusive political processes that consider the views
of the local populations. Cross-border cooperation
is, and will continue to be, key to a future where the
people enjoy security and development. Practical
confidence-building measures also create a conducive
environment. Neither side should see the ultimate
solution as a zero-sum game.
In conclusion, Norway strongly supports the
renewal of UNISFA’s mandate. We urge the parties
to implement the joint mechanisms, and we call on
the leaders of the Sudan and South Sudan to redouble
their efforts to reach an agreement on the final status
of Abyei.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
Let me begin by thanking our briefers, Mr. Lacroix
and Ms. Tetteh. I wish Ms. Tetteh all the best in her new
role. I also welcome the presence of the representatives
of the Sudan and South Sudan, and I commend the
two countries for their improved bilateral engagement,

Turning to the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA), we are glad to see that the
rotation of troops is almost concluded. We commend
the dedication of the Ethiopian peacekeepers in their
work to support peace and security in Abyei over the
last decade. It is our hope that attention can now return
to the full implementation of UNISFA’s mandated
tasks and improving the lives of citizens in Abyei who
continue to suffer.
To this end, we repeat our call on the Governments
of the Sudan and South Sudan to remove the operational
obstacles that limit UNISFA’s ability to implement
its mandate in full. We also remain concerned at the
continued restriction of UNISFA’s freedom of movement,
including on vital border-monitoring activities. We call
on both countries to remove restrictions on the freedom
of movement of UNISFA and urge the Government of
South Sudan to allow the re-operationalization of the
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
headquarters in Gok Machar.
We also join our fellow Council members in
expressing concern over the two armed attacks on
UNISFA forces during the reporting period. The
safety and security of United Nations peacekeepers
is vital, and we echo the Secretary-General’s call for
the relevant authorities to investigate and hold those
responsible to account.
Lastly, we would like to express deep concern
at the outbreak of violence in Agok, during which
two humanitarian workers were killed and activities
suspended. The United Kingdom urges all parties to
fully respect international humanitarian law and allow
humanitarian actors to deliver aid to those in need in all
parts of Abyei without hindrance.

22-3257815/18

S/PV.9020

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): Mr. President, first of
all, let me congratulate you and your delegation on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
during this holy month of April. My delegation accords
you its support.
Allow me also to welcome our briefers, UnderSecretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Special
Envoy Hanna Tetteh. We congratulate Ms. Tetteh on her
new appointment. She is surely not new to the issues of
South Sudan and the Sudan, and we are additionally
pleased that she is participating today from Juba.
I would also like to thank the Government of
Ethiopia for its commitment and service to the people of
Abyei for the last 10 years. The Ethiopian peacekeeping
forces, through their commitment, have sacrifice and at
times paid the ultimate price for keeping peace in the
Area. The Abyei community and the people of South
Sudan will be forever grateful.
South Sudan welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Abyei (S/2022/316), as
called for pursuant to resolution 2609 (2021). This
report comes at a time when the situation in Abyei is
engulfed by an uncertain security situation, especially
from perpetual attacks from the Ajaira Misseriya, who
over the last year have continuously attacked, killed,
displaced the Ngok Dinka and looted their property.
These attacks are organized and systematic, as reflected
in the coordinated approach and intensity with which
they have been unleashed on the villages. This can be
seen in the 5 and 6 March attacks in Mading Tong, where
30 lives were lost, as well as in the 13 April attacks in
Leu, Noong and Amiet, where a total of 41 lives were
lost. These are not well reflected in the report before
the Council.
South Sudan repeatedly raised its concern as to the
timing and security vacuum that will be created by the
quick and abrupt manner in which the Ethiopian forces
were allowed to exit. We knew their replacements
would not take over as quickly and as smoothly as the
Department had hoped. The aforementioned attacks
can be directly linked to the security vacuum, which
the Ajaira Misseriya are keen to exploit, as they have
done at the expense of our people.
The Security Council has repeatedly emphasized
through its resolutions that the region should remain
16/18

21/04/2022

a weapon-free area, with an exception granted to the
United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA) forces. But we continue to have the so-called
Oil Police in Diffra, despite the Security Council’s
calls for its exit. The recent attacks revealed that
elements of the Sudanese Armed Forces — its Rapid
Support Forces — were picking from the remains of
the attackers left on the ground. If this is allowed to
continue unabated, given the fact that the attacks on
Ngok Dinka have intensified, the security situation
will deteriorate further, with the Ajaira Misseriya, as
reported by our sources, organizing and mobilizing for
more attacks.
South Sudan calls on the Security Council, the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development to engage with the parties and finalize the
status of Abyei and the borders of the region, as agreed
in the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and held by the
International Court of Arbitration in The Hague. This
will create much-needed security, improve relations and
a structured engagement, which Ngok Dinka have been
longing for for a long time. In this regard, we welcome
the call of the representative of the United States for a
renewed diplomatic initiative on the issue of Abyei.
The role of the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism is crucial, as it continues to
support both countries in their obligation to complete
the demarcation of their border in line with the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. South Sudan will
continue to play a positive role towards the realization
of that goal.
On the unfortunate conflict between the Twic Dinka
and Ngok Dinka over the ownership of Agok — or
Amiet, as it is known — His Excellency President Salva
Kiir Mayardit acted swiftly in his appointment of
an investigating committee, with His Excellency
Vice-President Hussein Abdelbagi Akol Agany serving
as the committee chair and the committee composed
of stakeholders from both communities. Calm has
been restored while the investigation team continues
to investigate the genesis of the tension and find a
sustainable solution. I would like to take this opportunity
to pay our condolences to the families of those who lost
their lives, including the two humanitarian workers.
We have welcomed the initiative for an Abyei
joint programme with the visit of the team set up by
the Secretary-General, which visited both countries as
well as Abyei. This joint programme will play a pivotal
22-32578

21/04/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.9020

role in addressing the question of lack of services
and the scarcity of other essential items required by
the community. South Sudan has endeavoured within
limited resources to provide services in the region.
With this programme, we are confident that much will
be achieved.

establish an integrated and effective unified command
of the forces of all factions signatories to the peace
agreement, in line with the security arrangements under
the agreement, which have witnessed some challenges
before a positive breakthrough, thanks to the Sudanese
mediation and proposals.

I would like to conclude with the question of
reconciliation. Reconciliation is a very important
aspect of humanity when it is genuine and addresses
the core issues with the ultimate objective of reaching
a lasting solution between the parties or communities.
However, reconciliation in the face of perpetual attacks,
loss of life, displacement, loss of property and looting
without the perpetrators being answerable for their acts
or punished, reconciliation becomes a difficult task to
be achieved. For instance. It is nearly 10 years since
the Paramount Chief was assassinated in cold blood.
No one has answered for that. No report has been
released. Therefore, when the Council repeatedly calls
for reconciliation, what are we called to reconcile over?
Over a Paramount Chief assassinated, over a community
displaced, over property looted or over life lost?

Allow me to note that the proposals of the Sudan
took into account the spirit and text of the peace
agreement and therefore were accepted and welcomed
by the parties. Those proposals are comprehensive and
include a road map and a timetable for implementation.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohammed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We also express our appreciation
to the delegation of the sisterly United Arab Emirates
for its successful presidency of the Council last month.
We thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, UnderSecretary-General for Peace Operations, for his briefing
on the implementation of the mandate of the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA).
We also thank Ms. Hanna Tetteh, the Special Envoy
for the Horn of Africa, and congratulate her on her
new position. The Sudanese leadership welcomed her
during her visit to Khartoum two days ago. We also
take note of the report of the Secretary-General on this
issue (S/2022/316).
Bilateral relations between the Sudan and South
Sudan have witnessed positive developments over the
past few months, with the successful mediation lead
by the Sudan, resulting in the signing of an agreement
by the Government of South Sudan and the parties
to the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in South Sudan that will structure the
senior command of regular forces in South Sudan and

The Sudan is playing that role not only to strengthen
stability and security in South Sudan but also as a main
guarantor to monitor the implementation of the peace
agreement in South Sudan and because of the strong
historical relations between the Governments and
peoples of both countries.
As part of the rapprochement between the two
countries, we note the visit in March by the adviser
of the President of the Republic of South Sudan to
Khartoum, where he met with Sudanese political
leaders and officials. During the visit, the Chairman
of the Sovereignty Council called for accelerating the
process of opening border crossings between the two
countries to facilitate the movement of trade between
the two neighbouring countries.
Among the issues related to the situation in Abyei
that were discussed during the visit is a proposal from
the Sudan to establish a joint administration for Abyei.
We are still waiting to hear back from South Sudan in
that respect. If accepted and implemented, we believe
that it will have a positive impact on the security,
economic and social life of the residents in the region.
A meeting of the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism was held on 4 and 5 September 2021 in Juba.
At that meeting, which was headed by the Ministers of
Defence of both countries, the mechanism reviewed the
implementation of the results of the previous meeting,
held in Khartoum. The meeting also heard a report
from UNISFA and a report from the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM)
in the safe demilitarized zone. The Joint Political and
Security Mechanism, as the highest body responsible
for the joint cooperation agreements between the Sudan
and South Sudan, took positive decisions at its latest
meeting that will strengthen relations between the two
countries and promote joint security and stability. The

22-3257817/18

S/PV.9020

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

two parties also agreed to hold another meeting of the
Mechanism in Khartoum later this year.
Ms. Tetteh’s statement that political developments
in Khartoum were a cause of the meeting’s not being
held was incorrect. It was not the first time that the
meetings of the Joint Political and Security Committee
were postponed for various reasons, none of which was
the reason mentioned by Ms. Tetteh in her briefing.
The positive climate between the two countries has
had a positive impact on the situation in Abyei. The
Sudanese leadership is very pleased about that. The
Government of the Sudan is committed to building on the
development in the bilateral relations between the two
brotherly neighbours in order to promote peaceful and
social coexistence in the area and accelerate consensus
and understanding on the final status of Abyei.
Allow me to stress the following points.
First, the Government of the Sudan is counting on
friendly relations with South Sudan and wishes to take
advantage of the positive momentum in order to settle
the issue of Abyei, including the establishment of the
security and administrative mechanisms stipulated in
the agreement signed on 20 June 2011 between the two
parties, as well as issues related to border demarcation,
and without encroaching on the land and the current
demographic reality in the area.
Secondly, the Sudan is keen to maintain security,
stability and peace in Abyei, but we also express our
concern regarding the incidents that have taken place
over the past few weeks. We offer our condolences to
the families of the humanitarian workers who lost their
lives as a result of those incidents, which led to the
withdrawal of the JBVMM team from some locations.
Those locations were closed, and the personnel were
evacuated to Abyei. The Sudan calls for de-escalation,
the easing of tensions in the area and for the parties
to refrain from taking any unilateral measure that

18/18

21/04/2022

could threaten the stability of UNISFA operations. We
stress that the Abyei Area must be free of any armed
presence north and south of the zero line, pursuant to
the agreements signed between both countries.
Last week, the Chairman of the Sovereignty Council
of the Sudan issued a decision to form a fact-finding
mission to investigate the recent violent incidents in
Abyei. In that context, we are very concerned by the
presence of armed forces from South Sudan in the buffer
zone. That will have a negative impact on security and
stability in the area.
Thirdly, we welcome the fact that UNISFA has
started to implement 16 quick-impact projects. We call
on it to accelerate the implementation of further similar
projects, as that would have a positive impact on the lives
of the people there, especially with respect to education,
health, drinking water and the maintenance of security
and order. We also welcome the recommendation of
the Secretary-General that the mandate of UNISFA be
renewed for six additional months.
In conclusion, we reiterate the commitment of the
Government of the Sudan to strengthening cooperation
with the Government of South Sudan in order to
strengthen the work of the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism and the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee,
in addition to establishing joint security and civil
mechanisms between the two countries, in accordance
with the provisions of the agreements signed between
the two parties, leading to a resolution of the final-status
issues for Abyei, according to the agreed-upon terms
of reference.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

22-32578
