100

General AHembly-Twenty-fifth See,ion

in the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples,

Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of these TerritorieS,
1. Approves the chapters of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to these Territories;
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
these Territories to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries ~d
Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution

1514 (XV);
3. Calls upon the administering Powers to implement with respect to these Territories, and without
further delay, resolution 1514 (XV) and other relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly;
4. Expresses its conviction that the questions of territorial size, geographical isolation and limited resources
should in no way delay the implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples with respect to these
Territories;
5. Reiterates its declaration that any attempt aimed
at the partial or total disruption of the national unity
and the territorial integrity of colonial Territories and
the establishment of military bases and installations in
these Territories is incompatible with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
resolution 1514 (XV);
6. Strongly urges the administering Powers to reconsider their attitude towards the receiving of visiting
missions to the above-mentioned Territories and to
permit access by such visiting missions to Territories
under their administration;
1. Decides that the United Nations should render all
help to the peoples of these Territories in their efforts
freely to decide their future status;
8. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
pay special attention to these Territories and to report
to the General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session on
the implementation of the present resolution.
1929th plenary meeting,
14 December 1970.

2710 (XXV). Question of Antigua, Dominica,
Grenada, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia
and St. Vincent

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other relevant resolutions,
Recalling also its resolution 2593 (XXIV) of 16
December 1969 concerning Antigua, Dominica,
Grenada, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia and St.
Vincent,
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard

to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,a1
1. Takes note of the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situa~on with regard ~o the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Grantmg of
Independence to Colonial Countries and P~oples ~elating to Antigua, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts-NevisAnguilla, St. Lucia and St. Vincent;
2. Requests the Special Committee to give urgent
consideration to all aspects of this question in accordance with General Assembly resolution 2593 (XXIV)
and to report thereon to the Assembly at its twentysixth session.
1929th plenary meeting,
14 December 1970.
2711 (XXV). Question of Spanish Sahara

The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory of Spanish Sahara,82
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling also the relevant provisions of its resolution 2621 (XXV) of ·12 October 1970 containing the
programme of action for the full implementation of
the Declaration,
Taking into consideration the resolutions adopted,
respectively by the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity at
its seventh ordinary session, held at Addis Ababa from
1 to 3 September 1970, and by the Third Conference
of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at Lusaka from 8 to 10 September
1970,
Reaffirming its resolutions 2072 (XX) of 16 December 1965 2229 (XXI) of 20 December 1966, 2354
(XXII) ~f 19 December 1967, 2428 (XXIII) of 18
December 1968 and 2591 (XXIV) of 16 December
1969,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Sahara to self-determination in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory of Spanish Sahara;
3. Expresses its regret that it has not yet been possible for the consultations to take place which the administering Power was to conduct with the Governments concerned in connexion with the holding of a
referendum in the Territory;
4. Declares that the continued existence of a
colonial situation in the Territory retards stability and
harmony in north-west Africa;
5. Regrets the incidents of bloodshed which occurred in the Territory in June 1970 and calls upon
3t Ibid., chapter XVII.
s2 Ibid., chapter IX
