S/PV.4204 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-fifth year

4204

th meeting
Wednesday, 4 October 2000, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Andjaba . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Namibia)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Netherlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Listre
Mr. Chowdhury
Mr. Heinbecker
Mr. Wang Yingfan
Mr. Levitte
Miss Durrant
Mr. Hasmy
Mr. Ouane
Mr. vanWalsum
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Ben Mustapha
Mr. Yel’chenko
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Mr. Holbrooke

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian Question
Letter dated 2 October 2000 from the Permanent Representative of Iraq to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2000/928)
Letter dated 2 October 2000 from the Permanent Representative of Malaysia to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2000/929)
Identical letters dated 2 October 2000 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and to the
President of the Security Council (S/2000/930)
Letter dated 2 October 2000 from the Permanent Representative of South
Africa to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2000/934)
Letter dated 2 October 2000 from the Permanent Representative of Malaysia to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2000/935)
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

00-67366 (E)
`````````

S/PV.4204 (Resumption 1)

The meeting was resumed at 3.20 p.m.,
4 October 2000.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Indonesia, Japan, Lebanon,
Morocco, Nepal, Oman, the Sudan, the United Arab
Emirates and Viet Nam in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Thayeb
(Indonesia), Mr. Akasaka (Japan), Mr. Tadmoury
(Lebanon), Mr. Zahid (Morocco), Mr. Sharma
(Nepal), Mr. Al-Hassan (Oman), Mr. Erwa
(Sudan), Mr. Samhan (United Arab Emirates) and
Mr. Nguyen Thanh Chau (Viet Nam), took the
seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 2 October
2000 from the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, which reads as follows:
“In my capacity as Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, I have the
honour to request that I be invited to participate
in the debate on the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, under
rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure of
the Security Council.”
On previous occasions, the Security Council has
extended invitations to representatives of other United
Nations bodies in connection with the consideration of
matters on its agenda. In accordance with past practice
in this matter, I propose that the Council extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

2

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 3 October 2000 from the
Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the United
Nations, which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that the
Security Council extend an invitation, under rule
39 of its provisional rules of procedure, to
Hussein Hassouna, Ambassador, Permanent
Observer for the League of Arab States to the
United Nations, to participate in the Council’s
forthcoming discussions on the situation in the
Palestinian occupied territories.”
That letter has been published as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/2000/939.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to
Mr. Hussein Hassouna.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 3 October 2000 from the
Permanent Representative of Malaysia to the United
Nations, which reads as follows:
“I have the honour in my capacity as
Chairman of the Islamic Group of the United
Nations to request that the Security Council
extend an invitation to participate in the
discussion under rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Mokhtar Lamani, Permanent Observer of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference to the
United Nations, during the Council’s discussion
on the item entitled ‘The situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question’,
scheduled for Wednesday, 4 October 2000.”
That letter will be published as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2000/951.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to
Mr. Lamani.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Algeria. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.

S/PV.4204 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): Despite
the tragic circumstances in which this first meeting of
the Security Council under your presidency, Sir, is
being held, I should like to express my joy and pride at
seeing you, a worthy son of Africa, following another
worthy son of Africa at the helm of the Council.
I am convinced that the great professional and
human qualities that all of your colleagues recognize in
you will enable you to conduct the work of the Council
as brilliantly as did your predecessor, my brother
Ambassador Moctar Ouane of Mali — who has earned
our gratitude and admiration — during a particularly
busy month, when heads of State and Government
honoured us with their presence, including in this very
Chamber.
I thank you for the opportunity to participate in
these deliberations. I should like to make a few
comments concerning the way the Security Council
functions and its attitude towards deciding the
timeliness of convening or not convening a formal
meeting.
Increasingly, the consultations of the Council
have indeed been delayed and dragged out beyond
measure over the question of whether or not to meet in
public, even when a request for such a meeting has
been submitted by one or several regional groups; over
the principle of whether or not to involve non-members
of the Council; over the issue of whether or not to
limit, out of considerations that are not always well
founded, the right of certain countries to speak; and
even over the merit of calling on speakers to adopt a
particular tone in debates.
As if it were not enough that the Council’s way of
doing business already causes sufficient problems and
that its methods already need revision and
improvement, attempts are now being made to restrict
access to it.
I wish to remind the Council that it is my
understanding and that of the States Members of this
Organization that it is the absolute right of any Member
State to call for a public meeting and that it is also the
absolute right of any State to speak in a debate and to
adopt the tone it deems appropriate.
For a number of States Members of this
Organization, and certainly for its weakest and
smallest, the United Nations remains the ultimate
forum in which they can, in all freedom and without

fear, express their opinions, their expectations and even
their frustrations and anger when the international
community is incapable of protecting women and
children from the deadly madness of men in the Middle
East, in Africa, Europe or elsewhere.
To restrict the right to speak and to prefer the
secrecy of consultations — which may occasionally
prove to be useful and necessary — to frank,
transparent and open debate is undemocratic and
contrary to the very principles of our Organization. If
this regrettable trend continues, we may one day find
ourselves reduced to contemplating the famous
statement of a French revolutionary: “All we have left
is the right to keep quiet and there has been talk of
stripping us of that”. This situation only makes the
reform of the Security Council even more urgent.
Perhaps it is time for us seriously to tackle this
question.
For several days now the populations of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif and the occupied Palestinian territories have
been the objects of a repression the likes of which has
rarely been seen since the intifada. Children and
adolescents, armed only with their faith in the justice
of their cause, and having nothing to protect
themselves besides the pathetic means of defence that
nature offers them, are, in effect, facing an incredible
deployment of force involving tanks, missiles and
helicopter gunships.
The
result
of
this
obviously
unfair
confrontation — can we really talk about a
confrontation? — is that scores of innocent people,
including very young children, including even today a
10-year-old child in the Gaza Strip — have been killed
in cold blood by bullets. Meanwhile, to fight their
murderers these young people have had only their fists
and their stones, and even the ambulances bearing the
flag of the Red Cross have been fired at.
Over these past days we have all witnessed this
barbaric behaviour of another age. We all saw live on
our television screens the unbearable sight of that 12year-old child who was cruelly killed despite the
supplications of his father and his father’s vain
attempts to protect his son from the bullets of the
Israeli soldiers. What is still worse is that even the
ambulance worker who tried to help found himself
caught in the crossfire of the Israeli army and was
killed.

3

S/PV.4204 (Resumption 1)

If these painful images that the cameras have
brought into each of our living rooms and that still
haunt us and will haunt us for ever, even in this
Chamber of the Security Council — if these images
can serve some purpose, it is to convince us that, on the
one hand, it is not acceptable that children are targeted,
and, on the other hand, that as a matter of urgency we
must do all we can to see to it that this shameful
butchery stops as soon as possible and that the civilian
population that has been the victim of the brutality of
the Israeli occupying forces is protected.
The acts that triggered the tragic developments
that have been occurring in Al-Quds Al-Sharif and the
occupied territories since last Friday are well known,
as are those who are responsible for it. We all know
that the originator of this terrible tragedy was the
commander who ordered the massacre of Sabra and
Shatila and the invasion and occupation of Lebanon.
We all also know that what he wished to achieve from
these acts of provocation — which led to the tragedy
that the people in the occupied Palestinian territories
are now undergoing — was to scuttle the peace process
and wreck for ever the chance of achieving a just and
final settlement of the Palestinian question. And we all
know that a just, lasting and comprehensive peace
cannot be achieved without the total, definitive
withdrawal of the Israeli forces from the territories that
have been occupied since 1967 and without the
restoration of the Palestinian people’s national,
legitimate rights, including its right to create its own
independent State with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its
capital.
In this difficult time when Palestinian civilians
are victims of the brutality of the occupying forces, it
is important that the Security Council rise to its
responsibilities and fulfil its role and its mandate with
regard to the Palestinian people and international law.
In this connection, the Council must see to it that, as
soon as possible, a stop is put to the illegal actions that
the Israeli occupying Power is engaging in. In
particular, an end must be put to the use of real bullets
against a defenceless civilian population.
The Israeli security forces must also immediately
withdraw from the plaza of Al-Haram Al-Sharif and
allow the third holy place of Islam to regain its serenity
and tranquillity, and they must also must withdraw
from the Palestinian towns where they are deployed.
Finally, Israel, as the administering Power, must be put
on notice to respect the Fourth Geneva Convention and

4

to guarantee the security and protection of Palestinian
civilians.
These are our expectations — the expectations of
my country, Algeria, which has stood, continues to
stand and in the future will stand united with the
fraternal Palestinian people, and which believes firmly
that peace is the right strategy for the settlement of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. These are also, I am sure,
the expectations of the international community as a
whole, and the Security Council has no right to
disappoint it.
The President: I thank the representative of
Algeria for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Pakistan.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan): Let me also begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this
important meeting to consider a serious development
that comes to all of us as a shock.
We all saw the pain-ridden face of that small
child lying at his father’s side as the last breath of life
slipped out of him. This was only one glimpse of the
fate that is suffered by thousands of children in
different parts of the world that are under foreign
occupation or in conflict situations. This tragedy is a
grim reminder that a part of humanity dies each time an
innocent life is snuffed out by violence.
The Security Council meets today in the wake of
the tragic events in Palestine, resulting in the deaths of
scores of innocent civilians, including children, and
injuries to many others. With these events, the hope
that peace was finally taking root in the Middle East
has fast evaporated.
We share the international outrage and concern at
the high-handedness of the Israeli forces’ actions
against defenceless Palestinian civilians in the very
vicinity of Al-Haram Al-Sharif, the third most holy
place of Islam. The immediate reason is the misplaced
determination of certain elements in Israel to
undermine the Middle East peace process. The Security
Council must send an unequivocal message that such
provocative actions and the bloodshed of innocent
Palestinians are unacceptable to the international
community.

S/PV.4204 (Resumption 1)

The excessive force used by the Israeli security
forces is simply unjustifiable. Grave breaches of the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 12 August 1949 have
been committed. The first article of that Convention
emphasizes that
“The High Contracting Parties undertake to
respect and to ensure respect for the present
Convention in all circumstances.”
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) continue to provide a viable and just framework
for a comprehensive peace in the Middle East. The
status of Al-Quds Al-Sharif, Holy Jerusalem, remains
central to any comprehensive settlement of the ArabIsraeli conflict. No lasting peace in the region will be
possible without the realization of the legitimate rights
of the Palestinian people. These include their right to
establish their independent State with Holy Jerusalem
as its capital and the exercise of their full sovereignty
over Al-Haram Al-Sharif. Pakistan extends its
unequivocal support to the just struggle of the people
of Palestine for their inalienable rights. This has been
our policy in respect of all peoples struggling against
foreign occupation and repression.
The peace process had recently been making
steady, if agonizingly slow, progress due to realistic
approaches of the leaders of the two sides. It has now
been dealt a severe blow and has been pushed to the
verge of collapse. Continuation of the violence
threatens to wreck the peace process. Immediate steps
are therefore needed to prevent any further
deterioration of the situation. The peace process must
be urgently put back on track on the basis of
agreements reached and full compliance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions. At stake are the
authority and credibility of the United Nations.
Prompt action is therefore required by the
international community, in particular the Security
Council, to put an end to the present round of violence
against the Palestinians, secure Israel’s compliance
with United Nations resolutions, ensure the safety and
sanctity of Al-Quds Al-Sharif and facilitate the
realization of the national rights of the Palestinian
people. The prospects for peace in that region, and
indeed the future prosperity of the Middle East, now
rest with this body.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Jordan. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.

Mr. Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): It is
my pleasure at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on
your accession to the presidency of the Security
Council this month. I am confident that your wisdom,
experience and wide-ranging knowledge will lead us to
the desired success. May I also express our deep
appreciation to your predecessor, the representative of
Mali, for the skill with which he presided over the
deliberations of the Council last month. May I
furthermore express my thanks to you for convening
this emergency meeting of the Security Council
following a request by the League of Arab States, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and the
Movement of Non-Aligned States.
The convening of this emergency meeting at this
time to take up the situation in the Palestinian occupied
territories is a clear expression of how aware and
concerned the Security Council is about the latest grave
events that threaten our region with a new wave of
violence and bloodshed. His Majesty King Abdullah
Bin Al Hussein has warned of the threat of such acts to
the peace process. These events once again reaffirm the
urgent need for peace in the Middle East as well as the
right of the Palestinian people to be rid of the injustice
and occupation under which they have languished for a
very long time.
The Government of the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan condemns the attacks and the heinous crimes
committed against Palestinians in Al-Quds Al-Sharif
and the occupied territories by the Israeli occupation
forces. We call on the Israeli Government to withdraw
its forces from the territories and towns under
Palestinian authority without delay.
The events in Al-Quds Al-Sharif are a direct
consequence of extremism and provocative practices
perpetrated by those who reject peace inside Israel
against Palestinians and against the feelings of Arabs
and Muslims. The Prime Minister of Jordan, Mr. Ali
Abul Ragheb, has stated that condoning extremism will
only lead to further extremism and strife and will
overcome the voice of dialogue, which we have all
accepted in the region as the only effective means to
reach just, lasting and comprehensive peace.
The Government of the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan calls on the Israeli Government to shoulder its
responsibilities vis-à-vis this critical situation at this
delicate stage of the peace process in the region. We
call upon it to cease harming the Palestinian people. In

5

S/PV.4204 (Resumption 1)

particular, it must stop the harm being meted out by
short-sighted extremists who, by their acts, are
undermining the peace process and working to renew
strife, violence, hatred and enmity in the region.
Jordan, its King, its Government and its people
reaffirm their solidarity with our brothers, the
Palestinian people, as they seek to achieve their
legitimate rights and establish their independent State
on their national soil with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its
capital.
May I, on behalf of my Government, express our
condolences and sympathy to the Palestinian leadership
and to our brothers, the Palestinian people, and with
their innocent martyrs.
The President: I thank the representative of
Jordan for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is Mr. Ibra
Deguène Ka, Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Ka (Senegal), Chairman of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People (spoke in French): I wish at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October. I am certain that under your wise guidance the
work of the Council will proceed in a constructive,
effective and successful fashion.
I wish also to congratulate your predecessor,
Ambassador Moctar Ouane, Permanent Representative
of Mali to the United Nations, on the exemplary way in
which he guided the work of the Council in
September — which is to say during the historic
millennium Summit.
I am grateful to you, Sir, and to the other
members of the Security Council for having given me
the opportunity to participate, in my capacity as
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, in this
important debate on the very recent events in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem.
For several months we have been following very
closely the endeavours to bring about a final peace
settlement between the Israelis and the Palestinians,
and we had been increasingly hopeful about the

6

outcome of the peace process. Although the Camp
David peace summit sponsored by the United States in
July did not yield all the hoped-for results, the parties
nevertheless remained together and frankly addressed
all the issues. This gave us reason to hope that
agreement might be reached. Indeed, the Palestinian
side decided last month to postpone a declaration of
statehood, even though it was entirely entitled to make
such a declaration. With that courageous and
responsible act, Palestine gave peace another chance.
Unfortunately, the Israeli side failed to
reciprocate. Throughout the time when IsraeliPalestinian final status negotiations were under way,
Israeli settlement continued without interruption, both
in the West Bank, including Jerusalem, and in the Gaza
Strip. Those unlawful measures, which seriously
undermined the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people in occupied East Jerusalem, are a blatant
violation of international law, of the fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, and of the great number of
resolutions and decisions adopted by the Security
Council and the General Assembly since 1947.
As members know, the latest outbreak of violence
followed in the wake of the provocative visit to the
forecourt of the holy site of Al-Haram Al-Sharif by the
Israeli opposition leader Mr. Ariel Sharon, and of the
brutal, disproportionate and indiscriminate way in
which the Israeli defence forces and police responded
to the protests the visit triggered among Palestinians.
As we all know, the results have been tragic: 63
Palestinian appear to have been killed, and more than
1,500 injured. The victims include civilians and even
innocent children, some as young as 12 years of age.
These inhuman acts run counter to humanitarian law
and to the letter and the spirit of the Declaration of
Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements
and of subsequent implementation agreements. These
actions could threaten the integrity of the peace
negotiations at a time when these should be entering
their most critical phase. They have struck a harsh
blow to the credibility of the entire peace process, and
thus threaten the peace and stability of the region.
These deplorable events have caused concern
throughout the international community, beginning
with the co-sponsors of the peace process, as well as
the European Union, the League of Arab States, the
Organization of African Unity and the Organization of
the Islamic Conference. The Committee on the

S/PV.4204 (Resumption 1)

Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People wishes to join them in calling upon the two
parties to refrain from any further escalation of
violence, and to spare no effort to defuse the tension
once and for all. Moreover, the Committee joins with
all in the international community who have called
upon the Israeli Government and upon the Israeli
political parties and security forces to take no further
measures that could jeopardize the peace process. The
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People calls for respect for the holy
places. The Committee calls for ensuring that the
Palestinian population will be protected. The
Committee calls for protection of the property of
Palestinians in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including Jerusalem, and for a halt to all activities that
could cause the peace efforts to miscarry. The
Committee appeals to the parties to proceed swiftly to
full, good-faith implementation of the agreements that
have already been concluded, with a view to achieving
a comprehensive, just and lasting settlement based on
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973).
The Committee remains convinced that only by
speedy, joint progress along the path of the peace
process, towards a comprehensive, just and lasting
settlement, will it be possible to stop the situation in
the Middle East from deteriorating. Any exacerbation
of the present tension could have unforeseeable
consequences for peace and stability in the region —
something no one could wish to see.
As we are all aware, there is no possible
alternative to peace negotiations — the negotiations
upon which the two parties embarked so courageously.
Israeli leaders should recognize that peace and stability
cannot be imposed unilaterally and by military means,
but that peace and security must rest first and foremost
on mutual respect and on the development of a
partnership based on equity and mutual trust. There is
no need to recall that Israeli policies and practices that
deny the legitimate needs and aspirations of the
Palestinian people can never be compatible with the
peace process.
By convening this meeting, members of the
Security Council have clearly shown that they have
been deeply concerned at the deteriorating situation in
the occupied Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem,
and at the problems that threaten to derail the peace
process. The Committee on the Exercise of the

Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People fervently
hopes that this discussion will provide an opportunity
for the Council to show its determination to find ways
to prevent an escalation of the violence we have all
been witnessing, and also to get the peace process back
on track so that it can soon reach a successful
conclusion.
The international community, and in particular
the sponsors of the peace process, must assist the
parties to make rapid progress along the path of
negotiated peace, a path to which they committed
themselves together to guarantee lasting peace in the
region.
In conclusion, let me state once again that the
Committee I represent believes that the United Nations
should continue to exercise the primary, ongoing
responsibility incumbent on it with respect to all
aspects of the question of Palestine, including the
problem of Jerusalem, until the question is settled in a
satisfactory manner, in accordance with United Nations
resolutions and international law, until finally all the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people are fully
realized. The events that have brought us together
today once again prove that the United Nations must
continue to involve itself in the question of Palestine
and in all the questions relating to peace and security in
the Middle East.
The President: I thank the Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People for his kind words addressed to
me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Kuwait. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): Our
delegation wishes at the outset to congratulate you, Mr.
President, on your accession to the presidency of the
Council for this month, for we are well aware of your
experience and capabilities. We also wish to express
our thanks to your predecessor, Ambassador Moctar
Ouane of the Republic of Mali, for his excellent efforts
in steering the Council last month. My delegation also
wishes to express its appreciation to you and to all the
members of the Council for convening this meeting,
which affirms the Council’s credibility in undertaking
one of the most important tasks it has been entrusted
with under the United Nations Charter: maintaining
international peace and security.

7

S/PV.4204 (Resumption 1)

Kuwait wishes to affirm that the massacres
perpetrated by Ariel Sharon, with the blessings and
support of the Israeli Government, against the
Palestinian people and the occupied Palestinian
territories, including Al-Quds Al-Sharif, are indeed
blatant threats to international security, not to mention
the fact that they are also blatant provocations of the
feelings of the Arab nation and the Islamic world alike.
Our delegation finds it very difficult to describe
our emotions when faced with the massacres and the
tragedy to which children, youth and the elderly are
being subjected in Palestine; massacres that continue
through today, and in which more than one person has
been killed and hundreds have been wounded,
according to the media. We can never forget the images
seen by the entire world of the martyrdom of the
Palestinian child, Mohammed Al-Durra, and other
Palestinian children who have fallen victim to the
savage and barbaric acts of the Israeli occupying
forces.
What makes it more painful to us, as human
beings first of all, before being Muslims and Arabs, is
the reaction of the United Nations, which recently
declared at the Millennium Summit its commitment to
spare no effort to protect the vulnerable, particularly
the children — the generations of the future.
Unfortunately, this leads us to pose many questions
concerning the credibility of what has often been
declared in this Organization and what has been
implemented over a long period of time. I refer in
particular, first, to the Fourth Geneva Convention of
1949; secondly, to the Security Council meetings on
the protection of civilians during armed conflict, and
particularly resolution 1261 (1999), adopted by the
Security Council in this connection; thirdly, to the
Secretary-General’s report on children and armed
conflict and his appointment of an international
representative for this purpose; fourthly, to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child of 1989; fifthly,
to the results of the Millennium Summit — the ink of
the Declaration is not yet dry; and, sixthly, to the
special session of the General Assembly for follow-up
to the World Summit for Children, to be held next year.
Bearing in mind all the above within the context
of what we have been witnessing over the past few
days — the tragedies and the deliberate murder of
unarmed children — can we really convince our
peoples today that the United Nations has the capacity
to prevent the likes of Ariel Sharon if they decide to

8

put an end to the innocence of childhood? Can the
United Nations alleviate the suffering of every
Palestinian child who has fallen victim to recent
repressive Israeli practices? Our delegation will leave it
up to the members of the Security Council to answer
those questions.
The Government of the State of Kuwait, as
represented by the Council of Ministers, has denounced
those savage Israeli practices against the Palestinian
people in the occupied Palestinian territories and
Al-Quds Al-Sharif resulting from the Israeli forces’
resorting to extreme measures against civilians there.
Kuwait has expressed its rejection and condemnation at
all levels of Ariel Sharon’s provocative visit to the holy
city of Al-Quds Al-Sharif and the desecration of holy
Islamic shrines. Moreover, Kuwait considers these
Israeli practices blatant violations of Security Council
resolution 1261 (1999), which firmly condemned any
operations directed against children in armed conflicts.
They are also violations of the principles of
international law, particularly the Fourth Geneva
Convention.
It has become very clear to world public opinion
how sensitive the issue of Al-Quds Al-Sharif is for us
all. It has become clear that the Arab and Islamic
peoples will never give up their rights to those holy
shrines, particularly Al-Haram Al-Sharif, the third
holiest Islamic site. In this respect, Kuwait reaffirms its
position on the need to support the demands of the
Palestinian people, their right to self-determination and
the right to establish their independent Palestinian State
with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.
Establishing a just and comprehensive peace in
the region must be based on the implementation of the
resolutions of the Security Council, in particular
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), and on the
principle of land-for-peace and Israel’s withdrawal
from all Arab territories occupied since 1967, including
Arab Syrian Golan.
In conclusion, we call upon the Security Council
to assume its responsibilities, end Israel’s repressive
practices against the innocent unarmed civilians of
Palestine, condemn Israel’s practices, ask it to
withdraw its forces from Al-Haram Al-Sharif, and all
Palestinian territories, and call for an international
investigation of the crimes perpetrated against the
Palestinian people, in particular the crimes committed
against children. Moreover, the Council should hold

S/PV.4204 (Resumption 1)

the Israeli Government fully responsible for all its
actions.
Kuwait would like to express its appreciation for
the efforts to establish peace and normalcy in the
region made by the Governments of the United States
of America and France, as well as those made by Egypt
under the leadership of President Hosni Mubarak and
his Government.
The President: I thank the representative of
Kuwait for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Qatar. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to extend my sincere
congratulations to you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October. I am certain that your experience and
diplomatic skills will help us to deal with the sensitive,
important and serious subject before us. Undoubtedly,
your decision to convene this meeting stemmed from
your deep understanding of the problem we currently
face on the Palestinian front and its potential effects on
the Middle East as a whole. We would also like to
extend our sincere appreciation to the Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Mali, Ambassador
Ouane, for his wisdom and excellent conduct of the
work of the Council during his presidency in
September.
The popular uprising currently raging in the
occupied Palestinian territories is but an expression of
the frustration and oppression suffered by the
Palestinian people at the hands of Israel’s tyranny,
which has surpassed all limits. The most recent
example of that tyranny was the provocative visit by
Ariel Sharon, the leader of the Israeli opposition, to AlHaram Al-Sharif. That visit was another attempt by
Israel to assert its baseless claims over Al-Quds AlSharif, in complete disregard of all international
resolutions and covenants, and in particular of Security
Council resolution 242 (1967). It was not only a
provocation to the sentiments of the Palestinian people,
but also a provocation to the feelings of millions of
Muslims around the world, and has aroused
unprecedented risks. As we know, there are limits to
people’s patience. We believe that for the Palestinian
people the situation has now surpassed the limits of
patience.

We, together with the entire world, have followed
the horrible images in the world press and television
networks of the actions against unarmed civilians
perpetrated by Israel’s occupation forces, who are
armed with all sorts of light and heavy weapons,
including tanks and helicopters. One of the most
atrocious crimes committed by those forces was the
heart-wrenching and painful scene of 12-year-old
Mohammed Jamal Al-Durra being killed in the arms of
his father. In addition to being one of the most
outrageous scenes we have seen, it was also a flagrant
violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War.
I would like, on behalf of the Government, the
people and the Permanent Mission of Qatar, to extend
our deepest sympathy and condolences to the families
of all the victims. We pray to Almighty God to grant
the victims a place among the martyrs at his side.
The aggressive actions against an unarmed people
by the Israeli army, which was backed by groups of
Jewish settlers and has violated all international
customs and norms, represents a shameful stigma upon
anyone who defends the Israeli position today. Those
actions are further proof that Israel’s Government
continues to be held hostage to extremist factions
within the Israeli population that completely disregard
internationally binding resolutions. The international
community is urged to act and to assume its
responsibility towards the Palestinian people, whose
land has been occupied and whose members have been
expelled to every part of the world to suffer the fate of
a permanent Diaspora as a direct result of Israel’s
ongoing rejection of their right to return to their
homeland.
Together with the entire world, we await the
outcome of the Paris talks that have brought together
Palestinian President Yasser Arafat, Israeli Prime
Minister Ehud Barak and United States Secretary of
State Madeleine Albright. However, Qatar’s view of
the peace process in the Middle East is founded on
realistic foundations and principles, regardless of the
differing views about that situation. Achieving a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace requires putting an
end to Israel’s occupation of all occupied Palestinian
territories, including Al-Quds Al-Sharif, and enabling
the Palestinian people to secure their legitimate
national and political rights. Those rights include their
right to return to their land, to enjoy self-determination

9

S/PV.4204 (Resumption 1)

and to have an independent State with Al-Quds AlSharif as its capital.
The tragic events that are taking place in the
occupied Palestinian territories should not be condoned
or forgotten. People never forgive or forget. In this
regard, we call on the Security Council to shoulder its
responsibilities under the Charter and take the
following actions.
First, it should intervene rapidly and call upon
Israel to halt its excessive and aggressive hostilities
and to withdraw its forces, which continue to kill
innocent, unarmed Palestinian civilians, including
children. Secondly, it should guarantee Palestinians
total freedom to carry out their religious practices in
Al-Quds Al-Sharif, free from harassment by Israeli
forces. Thirdly, it should launch an international
investigation of these tragic and outrageous events and
call for the prosecution of those Israelis responsible for
firing on Palestinian citizens, killing scores and
wounding hundreds more. Fourthly, it should condemn
the provocation caused by Ariel Sharon’s visit to
Al-Haram Al-Sharif. Fifthly, it should condemn the
actions of the occupying Israeli forces and call on them
to comply with the norms and instruments of
international law, in particular the Fourth Geneva
Convention. And sixthly, it should call for
compensation to Palestinian civilians for the loss of life
and material damage that they incurred as a result of
those events. This is the least it can do to appease the
outrage of the Arab peoples and to maintain the
credibility of the Security Council in the eyes of the
international community.
The President: I thank the representative of
Qatar for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Bahrain. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I have
placed my statement in a black file as an expression of
condolence and mourning for the Palestinian children
who were martyred by the bullets of Israeli soldiers in
the West Bank, in Al-Quds Al-Sharif and in the Gaza
Strip. This is the least that I, as an Arab citizen, could
do.
First of all, I should like, Sir, on behalf of my
delegation, to extend to you my congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security

10

Council for this month and to wish you every success. I
should like also to express my appreciation to you for
your speedy response to the request made by the
United Nations Arab Group, the Islamic Group and the
Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Movement to
convene this urgent and important meeting, in order to
allow the Council to assume its responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, as set
forth in the Charter of the United Nations.
The leader of the extremist Likud party, Ariel
Sharon, whose hands are still stained with the blood of
the martyrs of the Sabra and Shatila massacre, has
desecrated the courtyard of Al-Haram Al-Sharif. That
desecration was a blatant provocation and an attack on
the feelings and emotions of Muslims, and it had the
predictable results of triggering an uprising by the
Palestinian people against this deliberate act of
aggression.
The day before yesterday, an Israeli Government
official declared that the Government did not approve
of Sharon’s conduct and believed that the visit had
been a mistake. That official also said that the
Palestinian reaction was an orchestrated scenario. We
would like at this juncture to ask if it is reasonable to
allege that the Palestinians wanted and planned a
situation in which not dozens but hundreds of
Palestinian children would die at the hands of the
Israeli army — not the Israeli police — as a reprisal for
throwing stones — stones thrown yesterday by children
who have become men today.
Israeli bullets pierced the bodies of Palestinians,
blowing them to bits. One can only imagine the
physical suffering endured by those people, who were
also attacked by tanks, armoured vehicles and snipers.
Victims — men, women and children — fell before the
Israeli army, which was armed to the teeth. Most of
those present have seen the picture published on
Sunday by The New York Times, a picture of a father
and son, terror apparent on their faces. Seconds after
the picture was taken, the son was killed and the father
wounded trying to protect him.
The latest episode in this bloody chain of events,
as reported in Arab newspapers, concerns a father who
was helping to identify the bodies of murdered
Palestinians. He was shocked to discover that one of
the bodies was that of his son. He had been killed in an
extremely savage manner. The newspaper reported that

S/PV.4204 (Resumption 1)

“A rocket pierced Sami’s thin, dark body
and destroyed his chest and abdomen. He also
had seven bullets in his torso. Sami was
transferred to the hospital without an identity
card. The news spread that an unidentified martyr
was in the hospital, and the official Palestinian
television station broadcast Sami’s picture.
However, his father and his sick mother, who was
in the same hospital, did not know that their son
had died in another part of that hospital.”
In the face of these tragic events, we cannot but
ask the survivors of the Holocaust if, following the
ordeal they suffered, an Israeli generation exists that
wants to retaliate — in a merciless, savage and barbaric
manner — against people who were not responsible for
their ordeal. What crime have the Palestinians
committed that they should pay the price of mistakes
made by others? Their nation was occupied, their lands
confiscated, their citizens slaughtered in retaliation for
a crime perpetrated by others. Where is the 1949
Geneva Convention? Where are Security Council
resolutions 242 (1968) and 338 (1973), among the
other resolutions adopted in accordance with
international law concerning the rights of the
Palestinian people? Israel rode roughshod over them,
just as it disregarded the agreements concluded
following the Oslo talks and the Madrid Conference.
Israel wants only one peace: that which fulfils its
desire — the desire not to withdraw from the occupied
territories, let alone to give up the confiscated land on
which it has built its settlements.
Is it possible on that basis for just peace talks — I
stress the qualification, “just” — to have any chance of
success? The Palestinians, supported by the Arabs, are
advocates of peace. Provocation always comes from
the Israeli side. The Israeli side must be fully
convinced, on the basis of its experience, that
surrendering is not in the vocabulary of the
Palestinians or the Arabs. It has eloquent testimony of
this fact in the stone-throwing children of the past who
are the stone-throwing men of today. If Israel leans
towards a comprehensive peace based on justice, with a
provocation-free credibility, the Palestinians, supported
by the Arabs, will be the first to go along with it.
The President: I thank the representative of
Bahrain for his kind words addressed to me.

The next speaker on my list is the representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): It is my pleasure to congratulate you, Sir, on
your accession to the presidency of the Council for this
month. We are confident that your efforts will be
crowned with success. I also wish to express my
sincere thanks to you for your swift response in
convening this emergency meeting of the Security
Council to discuss the crisis situation that resulted from
the savage Israeli aggression against the Palestinian
people in Al-Quds and the occupied Palestinian Arab
territories.
I would like to take this opportunity to express
my thanks to Mr. Moctar Ouane for his efforts last
month. I also extend my gratitude to all the
representatives of Member States who supported the
convening of this meeting, in particular, to my brother
the Ambassador of Tunisia, who sent a message on
behalf of the Arab Group, and my brother Ambassador
Hasmy Agam of Malaysia, the Chairman of the
Non-Aligned Movement caucus in the Security Council
and of the Islamic Group.
There were six days of bloodshed before this
meeting was convened — days that witnessed the
martyrdom and wounding of many of our Palestinian
brothers in Al-Quds and the occupied Palestinian
territories, including the Palestinians who were within
Israel in 1948. The number of those killed can now be
counted in scores, and more than 2,000 have been
wounded, according to today’s information, many of
whom will join the list of martyrs as a result of their
serious wounds and because the hospitals can no longer
absorb the victims of this Israeli massacre.
I listened with great attention to the statements of
those who spoke yesterday afternoon and this
afternoon. It is very clear that they all consider the
provocative visit by the leader of the Likud Party to
Al-Quds Al-Sharif to be directly responsible for
triggering the bloodshed and the tragic events in AlQuds and the Palestinian territories.
The visit by Mr. Sharon, leader of the extremist
Likud Party, and the support of the Israeli Labour
Government for his visit — he was accompanied by
military forces that receive their instructions not from
Mr. Sharon, but from the Israeli Government itself —
reflect the clear and unequivocal responsibility of the

11

S/PV.4204 (Resumption 1)

Israeli Government for the visit and the bloodshed, and
confirm that there is coordination between Barak’s
Labour Government and his former rival in Likud, Mr.
Sharon, in planning the events for internal Israeli
reasons. The lives of innocent Palestinian citizens have
been the fuel for this Israeli war, waged against the
Palestinian people.
Sharon’s past is well known to everyone. This
was not the first time that he had committed such a
barbarous act leading to massacres. Nor was it the first
time that Israel perpetrated an act of aggression against
the holy Arab and Islamic sites in Al-Quds. We all
remember the attack on the Al-Aqsa Mosque, as well
as the massacre at the Ibrahimi Mosque and the person
who perpetrated it, to whose memory a statue was
erected. We all know about the tunnel that was dug
under the Al-Aqsa Mosque at that time. Now, Israel has
added yet another massacre to the long list of
massacres perpetrated against the Arabs in the
occupied territories.
The visit to the Al-Aqsa Mosque by Sharon, who
was surrounded by military and police forces, was a
blatant provocation and an affront to the human dignity
of our people, and could not but inflame their religious
emotions. No sooner had the innocent worshippers
denounced such racist behaviour than they were
ruthlessly shot by the Israelis on the basis of prior
orders that they had received in an attempt to bring the
Palestinian people to their knees — a people who have
refused to kneel and to give up.
We have all seen on television the use of
aeroplanes, tanks, armour-piercing shells and anti-tank
missiles directed at the heads and bodies of children
who were killed in cold blood, not to mention the
unjustified destruction of their homes and property. We
have all seen and wept at the tragic events and the
deliberate killing of children, the killing of the child
mentioned by the Ambassador of Bahrain, the child
who was in his father’s arms, who was pleading for the
Israeli snipers not to kill him. His father is being
treated at the moment for the wounds that he received
and is calling upon the world to avenge the killing of
his child. And yet another child was killed by Israeli
snipers as he was climbing on one of the buildings, as
was another child, a girl aged two. The Israeli forces
also killed the driver of the ambulance carrying the
child, Mohammed Al-Durra. They are attacking the
ambulances constantly not to mention the continuous
killing.

12

The visit of Sharon and its very serious
consequences raise a question. Why are the Israelis
challenging the religious and national feelings of the
Palestinians with the support of the Israeli
Government? What can we conclude from this openly
waged war — a war that is still claiming until this very
moment more martyrs from amongst the Palestinians
who are defending themselves with stones when faced
with live ammunition and missiles? Everything seems
to indicate that the Israeli Government most probably
planned this massacre, particularly if we bear in mind
the following facts.
First, in the course of the last two months the
Israeli Government has provided the settlers with stateof-the-art lethal weapons so that they might contribute
to the current massacre. That is what we see on
television screens.
Secondly, the Israeli Government told its forces
that were deployed all over Al-Quds and all over the
West Bank to use live ammunition in addition to all
kinds of other weapons to face children, the children
we have been talking about, to face Palestinian youths
defending themselves with blood and stones. Is a stone
equal to a missile to live lethal ammunition?
Thirdly, the Israeli forces are committing
collective, deliberate murder in operations that are no
less horrible than “ethnic cleansing”. They do so
against all Palestinians, including the Palestinians of
the interior who have been in Israel since 1948. All
those acts are aimed at terrorizing and humiliating the
Palestinians, at putting an end to Palestinian rights and
at facilitating Israel’s takeover of Al-Quds.
Fourthly, this massacre all over the Arab
territories confirms once more that Israel is not
interested in peace even though the Arabs have
accepted peace. It shows once again that the peace
process is going through one of its most difficult and
complicated crises.
This raises another important question. Is Israel
really willing to achieve a comprehensive and just
peace? And where does the Security Council stand in
the face of Israel’s refusal to implement its resolutions,
most important of which are resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973), apart from other resolutions which by now
form quite a volume.
Fifthly, the blood of the martyrs of Palestinian
children, youths, women and old people, and the anger

S/PV.4204 (Resumption 1)

of the Palestinian streets, the anger in Damascus and
Baghdad, in Oman, in Cairo, in Lebanon —
everywhere — are all irrefutable proof that the Arab
Palestinian people will never give up their legitimate
national rights, nor their sacred and holy shrines. The
Palestinian people will safeguard their identity and
their nation. Israel’s attempts to take over Al-Quds in
its entirety and to invent a new Al-Quds outside the
city will face Palestinian resistance defending its
legitimate rights and their holy sites with blood and
stones.
Sixthly,
Israeli
aggression
and
crimes,
particularly the visit of Sharon to Al-Haram Al-Sharif,
triggered religious feelings and anger all over the
world. It has been denounced and condemned by the
Arab States, the Islamic States and many other
countries, including States friendly to Israel.
The events seem to confirm the fact that Al-Quds
is indeed the basic issue, the symbol for all Arabs and
Muslims and Christians, and it would seem that the
destiny of the people of Al-Quds is to stand up to
Israeli plots that aim at Judaizing Jerusalem and
usurping its Arab identity.
The Syrian Arab Republic, which has always
supported the Palestinian struggle, denounces and
firmly condemns the Israeli aggression against the
Palestinian people and the horrible massacres
perpetrated by Israel against our Palestinian brothers in
Al-Quds and in the occupied territories, and against the
Arabs of 1948 who hastened to support their brothers
and to defend Al-Quds and the holy shrines and their
Arab identity and dignity.
Syria expresses its heartfelt condolences to the
brotherly Palestinian people as a whole and to the
families of the martyrs who have died in defence of
their legitimate rights.
The aggression of the occupying Israeli forces —
aggression that continues even now — killing unarmed
Palestinians, using live ammunition aimed at their
heads and at their hearts, killing them in cold blood,
destroying their properties — demonstrates that Israel
is committing a blatant violation of the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949, which is applicable to all the Arab
Palestinian occupied territories, including Al-Quds.
Moreover, such acts are a blatant violation of the
Charter, the principles of international law and
international humanitarian law.

I reaffirm that Israel is proving day after day that
it is not interested in peace, contrary to what its leaders
say.
If Israel wants real peace, why is it prevaricating
in the peace negotiations? Why is it not implementing
the resolutions of international legitimacy, particularly
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973)? Why is it continuing to occupy Arab
territories? Why does it not accept the return of AlQuds to the Palestinian people? Why is it continuing its
expansionist policies and settlements at the expense of
the occupied Arab territories? And why is it attempting
to impose conditions on some Arab parties?
Peace is still absent. The peace process is going
through a very difficult phase because of the Israeli
Government’s obdurate and intransigent attitude and its
non-recognition of the need to withdraw to the line of 4
June 1967, in accordance with Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). We should all
be aware that peace has to be just and comprehensive
or else there is no need for it. Peace will not become a
reality unless Israel implements the resolutions of
international legitimacy, the Madrid principles and
references and resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973),
as well as the principle of land for peace. This will not
happen until Israel withdraws from the occupied Arab
territories, including the occupied Syrian Golan to the
line of 4 June 1967.
Syria has shown its sincerity and credibility in
calling for a comprehensive and just peace. Our
position has always been clear concerning our rights
and has been accepted by the entire world. Syria
believed in the true wish of the co-sponsor of the peace
process and in President Clinton’s and Mrs. Albright’s
efforts to achieve a just and comprehensive peace.
Unfortunately, the signs we see before our very eyes,
particularly what has taken place in the past few days,
give us an idea of what could happen in the occupied
Syrian Golan, particularly because Israeli policy since
1991 has been vague about the different tracks of the
peace process. There has been a deliberate distortion of
Syria’s clear position concerning peace. In the light of
those facts, we call on the Security Council to take the
following steps.
First, the Council should put an immediate end to
the Israeli aggression, ensure the withdrawal of the
Israeli forces to their bases and put a stop to their
aggression against the unarmed Palestinian people.

13

S/PV.4204 (Resumption 1)

Secondly, the Council should assume its
responsibilities for safeguarding international peace
and security, in accordance with the Charter, and not
apply different yardsticks or double standards. It
should condemn aggression and the horrible crimes
perpetrated by Israel, the occupying force in the
occupied Palestinian territories and the Arab occupied
territories. It should call for Israel to respect the
Charter, all United Nations resolutions, international
law and humanitarian international law. It should ask
Israel to fully the Geneva Conventions of 1949.
Thirdly, the Council should once again reaffirm
that Al-Quds is an integral part of the Palestinian
territories occupied in 1967. International law and
humanitarian international law are applicable to AlQuds, as well as to all the occupied Arab territories.
Fourthly, the international community should
clearly recognize that the visit by Sharon to Al-Quds
Al-Sharif was deliberate and was planned to provoke
the national and religious feelings of Palestinians,
Arabs, Muslims and Christians alike. The Security
Council is called upon to clearly condemn Sharon’s
provocative visit and to condemn the Israeli
Government for protecting it, which indicates an
alliance between the Israeli Government and the Likud
Party against the Palestinian cause, Al-Quds and
Palestinian sovereignty over Al-Quds.
Fifthly, this horrible massacre, which has
involved the killing of children, puts the credibility of
the Security Council to the test. The Council cannot
remain silent, unable to adopt a resolution necessary to
put an end to Israeli aggression against the Arab
inhabitants in the occupied Arab territories. The time
has come to try the Israeli authorities responsible for
such crimes. All rights of the Palestinian people have
to be preserved and safeguarded, particularly their right
to self-determination and the establishment of their
independent State on their territory with Al-Quds as its
capital and the full exercise of inalienable Palestinian
sovereignty over Al-Quds.
Sixthly, the Council, and its permanent members
in particular, should bring pressure to bear on Israel to
pursue the peace process seriously, bearing in mind that
no security can be achieved without a just and
comprehensive peace ensuring respect for the dignity
of all. Peace cannot be achieved through words; peace
can be achieved only through sincere efforts aimed at
implementing United Nations resolutions.

14

In conclusion, allow me to point out that danger
and tension reside in Israel’s continued defiance of the
international community and international legitimacy
and its rejection of the basis of a just and
comprehensive peace. International legitimacy cannot
continue to apply double standards, when it concerns
Israel.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic for his kind words addressed to
me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran. I invite
him to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Nejad Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of
Iran): Mr. President, thank you for convening this
important meeting of the Security Council at this
critical time for the Palestinian people. We have full
confidence in your leadership and in your efforts to
steer the deliberations of the Council in the month of
October.
Since last Thursday, the Zionist forces in the
occupied territories have reacted excessively and
disproportionately to the justified protests that
followed a flagrant act of provocation committed by
the criminals of Sabra and Shatila and spread promptly
across the whole occupied territory. In recent days, the
whole area has been the scene of the killing of dozens
and the injury of hundreds of defenceless Palestinian
civilians.
The provocative act — committed last Thursday
by one faction of the occupying regime, facilitated by
the other and followed by the indiscriminate killing of
Palestinians — negates the Israeli pretence of
entertaining peaceful intentions or a desire for pacific
coexistence with the Muslims and Christians of the
region. This recent crime represents another attempt by
the Zionists to desecrate the Islamic holy site and
ultimately to destroy the Islamic nature of Beit alMaqdis. It followed two previous attempts: one in
1969, to burn down the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque and the
other, in 1996, to dig tunnels underneath its blessed
soil. In so doing, they insulted the religious feelings of
more than 1 billion Muslims worldwide and initiated a
new wave of crime in occupied Palestine.
The recent crime committed by the Israeli armed
forces is consistent with the aggressive and

S/PV.4204 (Resumption 1)

expansionist policies of Israel. It aims, in vain, at
gaining international recognition of its claim to
sovereignty over the holy Islamic sites. The Zionist
regime’ s repeated crimes and heavy-handed approach
run counter to all its high-sounding and empty claims
that it seeks peace. This regime is the main cause
behind the tension and instability in the region. While
deceitfully negotiating peace with the Palestinians, it
violently assaults the oppressed and defenceless people
of the occupied territories.
The events in the occupied territories are another
illustration of the perennial unequal war of stone versus
heavy weapons; Palestinian struggle versus Israeli
aggression; and sacrifice for freedom and liberation
versus arrogant oppression and occupation. This
unequal war is unlikely to cease. If history is any
lesson, oppression, aggression and heavy-handedness
cannot last forever and the Palestinians will eventually
gain control over their destiny.
The fundamental question for the international
community, and particularly the Security Council and
the Middle East peace brokers, is the amount of
Palestinian blood, life, homelessness and agony we can
justify before the occupiers and aggressors are tamed
and the fundamental right of the Palestinians to selfdetermination in their own land is realized.
The international community in general and the
Islamic world in particular are deeply concerned about
the ongoing atrocities committed by Israeli troops. The
incidents in recent days, partly captured on camera and
viewed across the world, illustrate the contempt in
which world public opinion is held by the Israeli
regime. The disdain of the Israeli leaders for the
principles of international law and the decisions of the
United Nations is no secret to anyone in this Chamber.
It is commonly acknowledged, deplored and
condemned, but very little, if anything, is done about it.
Undoubtedly, this latest act by Israel is likely to
further exacerbate the Middle East crisis unless the
international community and the United Nations
intervene immediately to stop the Israeli armed forces’
brutal campaign against the civilians. In this respect,
the President of the Islamic Republic of Iran, in his
capacity as the Chairman of the Eighth Summit of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), called
for an emergency meeting of the foreign ministers of
the States members of the OIC to consider the issue.

There is no doubt that the Security Council in
particular is expected to act resolutely with a view to
putting an end to the violations by the occupying
Power of the Fourth Geneva Convention and to paving
the way for bringing those responsible to justice. The
first step in this direction is explicit condemnation of
the excessive use of force by the Israeli armed forces
against defenceless civilians.
Several times in the past, the Security Council
has been called upon to shoulder its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security by putting an end to the inhuman
and aggressive acts of the Israeli regime. Regrettably,
however, the exercise or threat of exercise of the veto
has so far prevented the Council from discharging its
constitutional responsibility in such a crucial issue and
has thus raised profound international disappointment.
Undoubtedly, the inaction of the Security Council
emboldens Israel to defy the wishes of the international
community, reflected in, among other things, numerous
General Assembly resolutions.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran for his kind words addressed
to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Saudi
Arabia. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
I should like to join earlier speakers in congratulating
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I am confident that,
with your skills and sagacity, you will steer the
deliberations of the Council to the desired results.
I should like to thank you and the members of the
Council for your speedy response in convening this
meeting to discuss the grave situation in occupied
Palestine. It testifies to your determination to discharge
your responsibilities seriously and firmly.
I also extend my thanks to your predecessor,
Ambassador Moctar Ouane of Mali, who guided the
Security Council last month with his well-known
wisdom, knowledge and expertise.
The international community has followed with
great pain and anger the abhorrent massacre committed
by the Israeli occupation forces in the forecourt of the
Al-Aqsa Mosque, in Al-Quds Al-Sharif and in other
parts of occupied Palestine. In this massacre, dozens of

15

S/PV.4204 (Resumption 1)

martyrs were killed and hundreds of defenceless,
innocent Palestinian civilians — young people, the
elderly, children, men and women — were wounded.
Their feelings were provoked and their anger was
fanned by the visit to the Al-Haram Al-Sharif forecourt
by the extremist leader of the Likud Party, Ariel
Sharon, whose bloody past is well known from the
Sabra and Shatila massacres.
We were all moved watching the heartbreaking
scene of an innocent Palestinian child being killed in
the arms of his father, killed by the bullets of the
occupation forces. His father was seriously injured
while trying to protect his son. This scene is a most
eloquent expression of the tragedy that the Palestinian
people are living through in their occupied land. The
scene stirs the hearts and awakens the consciences of
those who have been ignoring the need for justice. May
it also serve as a reminder to the international
community, as represented by this Council, of the need
to find a comprehensive and just solution to the ordeal
of the Palestinian people, of the need to enable the
Palestinian people to regain their legitimate rights and
to choose their own destiny.
Instead of fulfilling its obligations and duties,
instead of assuming its responsibility for the
maintenance of security, and instead of preventing
Ariel Sharon from violating the sanctity of the Islamic
Holy sites and provoking the believers, the Israeli
Government — while fully cognizant of the aims and
goals of Sharon’s visit and of the extent of his defiance
of the feelings of Muslims, and while also cognizant of
the ramifications of his visits for the situation in
occupied Palestine and for the peace process — instead
of responding appropriately took to killing defenceless
civilians and bombarding Palestinians with rockets and
laying siege to their towns with tanks, guns and
helicopters. Perhaps — with a view to imposing a fait
accompli and establishing Al-Quds Al-Sharif as
Jewish — the Israeli Government’s inhumane action
was intended to continue the process that Sharon had
started by desecrating the Islamic holy site and
intimidating the Palestinians who defended their sacred
sites and defended their dignity.
The Government of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
condemns Israel’s brutal aggression against Palestinian
citizens in Al-Quds Al-Sharif and in the occupied
Palestinian territory. It believes that during the recent
events, Israel, by persisting in its policy of using all
kinds of weapons against unarmed citizens, has

16

breached the most basic principles and international
norms; it has defied the feelings of the Palestinians and
of the Arab nation and the Islamic world; and it has
breached the inviolability of the Islamic holy sites. The
Israeli actions are a departure from the principles of
peace and the agreements in international law that aim
at restoring peace to the region. The barbaric Israeli
practices witnessed by the world call attention to
Israel’s unwillingness to restore just peace and to
Israel’s persistence in the creation of obstacles and in
resorting to violence against an unarmed people,
defying all international instruments and conventions.
The Arabs have stressed on more than one
occasion that peace is their strategic choice. The Arabs
have demonstrated that they are willing to establish a
just and comprehensive peace on the basis of
international law, of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) and of the principle of land for peace. It is
obvious that any desired just peace would require Israel
to withdraw from all the occupied Arab territories —
including Palestine and, above all, Al-Quds Al-Sharif,
as well as from the Syrian Golan and the remaining
parts of southern Lebanon and the western Bekaa
valley.
No proof or evidence is needed to establish the
Arab character of Al-Quds. Al-Quds Al-Sharif is part
and parcel of the occupied Palestinian territories
covered under international law, as are all the occupied
territories. Al-Quds is also covered by Security Council
resolution 242 (1967), since it is a Palestinian area that
was occupied in June 1967.
We call on the Security Council to fulfil its
obligations and shoulder its responsibilities for the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
call on it to take all necessary measures to guarantee
the protection of the Palestinian people against being
killed or uprooted and the protection of the Islamic
holy sites against further Israeli violations. We call on
the Security Council to reiterate the importance of the
implementation of its resolutions and of the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949 relative to the protection
of civilians in occupied territories. In many of its
relevant resolutions the Security Council has stressed
that this Convention does indeed apply to all the
Palestinian territories, including Al-Quds.
We welcome the Paris and Cairo meetings. We
express the hope they will rectify the situation and put
an end to the bloodshed and the acts of violence and

S/PV.4204 (Resumption 1)

encourage the parties to return to the peace
negotiations with a genuine desire and serious
determination to achieve a comprehensive and just
peace.
However, those responsible for the despicable
events must be held accountable and investigated. The
provocative visit by the Israeli opposition leader must
be publicly condemned. We have to work seriously to
avoid the recurrence of such an action. And we must
also compensate both those Palestinians who have been
harmed by the Israeli acts of suppression and terrorism
and their families.
The President: I thank the representative of
Saudi Arabia for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Cuba. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Dausá Céspedes (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
First, I would like to say that my delegation is glad to
see you, Sir, presiding over the meetings of the
Security Council for the month of October. We also
congratulate Ambassador Ouane of Mali on the skill he
displayed in conducting the Council’s work in
September.

Cuba vigorously condemns the provocations and
barbaric acts committed against the Palestinian people.
We demand an immediate end to the repression and
acts of force, since their continuation would lead only
to an extremely dangerous escalation of violence in the
already very sensitive situation prevailing in Palestine,
with unforeseeable regional and global repercussions.
The Security Council, through 25 different
resolutions adopted over all these years, has confirmed
its recognition of the applicability of the Fourth
Geneva Convention to the occupied territories,
including Jerusalem. The Israeli actions have once
again breached those resolutions and many others
adopted by the General Assembly and the Council
itself. International law, the United Nations Charter and
international humanitarian law have been repeatedly
trampled upon.
The international community would have
expected more determined and effective action by the
Security Council. When the long list of speakers is
finished, this meeting will leave many of those present
feeling unsatisfied.

Once again humankind is witnessing how the
forces opposed to a peaceful, just and lasting solution
in the Middle East try to replace peace and negotiation
with violence and aggression.

Once again events have clearly proved that the
Security Council fails to fulfil its responsibility to
maintain international peace and security whenever
there is interference from the hegemonic and domestic
policy interests of one permanent member that
arbitrarily and irresponsibly uses its powers and
prerogatives.

Once again the world has been astounded to see
how the actions of the Israeli forces have taken
precious lives among the Palestinian civilian
population. We watch with great frustration the cruel
repression unleashed with the consent of the
Government of Israel and the indiscriminate use of
heavy weaponry and helicopter gunships against the
defenceless civilian population and Palestinian
facilities. We convey our heartfelt condolences to the
families of the deceased.

Cuba reaffirms its full and unswerving solidarity
with the Palestinian people in its just struggle to
establish an independent and sovereign State, with
Jerusalem as its capital, and to have all Arab occupied
territories returned. We call upon the international
community to strongly condemn the crimes and the
delaying tactics used by Israel during all these years in
order to impose its arrogant annexationist policy, which
violates the most elementary norms of coexistence and
international law.

This brutal provocation takes place at a time
when negotiations between the Israeli Government and
the Palestinian National Authority seemed to be
resuming in pursuit of the longed for and necessary
peace, and when through a number of peace initiatives
the utmost was being done to get the negotiating
process back on track.

My delegation welcomes with interest and hope
the meetings in Paris and Cairo, but reiterates that a
just and lasting solution will not be found for the
Middle East conflict unless it is based on strict
compliance with the relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions and particularly Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

17

S/PV.4204 (Resumption 1)

If today we are unable to take effective actions
that could reopen the path to peace and impede the
return of provocation and violence of those sectors in
Israel that are opposed to a peaceful solution to the
conflict, we will only be paving the way for a new
crisis.
The people of Palestine need, today more than
ever, the support of the international community, and
Cuba will not fail them.
The President: I thank the representative of Cuba
for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Yemen. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Al-Ashtal (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): It is
my pleasure to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I also congratulate the Ambassador of
Mali, your predecessor, on presiding over the Council
last month. May I furthermore express our sincere
thanks to you, Sir, for convening this meeting, which
returns to the questions of Al-Quds Al-Sharif and the
occupied Arab territories in the Security Council once
again. Whatever efforts are made to find a solution to
the Arab-Israeli dispute outside the United Nations, the
resolutions of the Security Council remain the only
international legitimacy that must not be violated.
Israel’s challenge to the Security Council,
through a law annexing Jerusalem, Al-Quds, planted
the seeds of the violence raging today. The provocative
visit by Ariel Sharon to Al-Haram Al-Sharif was
directly responsible for the eruption of violence.
However, the acts of war waged by Israeli forces
against defenceless Palestinians, including children,
have gone beyond anything imaginable. More than 50
Palestinians have been slain through the use by the
Israeli forces of live ammunition, heavy weaponry and
helicopters. This is undoubtedly a flagrant violation of
the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.
In this regard, Mr. Abdul-Qader Ba-Jammal,
Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of the
Republic of Yemen, has declared:
“The Government of Yemen has followed
with deep concern the bloody confrontations in
the courtyard of Al-Aqsa Al-Sharif following the
provocative visit by Ariel Sharon to the site with
the objective of exploding the situation in the

18

occupied
territories
and
preventing
the
continuation of the peace process as well as the
implementation of all international resolutions
obligating Israel to withdraw from all Arab
occupied territories.”
The Government of Yemen believes that the
reluctance shown by the Barak Administration and its
continuous reneging on its obligations was the reason
for the aggressive behaviour by the Israeli extremist
right and these acts of provocation and aggression
vis-à-vis the Palestinian people and Islamic shrines.
The Republic of Yemen, while roundly condemning the
barbaric massacre by the Israeli armed forces, places
squarely on the shoulders of Israel and the Barak
Administration the responsibility for the deteriorating
situation and the escalating feelings of frustration and
despair among the Palestinian people. We call on the
Security Council to put an end to the aggressive
military acts by Israel. We call on the Security Council
to reaffirm the need for a comprehensive solution,
including a solution to the status of the city of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif.
Finally, despite the seriousness of these most
regrettable events, we must continue to make efforts
for peace. We must strive towards a just,
comprehensive and durable peace, a peace that takes
into consideration the legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people and promotes peace and security,
both regionally and internationally.
The President: I thank the representative of
Yemen for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of India. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Sharma (India): Allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for October. We also extend our
congratulations to the Permanent Representative of
Mali, Ambassador Moctar Ouane, for his splendid
stewardship of the Council in its eventful last month.
Let me also thank you, Sir, for calling this meeting and
giving us the opportunity to speak on this very
important issue.
The Chair of the Non-Aligned Movement made a
statement yesterday on behalf of the Movement, with
which we associate ourselves. As we are deeply
concerned at the recent developments, we thought it

S/PV.4204 (Resumption 1)

necessary also to share our sentiments with the
Council. As many delegations have spoken yesterday
and today, and as many more are to speak, I shall keep
my statement short.
My Government is deeply concerned at the recent
incidents of violence in Jerusalem, the West Bank and
the Gaza Strip and in other parts of the Palestinian
National Authority areas and Israel. This has led to a
most regrettable loss of life and property. It has also
vitiated the atmosphere for the Middle East peace
process. Issues involved in the Middle East peace
process are of immense complexity. That is why the
overriding need now is for restraint, avoidance of
provocation and shunning all acts that could destabilize
the process.
We have noted with increasing concern that the
cessation of hostilities between the Palestinians and the
Israelis was short-lived, and we hope that efforts to
stop the violence will be redoubled, thus facilitating an
early conclusion of the peace process. We remain
convinced of the need for dialogue and peaceful
negotiation to find a just, comprehensive and lasting
settlement of all issues. We support the endeavours of
the international community towards that objective.
There had been considerable progress in the
peace process between the Palestinians and the Israelis.
Recent events should not be allowed to retard or delay
the peace process, for which the leadership of Palestine
and of Israel has striven so hard. We believe that, given
the required will and determination, and given a
commitment to settle disputes peacefully, no odds are
insurmountable, no goal too far. Violence has to be
abjured. Diplomacy and statesmanship have to triumph.
There is no alternative and no other way towards
lasting peace.
The President: I thank the representative of
India for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Iraq. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Hasan (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I wish at the
outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October. We hail your wisdom and your determination,
which have enabled States Members of the United Nations
to state their views at this open meeting on a most
important item that goes to the very core of the

maintenance of international peace and security. The
Council is meeting today to discuss the repression and
aggression to which the Palestinian people are
subjected not only in the territories occupied in 1967
but also in those occupied in 1948. That repression and
aggression are blatant violations of international law,
of international humanitarian law and of the Geneva
Conventions of 1949.
The desecration by the perpetrator of the Sabra
and Shatila massacres, the terrorist Ariel Sharon, of the
holy Al-Haram Al-Sharif on 28 September 2000, and
the subsequent use by the Zionist occupation forces of
their military machine, including tanks, helicopters and
missiles, against Palestinian civilians in order to
suppress Palestinian anger, have thus far caused the
death of more than 60 martyrs, among them the child
Mohammed Jamal Al-Durra — whose name means
“pearl”, and who is indeed a pearl among martyrs —
and they have caused the wounding of more than 2,000
others. This proves the aggressive nature of the Zionist
entity and presents the international community and the
United Nations with a genuine challenge. Can the
international community, this time, defend what is
right? Can it avenge those who have suffered and
punish those who have wronged them?
Some previous speakers have expressed the hope
that the Security Council would adopt the measures
necessary to put an end to the injustice inflicted upon
the Palestinians by the forces of occupation and that
the Council would hold the criminals responsible.
Unfortunately, the facts would suggest that those
speakers will be disappointed; such action will be
impossible because of the balance of power that has
obtained in the Security Council ever since its
establishment, and because the dominant Power in the
Council — the United States of America — extends all
possible support and protection to that iniquitous
entity, Israel, and provides it with all means of
destruction, including nuclear weapons. It also gives its
blessing to that entity’s aggression against Arab States.
That unlimited support to Israel began with its
establishment 52 years ago, and it will continue so long
as the Security Council reflects the interests of the
Power that dominates and controls it.
We say this not to discourage honourable
members of the Council or to discourage other States
Members of the United Nations which, in their statements
yesterday and today, have expressed their very strong
commitment to the principles of the Charter and their

19

S/PV.4204 (Resumption 1)

genuine wish to put an end to the injustice inflicted
upon the Palestinians and to the Arab nation. To the
contrary, the present situation should provide an
additional incentive to them all to study the core of the
matter and seriously to seek radical solutions that
would restore the rights of those who rightfully possess
them.
The problem is not how we can push the
Palestinians into unequal negotiations with the forces
of occupation, forces which will certainly not restore
their rights to them. What is needed is to study the core
of the problem in order to find the appropriate
solutions. The problem started in 1917, when a Briton
named Balfour promised another Briton named
Rothschild the establishment in Palestine of a national
homeland for Rothschild and for other extremists like
him. The problem is the military occupation of the
Palestinian territory and the flow of adventurers into
that land from Europe and the rest of the world under
the pretext that it is a land without a people. The
problem is the repeated acts of aggression perpetrated
by that usurping entity against the Arab States and its
occupation of the Arab territories, including the
occupied Arab Golan. The problem resides in the
tragedy of a people under occupation against whom all
forms of repression are being practised. The problem is
the suffering of more than 4 million Palestinian
refugees who were pushed out of their land and who
look back upon it as their homeland; they have the full
right to return to it. The problem is in the Zionist
creed — a racist, expansionist, arrogant and hateful
creed. The problem resides in the threat to the sites
held sacred by a billion Muslims and a billion
Christians.
Palestine is part of the Arab nation, one of the
oldest and noblest nations a nation on whose land
religions and cultures have coexisted and which has
given birth to one of the oldest and most noble
civilizations in history. It is a nation that has a
tremendous capacity to face challenges and greed, and
to prevail over invaders, such as the Zionist entity, as it
did once against the Moguls and the Crusaders. We
expect the international community to stand by that
nation in its just battle.
The President: I thank the representative of Iraq
for his kind words addressed to me.

20

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Mauritania. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Ould Deddach (Mauritania) (spoke in
Arabic): I wish at the outset to thank you, Mr.
President, for your response to the call to convene this
urgent important meeting following the grave events
witnessed in the occupied Palestinian territories, which
have led to the death of 60 Palestinians and more than
2,000 wounded. The Government and people of
Mauritania wish to express their full solidarity with the
Palestinian people. We bow before the martyrs who fell
defending the legitimate rights of the Palestinian
peoples, Al-Quds Al-Sharif and the Islamic and Arab
ummah.
We wish to express our thorough condemnation
of the events we have witnessed — the premeditated
firing upon defenceless civilians and the use of cannon,
helicopter gunships, tanks, missiles, and live
ammunition, a clear violation of the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949. We call on the United Nations to
condemn these acts and to investigate in order to arrest
and prosecute the perpetrators.
You are aware, undoubtedly, Mr. President, that
these grave events are an obstacle to achieving peace in
this region, a region in dire need of peace. On behalf of
my delegation, I reaffirm our support for the peace
process. We believe that a just, comprehensive and
lasting peace in the region can be achieved only
through the Madrid terms of reference, the principle of
land for peace and the full implementation of Security
Council resolutions, thus ensuring full Israeli
withdrawal from the occupied Palestinian territories
and reclaiming the legitimate national rights of the
Palestinian people, primarily their right to selfdetermination and the establishment of their own State
with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.
These grave events may well finally drive the last
nail into the coffin of peace in the Middle East. Today,
more than ever, the international community must
intensify its efforts to overcome obstacles to just,
lasting and comprehensive peace in the region.
The President: I thank the representative of
Mauritania for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is Mr.
Hussein Hassouna, Permanent Observer for the League
of Arab States to the United Nations, to whom the

S/PV.4204 (Resumption 1)

Council has extended an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Hassouna (League of Arab States) (spoke in
Arabic): I wish at the outset to extend to you, Sir, my
sincere congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month.
Allow me also to express my sincere appreciation for
your speedy response to the request to convene this
open Security Council meeting on a matter of great
importance, not only to the Arab, Islamic and Christian
world, but to all members of the international
community at large.
The Security Council is meeting today at the
request of the Arab Group at the United Nations, with a
view to considering the Israeli assault on Al-Haram AlSharif in occupied East Jerusalem and the Israeli
campaign of repression against Palestinian civilians in
all the occupied Palestinian territories.
Security Council members and others who have
spoken here during the past two days unanimously
believe that the bloody events in occupied East
Jerusalem and the other occupied Palestinian
territories, even within Israel itself, were ignited
because the extremist leader of the Likud Party, Ariel
Sharon, supported, regrettably, by the Israeli
Government, violated the sacred character of the AlHaram Al-Sharif plaza. This violation has clearly
roused Palestinian feelings and the feelings of all
parties in the Islamic and Christian worlds, because the
circumstances have affirmed Israel’s arrogant disregard
for the sanctity and dignity of those sites for the sake
of achieving vested political interests and goals.
Moreover, there is an international consensus that
the large and growing number of Palestinian victims —
be they men, women or children — is due to the
excessive use of force by the Israeli forces and their
aiming of their most sophisticated and lethal firepower
at the torsos of those civilian martyrs. This information
comes from the testimonies of human rights
organizations and other impartial groups, such as
Amnesty International and the International Committee
of the Red Cross. Allow me to take this opportunity to
extend our heartfelt condolences to the families of the
innocent victims.
The League of Arab States was the first
international organization to view these grave events
with concern and seriousness. The Council of the

League of Arab States has been discussing these
painful developments since they began. It took up the
matter at an emergency session on 1 October 2000. It
has laid full responsibility at Israel’s door for the
eruption of recent events, and has called upon the
international community to pressure Israel to withdraw
its forces from around Al-Quds Al-Sharif and the
flashpoints around Palestinian towns. It has also called
for an international investigation into Israel’s crimes
against the Palestinian people and for the prosecution
before an international criminal court of Israelis
responsible for those crimes. Furthermore, the Council
of the League of Arab States has called upon the
Security Council, and on its permanent members in
particular, to fully assume their responsibility for the
maintenance of peace and for the protection of the
Palestinian people by implementing internationally and
legally binding resolutions and the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War.
At a time when humanity has just taken its first
steps into the new century that ushers in the third
millennium; at a time when humanity aspires to wipe
from the world’s face the tears shed during the last
century; and at a time when humanity is trying to
inspire itself with wishes and desires to make serious
attempts to ensure peace for all, we find that Israel’s
aggressive forces — which hate peace — are
determined to follow a path that goes against the path
of peace that the countries of the world aspire to
follow. Our Arab States have indeed chosen peace as a
strategic choice. The massacre at the Al-Aqsa Mosque,
in which the blood of unarmed civilians was shed and
the wishes of humanity at large for peace were scuttled,
is an eloquent testimony to Israel’s violation of all
international instruments on human rights and the
protection of civilians and children, in whose drafting
and ratification we all participated and that we
committed ourselves to respect. It is altogether
unacceptable to allow Israeli violations to pass without
measures of deterrence and punishment.
We are fully aware of the gravity of the situation.
The League of Arab States therefore calls upon the
Security Council immediately to intervene in fulfilment
of its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. We call upon it to
intensify its efforts to put an end to Israeli aggression,
to provide protection for the Palestinian people, to take
every necessary measure to force Israel to end its

21

S/PV.4204 (Resumption 1)

unfounded, unjustified and provocative violations and
to have that country fully withdraw its forces from the
area around Al-Haram Al-Sharif and all occupied
Palestinian towns, in implementation of internationally
binding resolutions.
Those resolutions all affirm that East Jerusalem is
an integral part of occupied Palestinian territories, to
which Security Council resolution 242 (1967) and all
provisions of international law on occupied territories
apply. If the United Nations is truly interested in
promoting respect for the rules of international justice,
if it cares about the rule of law, and if it wishes to
implement the principle that places all States on an
equal footing and calls on them all without exception
to implement fully the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations and other provisions of this
Organization, then the League of Arab States maintains
that it is high time to force Israel to implement United
Nations resolutions, which are legally binding on all
States.
I refer in particular to the resolutions of the
Security Council dealing with Al-Quds, Israeli
settlements, the withdrawal from all occupied
Palestinian and Arab territories, and respect for the
provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War. In our
view, if these international resolutions had been
implemented by Israel in the first place, the United
Nations would not be facing this explosive situation in
the Middle East and we would not be witnessing today
the collapse of all efforts made to establish a lasting
peace in the region.
In conclusion, the League of Arab States
expresses the hope that the ongoing worthy efforts
aimed at salvaging the peace process will succeed. We
would stress, however, that when the Arab nation opted
for comprehensive and just peace in accordance with
the internationally binding resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973) and the principle of land for peace, it did so
because we believed that Israel would in turn commit
itself to withdrawing its forces from all occupied Arab
territories and to the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.
The President: I thank Ambassador Hassouna,
Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States, for
his kind words addressed to me.

22

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Turkey. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Pamir (Turkey): I would like to join my
colleagues in extending to you, Mr. President, our
warm congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October.
Turkey deplores the recent acts of violence at
Al-Haram Al-Sharif, in the vicinity of Jerusalem, in the
West Bank and in the Gaza Strip, as well as in other
Palestinian areas, which, as a result of the use of
excessive force, have led to the killing of more than 50
innocent civilians and the injuring of over 1,500. We
would like to extend to the bereaved families of the
victims our heartfelt condolences and profound
sympathy.
During the period preceding the regrettable
developments, tension in the region had mounted as a
consequence of the difficult phase in which the peace
process found itself. That tension should not have been
exacerbated
by
blatant
provocative
actions.
Unfortunately, the events we have seen did precisely
that, fanning the die-hard dynamics of confrontation.
Nothing can justify the loss of innocent lives, no matter
how charged the atmosphere.
We think that it is time now for de-escalation. We
call on both parties to restore calm through the exercise
of utmost restraint.
We believe that the withdrawal of Israeli security
forces would constitute a first step towards normalizing
the situation on the ground.
A transparent and impartial investigation, with
the involvement of both Israel and Palestine, into the
causes of the recent upheaval should be undertaken as
soon as possible. It is of the utmost importance that due
procedures should be initiated against the perpetrators
of these criminal acts, so that the bereaved families can
find solace.
Turkey continues to follow the developments in
the region, in close contact with the parties. The
Turkish Government has also expressed its outrage and
concern in the face of the escalating violence through
its direct contacts with President Arafat and Israeli
Acting Foreign Minister Ben-Ami. Furthermore, in
response to the request for emergency humanitarian
assistance made by the Palestinian side, my

S/PV.4204 (Resumption 1)

Government has decided to contribute $500,000 as well
as medical supplies and medicine. It is incumbent upon
all of us to alleviate the plight of those who have fallen
victim to this senseless violence.
Turkey maintains its hope that these events,
however excruciating, will not deflect the parties from
their principal course, the Middle East peace process.
We, as members of the international community, should
assume our responsibility to help revive this process.

We continue to believe that a lasting settlement will be
the best answer to provocateurs of all sorts.
The President: I thank the representative of
Turkey for the kind words he addressed to me.
There are a number of speakers remaining on my
list. In view of the lateness of the hour, and with the
concurrence of the members of the Council, I intend to
suspend the meeting now.
The meeting was suspended at 6.05 p.m.

23
