V.

35/105.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Assistance for the reconstruction, rehabilitation
and development of Equatorial Guinea 224

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34/123 of 14 December 1979,
in which it appealed to all Member States, specialized
agencies and other organizations of the United Nations
system, and to international economic and financial institutions, to contribute generously, through bilateral or
multilateral channels, to the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development needs of Equatorial Guinea,
Recalling also the deep concern expressed in that resolution at the widespread destruction of property and
severe damage to the economic and social infrastructure of Equatorial Guinea during the preceding eleven
years,
Recalling the urgent problem of absorbing the large
numbers of returning refugees and displaced persons
into the social and economic life of Equatorial Guinea
and of resettling them,
Recalling further its requests to the Secretary-General
to organize an international programme of financial,
technical and material assistance to Equatorial Guinea
to meet the long-term and short-term reconstruction, rehabilitation and development needs of the country,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
of 19 September 1980, 229 to which was annexed the report of the interagency mission dispatched to Equatorial
Guinea to consult with the Government on the additional assistance it required for the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development of the country,
Noting with satisfaction that the new Government has
succeeded in carrying out a number of measures designed to revive the economy and revitalize social and
public services,
Noting also with satisfaction the efforts made to ensure
the welfare of all the citizens of the country,
Recognizing the need for the adoption of special
measures of assistance to enable Equatorial Guinea to
rebuild its economy and to restore to normal the social
and public services of the country,
Noting that the Economic and Social Council, by its
decision I 980/ 161 of 24 July I 980, requested the Committee for Development Planning to expedite the review
of the economic situation of certain developing countries, including Equatorial Guinea, with a view to their
inclusion in the list of least developed countries, and to
make recommendations concerning those countries to
the Council at its first regular session of 1981,
I. Endorses fully the assessment and recommendations of the mission to Equatorial Guinea contained in
the annex to the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for the steps he has taken to mobilize humanitarian and economic assistance for Equatorial
Guinea;
3, Draws the attention of the international community to the critical social and economic situation confronting Equatorial Guinea and to the list of urgent
short-term and long-term projects required by the
Government of Equatorial Guinea to carry out its programme of rehabilitation and reconstruction;
. 4. Appeals to all Member States, specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations
system and international economic and financial insti21• A/35/447 and Add. I.

161

tutions to contribute generously, through bilateral or
multilateral channels, to the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development needs of Equatorial Guinea;
5. Notes with satisfaction the assistance already
provided or pledged to Equatorial Guinea by some
Member States and agencies of the United Nations
system as well as by some voluntary agencies and nongovernmental organizations;
6. Appeals to all Member States to extend all possible technical assistance to Equatorial Guinea, so that its
programme of rehabilitation and reconstruction can be
implemented, and also to assist the Government in organizing the necessary educational and training programmes for nationals of Equatorial Guinea in order to
overcome the critical shortage of trained and skilled
manpower;
7. Expresses the hope that, in implementing social
and economic programmes, the relevant agencies and
organizations of the United Nations system will contribute, as far as possible. the necessary funds and technical assistance;
8. Requests the International Labour Organisation
to do whatever is possible to help the Government of
Equatorial Guinea in its manpower training programmes and in the formulation of a labour code and
employment policies:
9. Requests the World Health Organization, the
United Nations Children's Fund, the World Food Programme, the United Nations Development Programme
and the United Nations Fund for Population Activities
to provide all possible assistance to help the Government
of Equatorial Guinea to cope with the critical health
problems facing the population and to provide, as appropriate, food aid for schools and hospitals;
10. Requests Member States and the organizations
and programmes of the United Nations system to grant
special measures to Equatorial Guinea pending the review of its situation by the Committee for Development
Planning;
11. Requests the appropriate organizations and
programmes of the United Nations system-in particular the United Nations Development Programme, the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the World Food Programme, the World Health
Organization and the United Nations Children's Fundto maintain and expand their current and future programmes of assistance to Equatorial Guinea and to cooperate closely with the Secretary-General in the work
of organizing an effective international programme of
assistance, and to report periodically to the SecretaryGeneral on the steps they have taken and the resources
they have made available to help that country;
12. Invites the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the
World Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, the World Bank and the International Fund for Agricultural Development to bring to
the attention of their governing bodies, for their
consideration, the special needs of Equatorial Guinea
and to report the decisions of those bodies to the
Secretary-General by 15 August 1981;
13. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical and material assistance to Equatorial Guinea;

162

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

(b) To ensure that the necessary financial and
budgetary arrangements are made to continue the organization of the international programme of assistance to Equatorial Guinea and the mobilization of
assistance;
(c) To keep the situation in Equatorial Guinea under constant review, to maintain close contact with
Member States, regional and other intergovernmental
organizations, the specialized agencies and the international financial institutions concerned and to apprise the
Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session of 1981, of the status of the special economic assistance programme for Equatorial Guinea;
(d) To arrange for a review of the economic situation of Equatorial Guinea and the progress made in organizing and implementing the special economic assistance programme for that country in time for the matter
to be considered by the General Assembly at its thirtysixth session.

84th plenary meeting
5 December 1980

35/106.

Review of the economic situation of Djibouti,
Equatorial Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Sao Tome
and Principe, Seychelles, Tonga and newly independent developing countries with a view to
their inclusion in the list of the least developed
countries 224

The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council decision
1980/161 of 24 July 1980, in which the Council decided
to request the Committee for Development Planning to
expedite the review of the economic situation of
Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Sao Tome
and Principe, Seychelles, Tonga and newly independent
developing countries with a view to their inclusion in the
list of the least developed countries, and to make recommendations concerning those countries to the Council at its first session of 1981,
1. Decides to authorize the Economic and Social
Council to consider, at its first regular session of 1981,
the recommendations of the Committee for Development Planning on the above-mentioned countries and,
accordingly, to add any of these countries to the list of
the least developed countries on the basis of existing
criteria and the most recent data relating to the abovementioned countries;
2. Decides that this exercise should be without prejudice to any future over-all review of the list of the least
developed countries which may be authorized at a later
date by the General Assembly in accordance with established procedures.
84th plenary meeting
5 December 1980
35/107.

Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief
Co-ordinator

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 2816 (XXVI) of 14 December
1971, by which it established the Office of the United
Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator, and its resolution 3243 (XXlX) of 29 November 1974 on the
strengthening of that Office,

Recalling also section II, paragraph 14, of its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975, and its resolution 33 /22 of 29 November 1978,
Reaffirming that it is necessary to ensure a continued
sound financial basis for the Office of the United
Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator, as recognized by
the General Assembly in its resolution 31 / 173 of 21 December 1976,
Bearing in mind that the timely receipt and distribution of information about the responses of donors is essential for the execution of the mandate of the United
Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General on the work of the Office of the
United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator 21 " and
of the statement made by the Co-ordinator before the
Second Committee on 3 November 1980/ 11
2. Commends the activities of the Office of the
United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator which have
contributed to the easing of the consequences of natural
disasters;
3. Calls upon Governments and international organizations to co-operate with the United Nations Disaster
Relief Co-ordinator by providing timely information on
the nature and extent of their current and intended contributions to disaster-afflicted countries;
4. Decides to maintain for a further two-year period,
as from I January 1982, the trust fund established pursuant to its resolution 3243 (XXIX) of 29 November
1974, modified under its resolutions 3440 (XXX) of
9 December 1975 and 3532 (XXX) of 17 December I975
and its decision 33 /429 of 19 December 1978, in order to
ensure that the financial resources available to the Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator
remain adequate to meet the tasks entrusted to that
Office;
5. Urges all Governments to contribute to the trust
fund of the Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief
Co-ordinator;
6. Decides to review at its thirty-sixth session the
mandate of the Office of the United Nations Disaster
Relief Co-ordinator.
84th plenary meeting
5 December 1980
35/108.

Transport and Communications Decade in
Africa

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 34 / 15 of 9 November 1979 on
the Transport and Communications Decade in Africa.
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 1979 /61 of 3 August 1979 on the Transport and
Communications Decade in Africa,
Recalling further resolution 341 (XIV), adopted on
27 March 1979 by the Conference of Ministers of the
Economic Commission for Africa, 212 in which the Conference urged member States to give high priority to the
development of transport and communications,
Noting resolution CM/Res.738 (XXXIII), adopted
by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of
'"' A/35/228.
'" Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-fifth Session.
Second Committee, 36th meeting, paras. 6-17.
· ,_. See Official Record, of the Economic and Social Council. 1979.
Supplement No. 15 (f·. 1479/'i0), part two. sect. D.
