representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization
to participate in the debate and that that invitation
would confer upon it the same rights of participation as
those conferred on a Member State when it was invited
to participate under rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

Resolution 573 (1985)
of 4 October 1985

The Security Council,
Having considered the letter dated 1 October 1985, 9 '
in which Tunisia made a complaint against Israel following the act of aggression which the latter committed
against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Tunisia,
Having heard the statement by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Tunisia,9 6
Having noted with concern that the Israeli attack has
caused heavy loss of human life and extensive material
damage,
Considering that, in accordance with Article 2,
paragraph 4, of the Charter of the United Nations, all
States Members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State,
or acting in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations,
Gravely concerned at the threat to peace and security
in the Mediterranean region posed by the air raid perpetrated on 1 October by Israel in the area of Hammam
Plage, situated in the southern suburb of Tunis,
Drawing attention to the serious effect which the
aggression carried out by Israel and all acts contrary to
the Charter cannot but have on any initiative designed to
establish an overall, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East,
Considering that the Israeli Government claimed
responsibility for the attack as soon as it had been carried out,
1. Condemns vigorously the act of armed aggression
perpetrated by Israel against Tunisian territory in
flagrant violation of the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and norms of conduct;
2. Demands that Israel refrain from perpetrating
such acts of aggression or from threatening to do so;
3. Urges Member States to take measures to
dissuade Israel from resorting to such acts against the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States;
4. Considers that Tunisia has the right to appropriate reparations as a result of the loss of human life
and material damage which it has suffered and for which
Israel has claimed responsibility;
S. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Security Council on the implementation of the present
resolution by 30 November 198S at the latest;
6. Decides to remain seized of the matter.

Adopted by 10 votes to l
(United States of America),
with 4 abstentions (Australia,
Denmark, France,
United
Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland).

At the same meeting, the Council further decided, at
the request of the representative of Kuwait, 92 to extend
an invitation to Mr. Clovis Maksoud under rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

At its 2611th meeting, on 2 October 198S, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
Cuba, Greece, Lesotho, Mauritana, Morocco, Pakistan,
Senegal, the Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the question.

At the same meeting, the Council also decided, at the
request of the representative of Kuwait, 93 to extend an
invitation to Mr. Adnan Omran under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure.

At its 2613th meeting, on 3 October 198S, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of Bangladesh, the
German Democratic Republic, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Malta, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Saudi
Arabia and Yugoslavia to participate, without vote, in
the discussion of the question.

At the same meeting, the Council also decided, at the
request of the representative of Egypt, 9 • to extend an
invitation to Mr. Syed Sharifuddin Pirzada under rule
39 of the provisional rules of procedure.

At its 2615th meeting, on 4 October 198S, the Council
decided to invite the representative of Viet Nam to
participate, without vote, in the discussion of the question.

Adopted at the 2615th meeting
by 14 votes to none, with J
abstention (United States of
America).

92 Document S/17513, incorporated in the record of the 2610th
meeting.
93 Document S/11S1S, incorported in the record of the 2611th
meeting.
94 Document S/17524, incorporated in the record of the 2613th
meeting.

9 s Official Records of the Security Council, Fortieth Year, Supplement for October, November and December J985, document S/ 17509.
96 Ibid., Fortieth Year, 2610th meeting.

23
