NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY C01JNCIL
OFFICIAL 'RECORDS
SECOND YEAR

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS
DEUXIEME ANNEE

No. 58

157th and 158th meetings

157erne "et 158eme seances
15 juillet 1947

15 July 1947

Lake Success
( 52 p.)

New York

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATiERES,

Hundred and fifty-seventh meeting

Cent-cinquante-sep.ieme seance
Page

216. Provisional agenda

"

217. Adoption of the agenda

Pages

1293

216. Ordre du jour provisoire

1293

1293

217. Adoption de l'ordre du jour

1293

218. Continuation of the discussion on the
special agreements under Article 43 of
the Charter and the organization of the
United Nations armed forces
1294

218. Suite de la discussion sur les accords
speciaux prevus a l'Article 43 de la
Charte et sur l'organisation des forces
1294
armees des Nations Unies

Hundred and fifty-eighth meeting

Cent-cinquante-huitieme seance

219. Provisional agenda
220. Adoption of the agenda

,

•

1312

219. Ordre du jour provisoire

1312

1312

220. Adoption de l'ordre du jour

1312

221. Continuation of the discussion on the
(}reek question
1312

221. Suite de la discussion sur la question
1312
grecque

Documents

Documents

The following document, relevant to the hundred
and fifty-seventh and hundred and fifty-eighth
.
meetings, appear as follows:

Les documents se rapportant aux cent-cinquanteseptieme et cent-cinquante-huitieme seances
figurent dans les publications suivantes:

Official Records of the Security Counctl~ Second
Year:

Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de sBcuritl,
Deuxiema Annee:

No. 13~ Annex 36

No 13~ Annexe 36

Letter, dated 26 June :1.347, addressed to the
Chairman of the Military Staff Committee by
the President of the Security Council,and
reply dated 30 June 1947 (document S/394).

Lettre, en date du 26 juin 1947, adressee au President du Comite d'etat-major par le President du Conseil de securite, et reponse en
date du 30 juin 1947 (document S/394).

Special Supplement No. 1

SuppUment special No 1

Letter, dated 30 April 1947, from the Chairman
of the Military Staff Committee to the Secretary-(}eneral and enclosed report on general
principles governing the organization of the
armed forces made available to the Security
Council by Member nations of the United
Nations (document 8/336).

Lettre, en date du 30 avril 1947, adressee au
Secretaire general par le President du Comite
d'etat-major, et rapport, joint a cette lettre,
su" les principe3 generaux regissant l'organis~ ion des forces armees mises a la disposition
cl,.. Conseil de securite par les Etats Membres
des Nations Unies (document S/336).

Special Supplement No. 2

SunUment special No 2

Report by the Commission of Investigation concerning (}reek Frontier Incidents to the Security Council (document S/360).

Rapport presente au Conseil de securite par
la Commission d'enquete sur les incidents survenus it la frontiere grecque (document
S/360) .

-new difficulties are being added to the existing ones; this will not lighten but will only :omplicate our task.

thode qui nous permettra d'aboutir a un accord.
Mais, en realite, on ne fait qu'ajouter de nouvelles
difficultes a celles qui existent deja, ce qui
complique notre travail au lieu de le rendre
plus facile.

Mr. Gromyko thereupon continued Ms remarks in English as follows:

Ici M. Gromyko continue en anglais par la
remarque suivante:

I wish to quote a brief passage from the
resolution adopted by the Security Council on
13 February 1947. It reads as follows:
". . . to submit to the Security Council not
later than 13 April 1947 its recommendations
with regard to the basic principles which should
govern the organization of the United Nations
Armed Forces:"

Je voudrais dter un court passage de la
resolution adoptee par le Conseil de securite
en date du 13 fevrier 1947; il est ainsi libelle:
". . . de soumettre au Conseil de securite, le
30 avriI 1947 au plus tard, ses recommandations
en ce qui concerne les prindpes fondamentaux
qui doivent regir l'organisation de la force '
1
armee des Nations Unies " .

The PRESIDENT: We have another meeting at
3p.m. The hour is now rather late and, consequently, we will have to adjourn this meeting.
This afternoon the Security Council will continue its discussion of the Greek question.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Nous
avons une autre seance a 15 heures. II se fait
tard, il nous faut donc lever la seance. Cet
apres-midi, le Conseil de securite poursuivra
la discussion de la question grecque.

The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

La seance est levee a13 h. 20.

HUNDRED AND FIFTY-EIGHTH M£ETING

CENT-CINQUANTE-HunSEME SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Tuesday, 15 July 1947, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. O. LANGE (Poland).

Tenue a Lake Success, New·York,
le mardi 15 juiUet 1947, a 15 heures.
President: M. O. LilNGE (Pologne).

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom,
United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine, Colombie,
France, Pologne, Syrie, Union des Republiques
soclalistes sovietiques, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Uni~
d'Amerique.

219. Provisional agenda (document
5/413)

219. Ordre du iour prOVISOlre (document
5/413)

iif"""".,c"""

..~~",,~

1. Adoption of the agenda.

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.

2. The Greek question: report by the Commission of Investigation concerning Greek Frontier Incidents to the Security Council (document S/360):

2. La question grecque: rapport presente au
Conseil de securite par la Commission d'enquete sur les incidents survenus a la frontiere
grecque (document 8/360)".

220. Adoption of the agenda

220. Adoption de I'ordre du iour

The agenda was adopted.

L'ordre du jour est adopte.

221. Continuation of the discussion on the
Greek question

221. Suite de la discussion sur la question
grecque

At the invitation of the President, Colonel
Kerenxhi, r.epresentative of Albania, Mr. Mevoran, representative of Bulgaria, Mr. Dendramis,
representative of Greece, and Mr. Vil/an, representative of Yugoslavia, took their seats at the
Council table.

Sur l'invitation du President, le colonel Kerenxhi, representant de l'Albanie, i\tf. M evorah.
representant de la Bulgarie, M. Dendramis.
representant de 1(1. Grece, et Mo Vil/an, representant de la Y ougoslavie, prennent place a la
table du Conseil.

. Mr. PARODl (France) (transl....;,d from
French): When we began the exami .ation of
the Greek question a few weeks ago, we already
appreciated its gravity-a gravity still further
accentuated by the news contained in press

M. PARODl (France): Lorsque nous avons
commence, il y a queIques semaines, I'examen
de la question grecque, nous en mesurions deja
la gravite: elIe est davantage encore souIignee
par les nouvelles que nous ont apportees les

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 13.
• Ibid., Second Year, Special Supplement No. 2.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite, Deuxieme Annee, No 13.
t Ibid., Deuxieme Annee. Supplement special No 2.

reports received during the past few days. It
seems to me that we should start by recording
the grave and dangerous character of the question which we are examining. That realization
imposes on us certain duties.
Our first duty is to remain calm. I have just
referred to recent and most disturbing reports.
We must get them confirmed, and, as we have
fortunately left in Greece a group of observers,
we should await, in particular, the report which
they are in the best possible position to submit.

depeches de presse de ces derniers jours. Ce
caractere grave, dangereux de la question que
nous examinons est, me semble-toil, la constatation dont nous devons partir. Elle nous impose
. n certain nombre de devoirs.
Le premier est un devoir de sang-froid. Je
v;Ans de faire allusion a des nouvelles recentes
et 2articulierement inquietantes. Nons devons
en recevoir confirmation et, puisque nous avons
heureusement laisse en Grece un groupe d'observateurs, attendre en particulier le rapport qu'ils
sont les mieux places pour nous soumettre.
Nous avons un devoir d'objectivite, car plus
We have to be objective, for the graver the
situation the more imperative is the need to la situation est grave, plus il importe de l'analyser
analyse and understand it exactly. It is the duty et de la comprendre exactement. Les Etats inteof the States concerned not to let their suscepti- resses ont le devoir de ne pas faire passer avant
bilities as sovereign nations take precedence of all toute chose les susceptibilites de leur souverainete
else and not to give considerations of prestige nationale, et des considerations de prestige avant
pride of place above a concern for international le souci de l'o!'dre international necessaire au
order requisite to the maintenance of peace. We maintien de la paix. Nous devons avoir la volonte
must have the will to maintain the authority of de maintenir aux yeux du monde l'autorite des
the United Nations in the eyes of the world, Nations U nies et de ne pas prendre une voie de
and not follow the course of weakness which in faiblesse qui a conduit autrefois la Societe des
the past led to the collapse of the League of Nations a sa ruine; mais nous devons en meme
Nations. At the same time we ourselves should temps nous garder ode devenir nOllS-memes trop
beware of becoming over-sensitive to considera- sensibles a des considerations de prestige. Les
tions of prestige. Such considerations, even on the considerations de cet ordre, meme si elles s'applipart of an international organization, seldom quent a l'organisme international,sont rarement
serve the cause of peace.
au profit de la paix.
Finally we should adhere to the course of
Nous devonS enfin rester dans la ligne d'action
action laid upon us by the Charter, namely to qui nous est impartie par la Charte, et qui est
seek first of all to settle disputes by reconciling de chercher d'abord a regler les conflits par la
and harmonizing points of view, so that the conciliation et le rapprochement des points de
graver and more complicated the question, the vue; et, par voie de consequence, plus la quesmore careful should we be in tackling it and in tion est grave et complexe, plus nous devuns etre
approaching the nations concerned.
attentifs a la maniere dont nous I'abordons, dont
nous nous adressons aux nations interessees.
Part I of the report submitted to us by the
Le rapport qui nous a ete presente par la
Commission of Investigation contains an analysis . Commission d'enquete contient, dans une preor enumeration of the contradictory allegations miere partie, une analyse ou une enumeration
made before the Commission, and of the testi- des allegations contradictoires qui ont ete promony which the Commission gathered. Speakers duites devant la Commission et des temoignages
in this debate have already pointed out what a qu'elle a recueillis. On a deja releve dans cette
confused impression is left by this P:'lft I of the salle combien cette premiere partie du rapport
report. The clearest idea which the reader· laisse une impression confuse. L'idee la plus
gathers is that of the extreme difficulty 6f the nette qui s'en degage pour le lecteur est celle d~
Commission's task in the face of testimony which l' extreme difficulte de la tache de la Commission
~ every case involved questions of reliability and en presence de temoignages qui posaient, tous,
mdependence. One may add, however, that this des problemes d'authenticite et d'independance.
!estimony seems, in the last analysis, rather slight Il est possible cependant d'ajouter que ces temoim content.
gnages paraissent finalement assez minces quant
a leur contenu.
My personal conviction that aid was given by
Si je suis, pour ma part, convaincu qu'une
!he nei&,hbours of Greece to the partisans fight- aide a ete donnee par les pays voisins de la
mg agamst her Government is based less on the Grece aux partisans qui luttent contre son Goutestim?ny given to this effect than on a priori vernement, je fonde ma conviction moins sur
reasonmg from the frontier incidents. These in- les temoignages qui ont trait a cette aide que
c~~ents have, in the form of reciprocal accusa- sur un raisonnement a priori fonde sur les incitions, been admitted by all the countries con- dents de frontiere. Ceux-ci sont reconnus, sous
c.erned. It seems to me quite unlikely that fron- la forme d'accusations reciproques, par tous les
tier guards who e.xchange shots so often would pays interesses. Il me parait absolument invrainot, .a fortiori, wink at the operations of Greek semblable que des postes frontieres qui echangent
p~rtlS~ns: or encourage them. But to say that si souvent des coups de fusil n'aient pas a fortiori
this md v-:as actually given still leaves quite open vu d'un bon reil les operations des partisans
the question of how substantial it was whether grecs et ne les aient pas favorisees. Mais dire
it involved the responsibility of the Go~ernments que cette aide a ete donnee, c'est laisser entiere
concerned more than did the frontier incidents ensuite la question de savoir queUe a ete son

themselves, and finally what part it plays in the
present Greek situation.

It is certain indeed that the aid given across
the frontier to the partisans is only one of the
factors in this difficult situation, and the majority
of the Commission has judiciously prefaced its
recommendations with an analysis of all the
various elements contributing to make the situation on Greece's northern frontier so complex.
The Commission mentions, in this part of its
report, the disturbed situation in Greece due to
the occupation, the refusal of most of the countries concerned to accept their present frontiers
as definitive, the exploitation of the Macedonian
question, the presence in Greece of refugees from
neighbouring countries, and, conversely, the
presence in these countries of refugees from
Greece, the vehemence and volume of the propaganda indulged in.
Perhaps we might add the geographical and
historical characteristics of this region, with its
mixed population, its local rivalries, its memories
of past struggles. The Commission might also
have laid greater stress on the phenomenon of
the Resistance which appeared with so many
common features in all the occupied countries,
and which, I feel, it is very hard for countries
that have not experienced enemy occupation to
appreciate and understand exactly.
It is very difficult, in a situation whose extreme
complexity the Commission has rightly emphasized, to formulate an opinion which does not
lend itself to criticism. The French member of
the Commission of Investigation and, with slight
variations, two of his colleagues, have accordingly suggested' to the Commission another
course. I notice that most of the members of the
Security Council who have spoken have more
or less adopted this other course. The United
States resolution which has been circulated
passes no verdict on what has happened, and the
representative of the United Kingdom has also
agreed that what was important was not to pass
judgment on the past, but rather to find a
remedy for the situation in the future. It is this
line of action that I, too, would urge the Security
Council to follow.
It is quite certain-this can be deduced, without leaving room for doubt, from the Commission's entire report-that a situation disquieting
for world peace has developed on the northern
frontier of Greece. We know from many examples what a danger to peace domestic strife
presents at a time when ideologies are so impassioned and extend so far beyond national frontiers. The internal situation in Greece creates a
sort of low-pressure zone which cannot but be to
her neighbours holding diametrically opposite
views a constant temptation to intervene or to
allow intervention by the refugees who are on
their territory. The Security Council must face
this situation squarely, weigh its dangers and
appraise its complexity.

I

importance, si eIle a pris une forme qui engage
la responsabiEte des Gouvernements interesscs
plus que les incidents de frontiere eux-mcmes,
quelle part, enfin, dIe occupe dans la presente
situation de la Grece.
11 est certain, en dfet, que l'aide donnee pardessus la frontiere aux partisans n'est qu'un des
elements de cette situation difficile, et la majoritc
de la Commission a judicieusement fait precedeI'
ses recommandations d'une analyse de l'ensemble
des elements qui rendent si complexe la situation
de la frontiere nord de la Grece.
La Commission mentionne, dans cette partie
de son rapport, la situation troublee de la Grece,
heritage de l'occupation, le refus de la plupart
des pays interesses d'accepter leurs frontieres
actuelles comme definitives, l'exploitation de la
question macedonienne, la presence en Grece
de refugies venus des pays voisins et la presence
reciproque de refugies grecs chez ceux-ci, la
violence et l'ampleur de la propagande.
Peut-ctre serait-il legitime d'ajouter les caracteres geographiques et historiques de cette region,
avec ses melanges de populations, ses rivalites
locales, ses souvenirs des luttes passees. Peut-ctre
aussi la Commission aurait-elle pu attirer davantage rattention sur le phenomene de la Resistance, qui s'est retrouve avec tant de traits
communs dans tous les pays occupes et qui me
semble si difficile a apprecier et a comprendre
exactement pour les pays qui n'ont pas connu
I'occupation.
11 est trcs difficile, en presence d'une situation
dont la Commission a ainsi, a juste titre, souligne l'extrcme complexite, de formuler un jugement qui ne prete pas a la critique. Aussi, le
membre fran~ais de la Commission d'enqucte,
et, avec des nuances, deux de ses collegues,
avaient-ils propose a la Commission une autre
voie. Je relcve que la pIu part des membres du
Conseil de securite qui ont pris la parole se sont
plus ou moins engages clans cette autre voie.
La resolution cles Etats-Unis, qui nous a ete
distribuee, ne formule aucun jugement sur le
passe et le representant du Royaume-Uni a
repris a son compte l'idee que I'essentiel n'etait
pas d'apprecier le passe, mais de remedier a la
situation pour l'avenir. C'est dans cette direction
qu'a mon tour je voudrais presser le Conseil de
securite de s'engager.
Il est tres certain - ceci se degage, sans laisser place au cloute, de tout le rapport de la
Commission qu'une sitl'.:ttion inquietante
pour la paix du mande s'est formee a la frontiere nord de la Grccc. Nous savons, par assez
d'exemples, quel danger les luttes interieures presentent pour la paix a une epoque allies ideologies sont si passionnees et debordent si largement les fronticres. La situation interieure de
la Grece cree une sorte de zone de basse pression qui ne peut manquer d'ctre pour ses voisins,
tenants d'une ideologie opposee, une tentation
constante d'intervenir, ou de laisser intervenir
les rCfugies qui se trouvent sur leur territoire.
Le Conseil de securite doit regarder cette situation en face, en mesurer les dangers et en
apprecier la complexite.

wit

1315
One example will serve to bring out this complexity: the relations of Greece with her ~orth­
em neighbours assume, from the legal pomt of
view three different forms. Greece considers herself in a state of war with Albania; she has not
resumed diplomatic relations with Bulgaria; she
has normal relations only with Yugoslavia. In
these three cases, the psychological atmosphere is
bad for reasons which are not always the same
from one country to another.
It is after making allowance for these factors,
namely, the danger and the complexity of the
situation, that the Council must act.
The proposals of the Commission, those appearing in the "Recommendations" section of
the report (whatever your opinion may be about
the part of the report entitled "Conclusions")
are, in substance, a sound basis to work on. The
nature of the situation and its gravity require
long-range measures for which the co-operation
of a body having some permanence and enjoying
the support of the Security Council's authority,
has rightly been recommended by the Commission. Such a body certainly requires, I think, to
be set up. In my view, it should· be equipped
primarily to aid the States concerned in carrying
out the Commission's recommendations directed
to normalizing the legal relations between the
interested countries, to regulating especially
their frontier relations, and to settling the refugee
question.
The statements made to the Council have
indicated acceptance, by at least one of Greece's
neighbours, of this part of the recommendations,
and goodwill to carry them· out.
I should like to see the other countries bordering on Greece bringing us also something other
than discussions of testimony, and I wish that,
looking to the future rather than to the past,
they might assure us that their Governments will
do all in their power to implement this section
of the recommendations of the Commission's
report.
In its role of conciliator, which I feel should
be the essential function of the new body it is
suggested to set up, it should have the greatest
possible moral authority. The question arises
whether it would not be to the advantage of this
body to hav~ a smaller membership than that of
the Commission whose report we are examining.
This, moreover, was how the majority of the
<?ommission conceived the body whose estabhshment it recommended. My personal preference would have been the other alternative
envisaged in the report, namely, that of a single
co~missioner, did not the example of the nomination of a governor for Trieste induce the fear
that we should encounter the same interminable
diffic~lties in reaching agreement on the choice
of a smgle commissioner.
Without wishing to take a final stand on this
matter today, I think that the best solution
would be to have a small commission. of from
three to five members, for example. As to the

Un exemple fait bien ressortir cette complexite: les relations de la Grece avec ses voisins du Nord revetent, sur le plan juridique, trois
formes differentes. La Grece se considere coinme
en etat de guerre avec l'Albanie; eHe n'a pas
repris les relations diplomatiques avec la Bulgarie; eHe n'a de relations normales qu'avec la
Yougoslavie. Dans les trois cas, le climat psychologique est mauvais pour des raisons qui ne sont
pas toujours les memes d'un pays a l'autre.
C'est en tenant compte de ces facteurs, danger
et complexite de la situation, que le Conseil
doit agir.
Les propositions de la Commission, ceHes qui
figurent dans la partie "Recommandations" du
rapport - et que! que soit l'avis que 1'0n puisse
avoir d'autre part sur la partie du rapport intitulee "Conclusions" - sont, dans leur substance,
une base solide de travail. La nature de la situation et son caractere de gravite necessitent des
mesures de•. longue haleine pour lesquelles la
cooperation d'un organisme d'une certaine duree
et s'appuyant sur I'autorite du Conseil de securite a ete, a juste titre, recommandee par la
Commission. L'institution de cet organisme nous
parait, en efIet, indispensable. A nos yeux, cet
organisme devrait ctre avant tout equipe pour
aider les Etats interesses dans l'application des
recommandations formulees par la Commission
et qui tendent a normaliser les rapports juridiques des pays interesses, a regulariser en particulier leurs relations frontalieres, a regler la question des refugies.
Les declarations qui ont ete presentees devant
nQUS ont marque, de la part de l'un au moins
des voisins de la Grece, une acceptation de cette
partie des recommandations, et une bonne
volonte de les appliquer.
Je souhaite que les autres pays limitrophes
de la Grece nous apportcnt ici, a leur tour, autre
chose que des discussions de temoignages, et que,
regardant eux aussi vel'S I'avenir plus que vel'S
le passe, ils nous disent que leurs Gouvernements
respectifs feront ce qui dependra d'eux pour
rendre effective cette partie des recommandations du rapport de la Commission.
Dans ce role de conciliation, qui doit etre
a nos yeux l'essentiel du rOle du nouvel organisme dont la creation est suggeree, celui-crdoit
avoir l'autorite morale la plus grande possible.
La question se pose de savoir s'il ne gagnerait
pas a ctre plus reduit en nombre que la Commission dont nous examinons le rapport.
C'est ainsi d'aillcurs que la majorite de la
Commission avait con/Su I'organisme dont eHe
recommandait la constitution. Nos preferences
auraient meme ete a I'autre formule qui est
envisagee dans le rapport, a savoir ceHe d'un
commissaire unique, si I'exemple de la nomination du gouverneur de Trieste ne devait nous
faire craindre que nous ne rencontrions les
memes tres longues difficultes a nous mettre
d'accord sur le choi:1( d'un commissaire unique.
Sans vOllloir prendre aujourd'hui, a cet egard,
line position definitive, nous pensons que la
mcilleure solution serait celle d'une commission
reduite quant au nombre de ses membres, trois

choice of these members, it could be conceived
either as comprising a balanced representation of
certain permanent members of the Council,
together with representatives of two or three
other countries, or-and this is the formula I
would prefer-a body composed entirely of representatives of countries other than the five permanent members, and chosen from those countries with the fewest interests in that part of the
world. This would in short reproduce the formula which the last United Nations Assembly
adopted for the Palestine question.

a cinq membres par exemple. Quant au choix

The Security Council would be performing
its most ordinary functions in lending its good
offices, through this commission or body to be
set up, to help in the w?rk of conciliating and

de ces membres, on peut le concevoir soit comme
comportant une representation equilibree de certains des membres permanents du Conseil, avec
des representants de deux ou trois autres pays,
soit - et c'est la formule a laquelle nous inclinons - comme composee tout entiere de representants de pays &utres que les cinq membres
permanents, et choisis parmi ceux qui ont le
moins d'interets engages dans cette partie du
monde. Ce serait en somme reprendre la formule
a laquelle la derniere Assemblee des Nations
Unies s'est ralliee dans le cas de la Palestine.
Une autre question discutable est celle du
siege de la Commission. Pour que l'organisme
qu'il s'agit de creer exerce pleinement son role de
conciliation, et en toute serenite, il peut y avoir
avantage a ce que son siege soit situe en dehors
du foyer des troubles.
D'ailleurs, la commission n'a peut-etre pas
besoin d'un siege permanent et unique. Nous
pouvons concevoir que ses membres seraient
convoques pour leur premiere reunion a Geneve,
par exemple, et qu'ils decideraient eux-memes
comment se deplacer suivant les besoins des negociations en cours, a Athenes, a Belgrade, a Sofia,
a Tirana, a Salonique.
Il est bien entendu que la commission, dans
notre esprit, devrait organiser et laisser sur place
des moyens d'observation: commissions mixtes
ou de frontieres, ou observateurs de frontieres,
organes de liaison, etc.
Quelle que soit, en efIet, la ville all s'installerait la commission, elle serait toujours eloignee
dans le temps et dans l'espace de la plupart des
points de la frontiere Oll se produisent les incidents.
Un exemple suffit: de Salonique a Konitza, il
faut compter deux heures d'avion ou plusieurs
heures d'auto, en admettant que les conditions
meteorologiques soient favorables.
Nous avons tenu a mettre l'accent sur le role
conciliateur de la commission. Il n'est malheureusement pas possible d'envisager - et les
nouvelles de ces derniers jours ne font que nous
confirmer dans cette vue - que nous puissions
nous passer d'un organisme susceptible de mener
rapidement de nouvelIes enquetes.
L'organisme a instituer devrait etre, a nos
yeux, investi d'avance des memes pouvoirs que
possedait la Commission d'enquete dont nous
examinons le rapport. Il apprecierait lui-meme,
en cas de nouvel incident grave, l'usage qu'il
aurait a faire de ses pouvoirs pour tenir le
Conseil de securite exactement informe des
faits, et lui permettre d'intervenir rapidement
suivant les necessites de la situation.
Nous ne pensons pas que l'institution d'un tel
organisme puisse meriter les objections de droit
qu'a formulees devant nous le representant de
la Bulgarie1 •
Le Conseil de securite serait dans son role le
plus normal en pretant ses bons offices, par l'intermediaire de cette commission ou de cet organisme a creer, en vue d'aider au travail de cbnci-

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 57.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite, Deuxicme Ann6e, No 57.

Another debatable question is that of a headquarters for the Commission. If the proposed
agency is to play its part as conciliator 'to the
full and in a \Fompletely calm atmosphere, it
may be better ~or it to have its headquarters
outside the trou;ble area.
Moreover; the Commission may not need one
permanent seati only. It is conceivable that its
members ,might be convened for their first meeting in Geneva, for example, and that they
might themselves de-cide how to move, as current negotiations required, to Athens, Belgrade,
Sofia, Tirana, or Salonika.
\

It goes without saying that the Commission,
as I see it, should organize, and leave on the
spot, observation units: joint or frontier commissions or frontier observers, liaison groups, etc.
Whichever city might be chosen to be the
Commission's headquarters, it would always be
removed in time and space from most points on
the frontier where the incidents occur.

t;,.....

One example will suffice: to travel from
Salonika to Konitsa takes two hours by plane or
several hours by automobile,assuming that
weather conditions are favourable.
I have stressed the conciliatory role of the
Commission. It is, unfortunately, impossible to
imagine-and recent reports only confirm us in
this opinion-that we can dispense with a body
which could carry out new investigations quickly.
In my opinion the body to be set up should
be invested in advance with the same powers as
held by the Commission of Investigation whose
report we are examining. Should another serious
incident occur, it would itself decide what use to
make of its powers in order to keep the Security
Council exactly informed and enable the Council
to intervene speedily as the situation required.
I do not think that the establishment of such
a body is open to the legal objections raised here
by the representative of Bulgaria:

•

1317
harmonizing points of view, which is its first
task under Chapter VI of the United Nations
Charter. The Security Council is also playing its
proper role in trying, in the face of a troubled
situation which will not change for the better
over night, to keep on the spot an agency capable if another serious incident should occur, of
reporting to it promptly. If the Security Council
had the power to set up the first Commission of
Investigation-and in my opinion it certainly
had this power under Article 34 of the Charter
-it has the same power to maintain on the spot
another body to perform the same functions, and
the maintenance of such an agency would, I
feel, be sufficiently justified by the circumstances
mentioned in the report.
I should like, finally, to revert to what I was
saying at the beginning of these remarks. In setting up a body to perform these various tasks,
there is nothing which can in any way whatsoever wound the susceptibilities of any State.
It is to the interest of all the countries concerned
that, should another grave incident occur, the
facts be promptly verified and false reports
denied. The measures which we suggest and
which are proposed in the report fall within the
framework of Chapter VI of the Charter; they
call for all members of the Council to collaborate
loyally in a body created to restore a peaceful
situation by means which are, in my opinion,
essentially those of conciliation and appeasement.
I should point out in closing that I reserve the
right to elaborate these views or t·) modify them
as may be called for by our subsequent discussions, by statements still to be made by representatives of the countries concerned and, of
course, by new information which may come to
us concerning recent events in Greece.
I submit these views to the Security Council
in the light of the information now available, in
the hope that they may contribute to the reestablishment of order, and the dissipation of a
grave threat to peace.
Mr. HSIA (China): Under Article 34 of the
Charter, the Security Council, on 19 December
1946, created a Commission of Investigation to
study the frontier violations and disturbances
between Greece on the one hand and Albania,
Bulgaria, and Yugoslavia on the other:
The Commission went to the Balkans at the
beginning of this year and spent several months
studying the border conditions. Now the Commission has presented to the Security Council
a well-documented, carefully worded, and extremely useful report which contains no less than
~50,000 words. On behalf of the Chinese delegation, I wish to congratulate the Commission on
the accomplishment of an exceedingly difficult
and laborious task.
The first volume of the report contains four
parts. The first part is an analysis of the work
of the Commission, and requires no comment.
y 1 See Official Records of the Security Council, First

ear, Second Series, No. 28, 87th meeting.

liation et de rapprochement des points de vue,
qui est sa premiere tache d'apres le Chapitre VI
de la Charte des' Nations Unies. Le Conseil de
securite est aussi dans son role en se preoccupant,
devant une situation troublee et qui ne cessera
pas de I'etre du jour au lendemain, de maintenir
sur place un organisme susceptible, en cas de
nouve! incident grave, de le renseigner rapidement. Si le Conseil de securite .:i. eu le pouvoir
d'instituer la premiere Commission d'enquete
- et, a nos yeux, il I'avait certainement, d'apres
l'Article 34 de la Charte - il a le meme pouvoir
de maintenir sur place un nouve! organisme
charge des memes fonctions, et ce rnaintien nous
paraitrait suffisamment justifie par les circonstances reievees dans le rapport.
Je veux, enfin, revenir a ce que je disais au
debut de ces observations. Dans I'institution d'un
organisme charge de ces diffelentes taches, il
n'y a rien qui puisse, d'une maniere quekonque,
heurter les susceptibilites d'aucun Etat. Tous les
pays interesses ont interet a ce qu'en cas de
nouvel incident grave les faits puissent etre rapidement controles, les fausses rumeurs dementies.
Les mesures que nollS envisageons, et qui sont
proposees dans le rapport, sont dans le cadre
du Chapitre VI de la Charte; elles reclament
la collaboration loyale de tous a un organisme
cree en vue de retablir une situation pacifique
par des moyens qui seront essentiellement, a nos
yeux, de conciliation et d'apaisement.
J'indique, en terminant, que je me reserve
de preciser ces vues ou de les modifier, en fonction de la suite de notre discussion, des declarations que pourraient encore nollS faire les representants des pays interesses et, bien entendu, en
fonction des nouveaux renseignements qui nous
parviendraient sur les derniers evenements de
Grece.
Te les soumets au Conseil de securite a la
lu~iere des informatiOl~s dont nous disposons
actuellement, avec le soud d'aider au retablissement de I'ordre et de faire disparaltre une
menace grave contre la paix.
M. HSIA (Chine) (traduit de l'anglais): En
application de I'Article 34 de la Charte, le
Conseil de securite a, le 19 decembre 1946,
etabli une Commission d'enquete chargee d'etudier les violations de frontiere et les troubles
survenus entre la Grece d'une part, l'Albanie,
la Bulgarie et la Yougoslavie d'autre part'.
La Commission s'est rendue dans les Balkans
au debut de cette annee et a consacre plusieurs
mois a l'etude des conditions existant le long des
frontieres. La Commission a maintenant presente
au Conseil de securite un rapport bien documente, soigneusement redige et tTes utile, qui
ne contient pas moins de 250.000 mots. Au nom
de la delegation chinoise, je tiens a feliciter la
Commission pour I'accomplissement d'une tache
extremement difficile et ardue.
Le premier volume de ce rapport est divise en
quatre parties. La premiere partie constitue une
analyse du travail de la Commission et n'appelle
1 Voir les Procds-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite, Premiere Annee, Seconde Serie, No 28, 87eme
seance.

1318
The second part is a survey of evidence, a task
which was entrusted to the Commission by the
Security Council. Each member of the Security
Council, I am sure, has complete confidence in
the competence and ability of its representative
on the Commission of Investigation.
The third part of the report presents the conclusions of the Commissiorl. From a survey of
evidence, eight members of the Commission
reached one set of conclusions, and two members reached another set. These two sets of conclusions were diametrically opposed to each
other. I shall not weary the Council by discussing
in detail the conclusions. I shall merely say that
China subscribed to the majority conclusions
only after a careful examination of the evidence,
and China still subscribes to them.
The most valuable part of the report is part
IV, in which nine members of the Commission
have made a series of proposals and recommendations which are designed to reduce the
tension in the border areas and, eventually, to
restore normal relations among the countries
concerned. I shall review briefly this series of
five proposals:

aucun commentaire. La deuxieme partie passe
en revue les pieces et temoignages recueillis conformement au mandat imparti a la Commission
par le Conseil de securite. Chaque membre du
Conseil de securite, j'en suis certain, a une
entiere confiance dans la competence et le talent
de son representant a la Commission d'enquete.
La troisieme partie -du rapport presente Ies
conclusions de la Commission. Sur la base des
pieces et temoignages, huit membres de la Commission ont abouti a une serie de conclusions
alors que deux autres membres ont abouti a une
autre serie de conclusions. Ces deux series de
conclusions sont diametralement opposees. Je
n'importunerai pas le Conseil en les discutant en
detail. Je dirai simplement que la Chine n'a
souscrit aux conclusions de la majorite qu'apres
un examen extremement attentif des pieces et des
temoignages et qu'elle persiste a approuver ces
conclusions.
La partie la plus precieuse du rapport est
la quatrieme partie, dans laquelle neuf membres
de la Commission ont fait une serie de propositions et de recommandations visant a reduire
la tension dans les regions frontalieres et eventuellement a retablir des relations normales entre
les pays interesses. Je pass~rai rapidement en
revue cette serie de cinq propositions:

A. That the Gcvernments of Greece, Albania,
Bulgaria and Yugoslavia should abstain from all
action which might increase or maintain the
tension and unrest in the border areas, and
speci~cally should rigorously refrain from any
support, overt or covert, of elements in neighbourillg countries aiming at the overthrow of
the lawful government of those countries. This
is a reaffirmation of the provision in the preamble of the Charter in which all Members are
enjoined "to practice tolerance and live together
in peace with one another as good neighbours".
Furthermore, here we find a timely warning. I
quote a passage from page 248 of the report:

A. Que les Gouvernements de Grece, d'Albanie, de Bulgarie et de Yougoslavie s'abstiennent
de toute action susceptible d'accroltre ou de
maintenir la tension et les troubles dans les regions frontalieres et, plus precisement, qu'ils
s'abstiennent rigoureusement de fournir ouvertement ou en secret un appui quelconque aux
elements des pays voisins qui cherchent a renverser le gouvernement legal de ces pays. Ceci
constitue une nouvelle affirmation des dispositions du preambule de la Charte dans lequeI
tous les Etats Membres s'engagent "a pratiquer
la tolerance, a vivre en paix l'un avec l'autre
dans un esprit de bon voisinage". En outre, nous
nous trouvons ici en presence d'un avertissement
opportun. Je cite un passage extrait de la page
258 du rapport:

"In the light of the situatio.'1 investigated by
it the Commission believes that, in the area of
its investigation, future cases of support of armed
bands formed on the territory of one State and
crossing into the territory of another State, or
of refusal by a Government in spite of the demands of the State concerned to take all possible
measures on its own territory to deprive such
bands of any aid or protection should be considered by the Security Council as a threat to
the peace within the meaning of the Charter
of the United Nations."

"A la lumiere de la situation examinee par
e1Ie, la Commission croit que, dans la zone qui
a fait l'objet de son enquete, le Conseil de securite devrait considerer comme une menace a la
p~ix dans l'acception de la Charte des Nations
Unies les cas suivants: appui fourni dorenavant
aux bandes armees formees sur le territoite cl'un
Etat et penetrant dans le territoire d'un autre
Etat, ou refus par un Gouvernement, en depit de
demandes faites par l'Etat interesse, de prendre
toutes les mesures possibles sur son propre territoire en vue de suspendre toute aide ou protection a des bandes de ce genre."

B. That with a view to providing effective
machinery for the regulation and control of their
common frontiers, the Governments concerned
should enter into new (rontier conventions. This
would revive a political device which was tried
and found useful in settling'border disputes between Greece and~Bulgaria.

B. Que, en vue d'assurer une reglementation
et un controle efficaces de !eurs frontieres communes, les Gouvernements interesses concluent
de nouvelles conventions frontalieres. Ceci constituerait une nouvelle application de la politique
qui fut suivie et qui s'est revelee utile lors du
reglement des differends de frontiere entre la
Grece et la Bulgarie.

•

1319
C. That a commISSIon should be established
to investigate future border violations and to
settle any future frontier controversies. I am
hopeful that the presence of such a commission
would engender a new sense of confidence
among the people and lessen the likelihood of
any future border disturbances.

C. Qu'une Commission soit etablie afin d'enqueter sur toutes les violations de frontiere qui
pourraint se produire et de regler tous les differends de frontiere qui pourraient surgir a I'avenir. J'espere que la presence d'une telle commission insuffiera aux populations un nouveau
sentiment de confiance et reduira la possibilite
de nouveaux troubles le long des frontieres.

D. That the Governments concerned should
not permit refugees to indulge in any political or
military activities. This is a duty every State
owes to- its neighbours.

D. Que les Gouvernements inteTesses n'autorisent pas les refugies a se livrer a des activites
politiques ou militaires. C'est la le devoir de tout
Etat a I'egard de ses voisins.

E. That the Governments concerned should
study the possible arrangements for the voluntary
transfer of minorities. This measure, if carried
out, would remove one of the basic causes of the
tension and unrest in the Balkans.

E. Que les Gouvernements interesses examinent la possibilite de prendre des dispositions
pour le transfert volontaire des minorites. Cette
mesure, si elle e~ait appliquee, ecarterait une des
causes fondamentales de la tension et de la situation trouble dans les Balkans.
La delegation chinoise estime que les propositions ou les. recommandations de la majorite
de la Commission sont sages, justes et constructives. Les recommandations sont sages et prudentes parce qu'elles ont pour premisse le fait
essentiel que - je cife id un passage extrait de
la page 256 du rapport - " ... il y a la situation.
troublee actuelle de la Grece. Cette situation est
un heritage du passe. ElIe a pour cause la tragique experience que la Grece a faite pendant la
guerre, son occupation par les Italiens, les Allemands et les Bulgares, la guerre de francs-tu'eurs
pendant )'occupation, et les rancreurs politiques
et les difficultes economiques, consequences de
la guerre."
Les recommandations sont moderees et justes
parce qu'elles ne sont pas liees a la question des
responsabilites respectivement encourues et qu'elles ne sont ni I'echo ni le reflet des conclusions,
queUes qu'elIes soient, auxquelles la Commission
a pu aboutir au sujet de la malheureuse situation
actuelle.
Les recommandations sont pI atiques et constructives parce qu'elles sont etablies sur le fait
simple et indiscutable que les relations sont tres
tendues entre la Grece d'une part, I'Albanie, la
Bulgarie et la Yougoslavie d'autre part, et qu'il
en resulte une situation extremement dangereuse
et explosive. Si on n'y porte remede, cette situation peut avoir de serieuses consequences internationales.
La delegation chinoise se declare favorable a
ces propositions ou recommandations et les
appuie parce qu'elles representent un effort sincere de la part du Conseil de securite - ainsi
qu'il est dit en substance a la page 257 du
rapport - pour detendre la situation dans les
Balkans et la ramener a la normale; cIles prevoient les reglementations efficaces qui faciliteront le retablissement de relations de bon voisinage, de I'ordre et de la tranquillite dans les
Balkans; cIles ne portent pas atteinte a la souverainete nationale de ces Etats et ne touchent
pas aux questions qui relevent essentiellement
de la competence nationale de ces pays; elles
sont formulees en pleine conformite de l'esprit
et de la lettre de la Charte.
Enfin, la delegation chinoise estime qu'en'
vertu de I'Article 36 de la Charte, le Conseil de

In the opinion of the Chinese delegation the
proposals or recommendations of the majority
of the Commission are wise, fair and constructive. The recommendations are wise arid prudent because they have as a premise the central
fact that-I am quoting a passage from page
246 of the report-"... there is the present disturbed situation in Greece which is a heritage
from the past and the causes of which are to
be found in Greece's tragic experience during
the war, in her occupation by the Italians, Germans and Bulgarians, in the guerrilla warfare
waged during the occupation and the political
bitterness and economic difficulties to which this
war gave rise".
The recommendations are moderate and fair
because they are not dependent upon the question of respective responsibility for the situation,
and are quite uninfluenced and unprejudiced by
whatever conclusions the Commission may have
reached concerning the present unhappy state of
affairs.
The recommendations are practical and constructive because they are based upon the simple
and undeniable fact that relations between
Greece Oh the one hand and Albania, Bulgaria
and. Yugoslavia on the other, are very much
stramed and there exists a situation highly dangerous and explosive. If not alleviated, it might
lead to serious international consequences.
The Chinese delegation favours and supports
these proposals or recommendations because they
represent an earnest endeavour on the part of
the Security Council-and I quote again from
page 246 of the report-"to alleviate and remedy" !he Balkan situation; they provide effective
machmery that will assist in the establishment
of good neighbourly relations and of order and
tranquillity in the Balkans; they do not infringe
upon the national sovereignty of these States
~d .do not affect matters which are essentially
w~thm the domestic jurisdiction of these countr~es; and they are made in strict conformity
WIth the spirit and letter of the Charter.

Finally, the Chinese delegation submits that
the Security Council is completely competent

1320
under Article 36 of the Charter to adopt the
proposals of the Commission. Indeed, it is the
clear duty of the Security Council, entrusted as
it is with primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, to
adopt such proposals as are calculated to reduce
the tension and ~nrest in the Balkans, and to
restore the peaceful relations between Greece on
the one hand, and Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia on the other. The Security Council would
not be fulfilling its responsibility were it to permit the Balkan situation to deteriorate by its
failure to recommend appropriate procedures or
methods of adjustment.
The proposals of the Commission have now
been incorporated in the draft resolution which
the United States representative introduced in
the Security Council on 27 June 1947:
The Chinese delegation supports the United
States draft resolution and urges its early adoption by the Council. The Chinese delegation
reserves the right to make such suggestions and
changes as it sees fit, with a view to improving
the draft, when the Council is ready to examine
the document in detail.
This is the first United Nations commission of
investigation. An early and speedy implt:mentation of these proposals will, on the one hand,
bring order and peace to the Balkans, and on the
other hand, will increase the confidence of the
world in the United Nations as an organization
which is really able to maintain peace and security in every part of the world.

securite possede la competence necessaire pour
adopter les propositions de la Commission. Investi qu'il est de la responsabilite principale du
maintien de la paix et de la securite internationales, le Conseil de securite a, en efIet, l'obligation evidente d'adopter de teIles propositions,
destinees a reduire la tension et les troubles dans
les Balkans, et a retablir des relations pacifiques
entre la Grece d'une part, l'Albanie, la Bulgarie
et la Yougoslavie d'autre part. Le Conseil de
securite ne ferait pas face a ses responsabilites si,
en s'abstenant de recommander les mesures et les
solutions appropriees, il permettait une' aggravation de la situation dans les Balkans.
, Les propositions de la Commission sont maintenant incorporees dans le projet de resolution
presente au Conseil de securite, le 27 juin 1947,
par le representant des Etats-Unis'.
La delegation chinoise appuie le projet de
resolution des Etats-Unis et insiste pour que le
Conseill'adopte rapidement. La delegation chinoise se reserve le droit de presenter les suggestions et modifications qui lui paraitraient utiles,
afin d'ameliorer le projet, lorsque le Conseil sera
en mesure d'examiner ce document en detail.
C'est la premiere commission d'enquete etablie par les Nations Unies. La mise en reuvre
proche et rapide de ces propositions assurera
d'une part, l'ordre et la paix dans les Balkans
et augmentera, d'autre part, la confiance du
monde dans les Nations Unies en tant qu'organisation reeIlement capable de maintenir la paix
et la securite dans toutes les parties du monde.

Mr. LOPEz(Colombia): In the OpInIOn of
the Colombian delegation, of all the matters of
which the Security Council is seized, the socalled Greek question is perhaps the most important-I mean, of course, at the present time.
We have several other very important matters on
our agenda, such as the international control of
atomic energy, the regulation and reduction
of armaments and armed forces, or the report of
the Military Staff Committee, but we all understand that months, perhaps years, will elapse
before any plan is finally agreed upon, and that
basic agreement among the major Powers will
not come to fruition before the peace settlements
with Austria, Germany and Japan have been
made.

M. LOPEz (Colombie) (traduit de l'ang1ais) :
La delegation colombienne estime que ce qu'on
appelle la question grecque est peut-etre la plus
importante de toutes les questions dont le Conseil
de securite est saisi - je parle, bien entendu,
de I'heure presente. Un certain nombre d'autres
questions tres importantes sont inscrites a notre
ordre du jour, te! que le controle international
de l'energie atomique, la reglementation et la
reduction des armements et des forces armees
ou le rapport du Comite d'etat-major, mais
nous comprenons tous que des mois, peut-etre
des annees s'ecouleront avant qu'aucun plan
soit finalement adopte, et qu'un accord fondamental entre les grandes Puissances ne pourra
etre mis en reuvre avant que les traites de paix
aient pu etre conclus avec l'Autriche, l'Allemagne et le Japon.
The Security Council must take action on the
Le Conseil de securite doit, cette semaine ou
report of the Commission of Investigation estab- la semaine prochaine, prendre des mesures a la
lished by the resolution of 19 December 1946' suite du rapport de la Commission d'enquete
this very week or the next. We are all keenly etablie par la resolution du 19 decembre 1946'.
conscious of the fact that our decisions are bound Nous avons tous conscience du fait que nos
to have far-reaching consequences, not only for decisions auront necessairement des repercussions
the Balkan countries, but for the world at large. considerables, non seulement dans les pays balUnsettled conditions in the Near East continue kaniques, mais dans le monde tout entier. L'insto be a constant source of anxiety in Europe, tabilite de la situation dans le Proche Orient conand, as things go today, in other continents as tinue d'etre une source constante d'anxiete pour
well.
I'Europe, et, dans l'etat actuel des choses, pour
les autres continents egalement.
1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 51, 147th meeting.
" Ibid., First Year, Second Series, No. 28, 87th meeting.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite, Deuxieme Annee, No 51, 147eme seance.
"Ibid., Premiere Annee, Seconde Serie, No 28, 87eme
seance.

@

We have heard with great interest the statements made by various members of the Security
Council, particularly those of Mr. Austin and
Mr. Gromyko, in support of the proposals submitted by the United States of America and the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics respectively.
We cannot help saying it has given us great concern to see that they are conflicting to a degree
that seems to rule out any attempt by the representatives of the small nations to approach the
Greek question in a more conciliatory and cooperative spirit. Yet this, in the judgment of the
Colombian delegation, is our duty. The situation
in the Balkans, far from improving, has grown
worse since the establishment of the Subsidiary
Group of the Commission of Investigation ten
weeks ago. We certainly think it is in keeping
with the purposes and functions of the Security
Council to bring about a change for the better
in that situation through an effective exercise of
the Council's influence and powers.

Nous avons ecoute avec grand interet les declarations faites par divers membres du Conseil de
securite, en particulier celles de MM. Austin et
Gromyko, a l'appui des propositions soumises respectivement par les Etats-Unis d'Amerique et
l'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques.
Nous ne pouvons nous empecher de dire que c'est
pour nous un gros souci de constater que ces propositions s'opposent a un degre tel qu'elles semblent eliminer d'avance toute tentative faite par
les representants des petites nations pour abordel' la question grecque dans un esprit de plus
grande conciliation et cooperation. La delegation colombienne estime cependant que ceci est
notre devoir. La situation dans les Balkans, loin
de s'ameliorer, n'a fait que s'aggraver depuis
l'etablissement, il y a dix semaines, du Groupe
subsidiaire de la Commission d'enquete. Nous
sommes persuades qu'il entre dans les buts et les
attributions du Conseil de securite de provoquer
une evolution de cette situation dans un sens
favorable, en exerc;ant efficacement son influence
et ses pouvoirs.

This is not indeed an easy task, however
stimulating it may be for detached observers or
spectators of the political drama that has been
rapidly unfolding in the Near East since the
United Kingdom decided to withdraw her military and financial assistance from Greece. It is
considerably more difficult for the major Powers,
whose political and eC{)nomic interests are
heavily involved. But we realize that if we succeed. in inviting the Security Council to consider some aspects of the Greek question which
have apparently escaped the eye of its most
experienced members, we shall have made a positive contribution to the peace-keeping work of
the United Nations.
.

Ce n'est evidemment pas une tache aisee, bien
qu'elle soit passionnante pour des observateurs
ou des spectateurs objectifs du drame politique
qui s'est developpe rapidement dans le Proche
Orient depuis la decision du Royaume-Uni de
retirer son aide militaire et financiere a la
Grece. Cette tache est beaucoup plus difficile
encore pour les grandes Puissances, dont les
interets politiques et economiques sont conside~
rablement engages. Mais nous nous rendons
compte que, si nous reussissons a inviter le
Conseil de securite a considerer certains aspects
de la question grecque qui ont apparemment
echappe a l'attention de ses membres les plus
experimentes, nous aurons apporte une contribution positive a I'reuvre du maintien de la paix
entreprise par Ies Nations Unies.

We are inclined to believe that we may have
over-stressed in our discussions the importance
of appraising responsibilities for the present situation in Greece, and that in doing so we have
greatly reduced our chances of reaching a common ground of understanding as to the action
that the Security Council should now take. We
believe, in other words, that we are more apt to
find a satisfactory solution of the Greek problem
if we discuss it from a broader standpoint, placing more emphasis on the need for future cooperation among the Balkan countries than on
the origin of their disputes during the last twelve
months, whether we examine and pass judgment
on them in the light of recent developments or
as an outcome of the German invasion and its
after-effects.

Nous sommes tentes de croire que nous avons
pu exagerer, au cours de nos discussions, le souci de peser les responsabilites de la situation
actuelle en Grece et que, en 3.gissant de la sorte,
nous avons considerablement reduit nos chances
d'aboutir a un terrain d'entente pour l'examen
des mesures que le Conseil de securite devrait
prendre maintenant. Nous croyons, en d'autres
termes, qu'il nous serait plus aise de trouver une
solution satisfaisante au probleme grec si nous
l'examinions d'un point de vue plus large, en
mettant davantage l'accent sur la necessite d'une
cooperation ulterieure entre les pays balkaniques
plut6t que sur I'origine de leurs differends au
cours des douze derniers mois, examines et juges
a la lumiere des derni~rs developpements, ou bien
consideres comme les resultats de l'invasion allemande et de ses contre-coups.

To be sure, the fact that Greece has become
the declared or accepted frontier between the
West and the East in an ideological war lends
~dded importance to every aspect of· the quesh.on. Outside the chamber of the Security Council, the frontier incidents, which until a few
days ago had been the subject of our discussions,
~re not "the Greek question" of which we read
1ll the Press and hear so much over the radio. In

A coup sur, le fait que la Grece est devenue
la frontiere declaree ou acceptee entre l'Ouest
et I'Est, dans une guerre ideologique, augmente
l'importance de chacun des aspects de la question. En dehors de la salle du Conseil de securite,
les incidents de frontiere qui, jusqu'a ces derniers jours, ont ete l'objet de nos discussions, ne
constituent pas "la question grecque" apropos
de laquelle nous lisons dans la presse et enten~

1322
the report of the Commission of Investigation to
the Security Council we find an abundant mass
of contradictory evidence from which we could
draw, if we wished, ample support for the contention that civil war is raging in Greece or that
one of the parties thereto has been receiving aid
and comfort from the adjoining countries. We
think, however, that it is not necessary to dwell
any longer today on the source of the strength
of Greek partisans.

We all know that prompt and effective action
by the Security Council is required in order to
restore good neighbourly relations among the
nations of the Balkan peninsula. The report
leaves no doubt in our minds that there exists a
situation, the continuance of which is, in fact,
likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security.
It appears to the Colombian delegation that
the first step to be taken by the Security Council
at this stage of the dispute should be of a conciliatory nature in accordance with Article 37,
paragraph 2, of the Charter of the United Nations. We should expect such steps to accomplish
their avowed purpose if not only the Governments concerned but also the major Powers
which are more directly interested in this situation corroborated by action their oft-repeated
declarations of willingness to co-operate with the
Security Council. Moreover, in carrying out the
recommendations of the Council, the major
Powers would have a favourable opportunity to
exchange ideas in a cordial atmosphere, with a
view to ensuring peace and security in the
Balkans.
But let us for a moment assume that their cooperation is not forthcoming, and that, on the
contrary, the Security Council should find that
its efforts are being deliberately thwarted. How
would such obstruction to the Council's clear-cut
recommendations, entirely free from any taint of
recrimination or antagonism, look to the world?
Would it enable the Council to know when to
take enforcement measures,' sooner or later?
Would not then such measures be more readily
adopted, even if they were more drastic?

The Colombian delegation concurs in the proposals contained in paragraphs A, B, D and E
of the report of the Commission of Investigation,
and after carefully examining and discussing
them with other delegations, believes that,
in the amended form in which we understand
they will be submitted to the Council, they would
meet with general, if not unanimous, acceptance.
The Security Council should recommend to
the Governments of Greece, on the one hand,
and Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia on the
other, to establish as soon as possible normal,
good neighbourly relations, abstaining from all
action, direct or indirect, which might be likely
to increase or to maintain the tension and the
unrest in the border areas, and rigorously to refrain from any support of elements in neighbour_~ '

dons a la radio tant de commentaires. Dans le
rapport presente au Conseil de securite par la
Commission d'enquete ·nous trouvons une abondance d'elements contradictoires dont nous pourrions tirer, si nous le- desirions, une ample confirmation de la these selon laquelle la guerre civile
fait rage en Grece ou de la these selon laquelIe
une des parties en cause a re~u aide et assistance
des pays voisins. Nous pensons neanmoins qu'il
est inutile de s'etendre plus longuement aujourd'hui sur la question de la source a laquelIe les
partisans grecs ont puise leur force.
Nous savons tous qu'une action rapide et efficace du Conseil de securite est necessaire au retablissement des relations de bon voisinage entre
les nations de la peninsule balkanique. Le rapport ne laisse subsister dans notre esprit aucun
doute qu'il existe une situation dont la prolongation est de nature a mettre en danger le maintien de la paix et de la securite internationales.
La delegation colombienne crait que les premieres mesures a prendre par le Conseil de
securite, a ce stade du differend, devraient revetir
un aspect de conciliation en application de l'Article 37, paragraphe 2, de la Charte des Nations
Unies. Nous pourrions nous attendre a voir de
telIes mesures atteindre le but qui leur est assigne
si, non seulement les Gouvernements en cause,
mais egalement les grandes Puissances plus directement interessees a cette question, transformaient
en actes leur volonte si frequemment affirmee de
cooperer a l'reuvre du Conseil de securite. De
plus, en executant les recommandations du
Conseil, les grandes Puissances y trouveraient
une occasion favorable d'echanger des idees dans
une atmosphere cordiale en vue d'assurer la paix
et la securite dans les Balkans.
Mais supposons pour un instant que leur
collaboration ne se manifeste pas, qu'au contraire
le Conseil de securite constate que see efforts se
trouvent deliberem~nt contrecarres. Comment le
monde jugerait-il pareille obstruction aux recommandations precises du Conseil de securite,
exemptes de toute idee de recrimination et d'antagonisme? Cette obstruction permettrait-elle au
Conseil de savoir si des mesures d'cxecution se
revelent necessaires plus tot ou plus tard? De
telles mesures ne seraient-elles pas alors plus rapidement adoptees, meme si elles etaient plus draconiennes?
La delegation colombienne approuve les propositions contenues dans les paragraphes A, B,
D et E du rapport d~ la Commission d'enquete,
et apres les avoir examinees soigneusement et en
avoir discute avec d'autres delegations, elle crait
que, sous la forme amendee OU elles seront, pensons-nous, soumises au Conseil, elles rencontreront l'approbation generale, sinon unanime.
Le Conseil de securite devrait recommander
aux Gouvernements de la Grece d'une part, de
l'Albanie, de la Bulgarie et de la Yougoslavie
d'autre part, d'etablir aussitot que possible des
relations normales de bon voisinage et de s'abstenir de tout acte direct ou indirect de nature a
augmenter ou a maintenir la tension et la situation trouble dans les regions frontalieres, de
s'abstenir rigoureusement dp fournir un appui

~_ .,.__... ','_'_ ._~_______ ____<.;-i.~

_ ......!IIII""'--------.---..-.-.-...~._-_._-_._-_._---~---------

iiJS

1323

ing countries aiming at the overthrow of the
legal governments of those countries. Cases of
support of armed bands formed on the territory
of one State and crossing into the territory of
another Statel or refusal by a Government, in
spite of the demands of the State concerned, to
take all possible measures on its own territory to
deprive such bands of any aid or protection,
should be considered and avoided as a threat to
the peace within the meaning of the Charter of
the United Nations.

quelconque aux elements des pays voisins qui
cherchent a renverser les gouvernements legaux
de ces pays. L'appui donne a des bandes armees
fornlees slJr le territoire d'un Etat et penetrant
sur le territoire d'un autre Etat ou le refus par
un Gouvernement, malgre les demandes de
I'Etat interesse, de prendre sur son propre territoire toutes les mesures possibles en vue de suspendre toute aide ou protection a des bandes
de ce genre, devront etre consideres comme une
menace a la paix dans I' acception de la Charte
des Nations Unies et, comme tels, devront etre
evites.

The Security Council should recommend to
Le Conseil de securite devrait recorrimander
the Governments concerned to renew old fron- aux Gouvernements interei':ses de renouveler
tier conventions or to enter into new ones pro- .les anciennes conventions frontalieres ou d'en
viding for the pacific settlement of frontier in- conclure de nouvelles tendant au reglement padcidents and disputes.
fique des incidents et des differends de frontiere.
Puisque la presence de re£ugies clans l'un ou
As the presence of refugees in any of the four
countries is a disturbing factor, the Security l'autre des quatre pays est un facteur de trouble,
Council should recommend to the Governments le Conseil de securite devrait recommander aux
of Albania, Bulgaria, Greece and Yugoslavia to Gouvernements de l'AIbanie, de la Bulgarie, de
remove such refugees as far from the region from la Grece et de la Y9ugoslavie d'eloigner autant
which they came as it is practically possible; to que possible ces refugies de la region dont ils
segregate them in camps or otherwise; to take sont originaires, de les rassembler dans des camps
effective measures to prevent their participation ou ailleurs et de pre~dre des mesures efficaces
in any political or military activity. Such camps pour empecher leur participation a des activites
should be placed under the supervision of the politiques ou militaires. De tels camps devraient
International Refugee Organization or any other etre places sous la surveillance de I'Organisation
body designated by the United Nations.
internationale pour les re£ugies ou de tout autre
organisme designe par les Nations Unies.
The Security Council should further recommend to the Governments of Greece on the one
hand, and Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia on
the other, the conclusion of conventions in ord ~r
to facilitate the voluntary transfer of minorities
and refugees.

Le Conseil de securite devrait en outre recommander au Gouvernement de la Grece, d'une
part, et aux Gouvernements de l'Albanie, de la
Bulgarie et de la Yougoslavie, cl'autre part, de
conclure des conventions aGn de faciIiter le
transfert volontaire des minorites et des re£ugies.

No one, we think, can seriously object to these
provisions. If anything, they fall short of the requirements of a comprehensive Balkan convention, such as the Colombian delegation envisaged
in my statement of 18 April.' Objections arise,
however, to the establishment of a commiss;on
for the purpose of helping to carry out these
recommendations and of bringing about good
neighbourly relations between Greece on the one
hand, and Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia on
the other. Opinions differ more widely as to the
composition and terms of reference of the commission.

Nul ne peut, a notre avis; presenter des objections serieuses a ces dispositions. Si on peut leur
reprocher quelque chose, c'est d'etre insuffisantes
pour repondre aux necessites d'une convention
pour l'ensemble des Balkans, telle que I'envisageait la delegation de la Colombie, dont j' ai
fait connaitre I'avis dans mon expose du 18
avril'. Toutefois, des objections ont ete formulees
relativement a la creation d'une commission
destinee a faciliter la mise en application de
ces recommandations et a creer des relations de
bon voisinage entre la Grece, d'une part, et l'AIbanie, la Bulgarie et la Yougoslavie, d'autre part.
Les avis sont plus partages encore au sujet de la
composition et du mandat de la commission.

There seems to be hardly any room for disagreement as to the functions of the commission,
once the Security Council has decided to establish it. Those functions should be:

n semble que les fQnctions de la commission
pourront a peine fournir matiere a desaccord
lorsque le Conseil de securite aura decide de la
creer. Voici q uelles devraient etre ces fonctions:

1. To use its good offices to assist the Balkan
Governments concerned in the negotiation and
conclusion of the frontier conventions recommended by the Security Council;

1. Offrir ses bons offices pour assister les Gouvernements des pays balkaniques interesses dans
I'elaboration et la conclusion des conventions
frontalieres recommandees par le Conseii de
securite;

y 1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
ear, No. 37, 130th meeting, pages 779 and 780.

'Voir Ies Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite, D~uxieme Annee, No 37, 130eme seance, pages 779
et 780.

1324

2. To study and make recommendations with
respect to such additional bilateral agreements
between them, for the pacific settlement of disputes relating to frontier incidents or conditions
along the frontier, as the proposed commission
may consider desirable;

2. Proceder a des etudes et faire des recommandations en ce qui concenie les accords bilateraux complementaires entre ces pays, que la
future commission jugerait util€S en vue d'aboutir au reglement pacifique des difIerends relatifs
aux incidents de frontiere ou a la situation le
long de la frontiere;

3. To use its good offices for the settlement, by
the means mentioned in Article 33 of the Charter, of:

3. Offrir ses bons offices pour regler, en usant
des moyens mentionnes a I'Article 33 de la
Charte:

(a) Controversies arising from frontier violations;

a) .,Les difficultes provenant des violations de
fro!luere;

(b) Controversies directly connected with the
application of the frontier conventions recommended by the Security Council to the four Governments concerned;

b) Les difficultes reliees directement a I'application des conventions de frontiere recommandees par le Conseil de securite aux quatre Gouvernements interesses;

(c) Complaints regarding conditions on the
border which may be brought to the attention
of the commission by one Government against
another;

c) Les plaintes portant sur la situation le long
de la frontiere, qui pourraient etre soumises a
I'attention de la commission par un Gouvernement contre un autre;

4. Last, but not least, to assist the Govern4. Enfin, - derniere tache mais non la moins
ments concerned in the negotiation and conclu- utile, - assister les Gouvernements interesses
sion of arrangements for the tl'ansfer of refugees dans I'elaboration et la conclusion d'accords sur
and minorities, if called upon by any of them le transfert des refugies et des minorites, si un
to supervise the execution of such arrangements, Gouvernement faisait appel a la commission pOUf
and to act as registration authority for any per- controler I'application de ces accords, et foncsons desiring to emigrate.
tionner comme bureau cl' 4nregistrement a I'us"ge
des personnes qui desircnt emigrer.
It is obvious that for the proper performance
Il est ev:dent que, pour remplir correctement
of its functions the commission should be ac- ses fonctions; la commission devrait etre accrecredited as an organ of the Security Council to ditee en tant qu'organe officiel du Conseil de
the Governments of Albania, Bulgaria, Greece securite aupres des Gouvernements de l'Albanie,
and Yugoslavia, with tht" right of direct access to de la Bulgarie, de la Grece et de la Yougoslavie,
them; and, furthermore, that the commission et posseder le droit de s'adresser a ceux-ci direcshould be empowered to act on either side of tement; il est egalement evident que la commisthe border with the co-operation of the officials sion devrait etre autorisee a fonctionner de chaand nationals of the four Governments.
que cote de la frontiere avec la cooperation des
fonctionnaires et des nationaux des quatre Gouvernements.
However, we are not quite convinced that the
Nous ne sommes pas entierement convaincus,
commission should make its headquarters at neanmoins, que la commission doive etablir son
Salonika, as it has been suggested. We respect- siege a Salonique, comme cela a ete propose.
fully :"ubrnit that the headquarters of the com- Nous nous permettons de suggerer que le siege
mission should be established in a neutral coun- de la commission devrait etre etabli dans un
try, in Switzerland, preferably in Geneva. The pays neutre, en Suisse, et de preferenr.e a
Colombian delegation is more in favour of hav- Geneve. La delegation de la Colombie envisage
ing the commission located outside the territory plus volontiers I'etablissement de la commission
of Albania, Bulgaria, Greece and Yugoslavia, en dehors du territoire de I'Albanie, de la Bulif it is to be provided with the staff necessary to garie, de la Grece et de la Yougoslavie, si cette
fulfil its duties, including border 01 _servers.
commission dispose du personnel necessaire pour
accomplir ses fonctions, y compris les observateurs sur la frontiere.
A more debatable question 1::; the membership
Il existe. une question qui suscitera de plus
of the commission itself. It would seem that a amples discussions: c'est celle de la composition
commission composed of a representative of each de la commission elIe-meme. Il semblerait qu'une
of the States members of the Security Council, commission composee d'un representant de chawhichever they may be at any particular time, cun des Etats membres du Conseil de securite,
would have more authority and that its decision quels qu'ils soient a une epoque determinee,
would be more readily accepted; but we are not aurait plus d'influence, et ses decisions seraient
sure that it would not prove to be too cumber- plue aisement acceptees. Nous ne sommes pas
some for the most effective and speedy conclu- certains, toutefois, que cette composition ne conssion of its tasks. We have every reason to suppose tituerait pas un obstacle a I'accomplissement le
that a large membership would tend to retard plus efficace et le plus rapide de sa tache. Nous
the work and movements of the commission, avons toutes raisons de supposer qu'un nombre
'",,".::c.~

,.,~~

..... .

~_ -~

if, as is so likely to happen, the e: r~ri~nce and : 'mp!"' ta ,: de representants a cette commission
el.dance a retarder le travail et les deplaability of the eleven members shotud differ'~ry I '!
.•nents de celle-ci, au cas ou l'experience et la
widely. Under normal circumstances, a smaller
group of carefully selected men could be ex~ comp'~tence des ohze membres seraient largement differentes, Ge qui serait vraisemblablepected to function more efficiently.
ment le cas" Dans des circonstances normales,
un groupe plus restreint de personnes soigneusement choisies pourrait certainement fonctionner av-ec un meilleur rendernent.
En avril dernier, lorsque nous avons discute
Last April, when the establishment of the
Subsidiary Group of the Commission of Investi- la creation du Groupe subsidiaire de la Comgation was being discussed, we ventured to mission d'enquete, neus avons propose et recomrecommend that a Balkan commission consisting mande qu'une commission balkanique, se comof four permanent and thz:ee non-permanent posant de quatre membres permanents et de trois
members of the Security Council should be set membres non permanents du Conseil de securite,
up for the purpose of helping. to negotiate a flit constituee en vue de la negociation d'une
Balkan convention.' We should now like to sug- convention balkanique' . Nous voudrions maintegest that the new commission should consist of nant proposer que la nouveIle cOffilnission soit
three permanent and four non-permanent mem- composee de trois membres permanents et de
bers of the Security Council, and we respectfully quatre membres non permanents du Conseil de
ask our colleagues to stop to consider the rela£ve securite, et nous nous permettrons de vous
advantages and disadvantages of the large and demander de ne plus prendre en consideration
les avantages ou les inconvenients relatifs d'un
small memberships.
petit nombre ou d'un grand nombre de membres.
Nous avons, en fin de compte, plus confiance
We have decidedly more confidence in the
succ£ss of a commission of seven members with dans le succes d'une commission composee de
headquarters at Geneva than in the success of sept membres et ayant son siege a Geneve que
one of eleven members located in Salonika; and dans le succes d'une commission de onze memwe believe that in case of failure, the smaller bres ayant son siege a Salonique; nous estimons
commission would more quickly enable the qu'en cas d'echec la commission la moins imporCouncil to determine the causes of that failure, tante permettrait plus rapidement au Conseil
to foresee the course of immediate developments de determiner les causes de cet echec, de prevoir
in the Balkan countries, and to adopt without le cours du developpement immediat des evedelay the appropriate measures for any emer- nements dans les pays balkaniques, et de decider
gency.
sans retad des mesures appropriees a prendre en
cas de besoin.
But, first of all, the Colombian delegation
En premier lieu, la delegation de la Colombie
thinks that, given the terms of reference already estime neanmoins qu'etant donne son mandat,
outlined, the commission should seem to be more deja sommairement indique, la commission deconcerned with the arrangements contemplated vrait s'occuper des futurs accords entre la Grece
between Greece and her neighbours than with et ses voisins plutot que des questions de surveilfrontier surveillance; and that while it should lance de frontiere; nous estimons egakment que
have, in case of need, the same powers as the tout en etant dotee, en cas de b~soin, des memes
Commission of Investigation, it should not be pouvoirs que la CommL'lsion d'enquete, elle ne
expected to have to have recourse to them. We devrait pz.s en. principe etre appe1ee a y avoir
imagine that in carrying out the recommenda- recours. Il nous semble que, pour veiller a
tions of the Council, the commission would have l'application des recommandations du Conseil,
to travel to the Balkan capitals or to invite the la commission devrait se rendre dans les capirepresentatives of the Balkan countries to come tales des Etats balkaniques ou inviter les repreto its headquarters; but the commission would sentants de ces Etats a se rendre a son siege; en
delegate the task of acting as border observers revanche, la commission se dechargerait sur des
and reporting on the state of the frontier area observateurs de la tache de surveiller les fronand such matters. Otherwise, we are afraid that tieres, de fournir des rapports sur la condition
the position of the commission might appear des zones frontalieres, et d'autres questions anamore confused in the,minds of many people logues. S'il en etait autrement, nous craindrions
who, ~rom the start, have been labouring under que la position de la commission ne put paraitre
the nusapprehension that the United Nations is moins claire a l' esprit "de nombreuses personnes
playing a subordinate role in this situation.
qui, des l'abord, vivaient dans la supposition
erronee que les Nations Unies jouaient un role
secondaire dans cette question.
We prefer to suggest this fresh approach to the
Nous pre£erons proposer cette nouvelle maGreek question, considering how closely con- niere d'aborder la question grecque, compte tenu
nected it is to the whole European situation and de la maniere etroite dont eIle est reliee a la
mo~e concretely to all the matters that are en- situation generale de l'Europe et, d'une fa~on
~agmg the attention of the Security Council.
plus concrete, a tous les problemes qUI retiennent l'attention du Conseil de securite.

I

y 1 SeeNOfjicial Records of th, Stlcurity Council, Second
ear, o. 37, 130th meeting, page 781.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du ConSilii dll sicurite, Deuxieme Annee, No 37, 130eme seance, page 781.

--~

The Colombian delegation wishes, in short,
to recommend that a new and determined effort
should be made to draw the parties to this grave
international dispute as near as is reasonably
possible. For the past six months we have met
here, week after week, trying to implement the
resolutions of the General Assembly regarding
atomic energy, armaments, armed forces and
collective security, but we cannot show any remarkable, positive results. We have expended a
great deal of mental energy in trying very consistently to reduce the area of our disagreements,
and we have not succeeded in increasing to any
appreciable extent the area of our agreements.
It is rather comforting to think that, after all,
the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly
on 14 December 1946' really call for a great deal
of investigation and discussion. Ample time
should be allowed, therefore, and we can well be
content to know that we have cleared and paved
the way for very far-reaching advances in all
directions, once the peace-making process comes
to an end in Central Europe and Japan.

But this makes it all the more important that
nothing should in the meantime impair our ability to carry our tasks to a successful conclusion.
We must admit that we have been strongly
impressed by the possibilities of friction and
misunderstanding which the Greek situation
is making increasingly evident. The desire to cooperate in avoiding or overcoming them has
encouraged us to present our views, without,
however, giving them adequate form as an
alternative proposal, or elaborating an argument
in their support.
Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America):
I have been very much impressed by the unanimity on the themes which have run through
all the expositions by the various delegations to
which we have listened in the last few days.
Representatives may differ in their opinions, and
differ legitimately, as regards the causes of the
present situation or the relative weight to be
attached to the various causes, since there is probably no single cause. There is, however, a
singular unanimity on the fact that a situation,
potentially dangerous and likely to endanger
and menace international peace and security,
exists along the Greek frontier.
That being the case, we can hardly escape
the conclusion that the members e;{ this Council
feel a personal responsibility for this situation.
The primary responsibility of the Security Council is to watch over and maintain international
peace and security. In following our duty to obey
that mandate of the Charter, it is not necessary
for us to assess the blame when a situation which
we all admit is a dangerous one and a menace
I See Resolutions adopted by the General Assembly
during the second part of its first session, pages 6.5 to 67.

La delegation de la Colombie desire en resume recommander qu'il soit fait un nouvel et
tenace effort pour rapprocher, autant qu'il est
raisonnablement· possible, les parties' a ce grave
differend internationaL Au cours des six derniers mois, nous nous sommes reunis id, scmaine
apres semaine, en nous effor~ant de mettre en
application les resolutions de l'Assemblee generale relatives a l'energie atomique, aux armements, aux forces armees et a la securite collective, mais il nous est impossible de montrer
aucun resultat tangible. Nous avons depense une
grande quantite d'energie intellectuelle a tenter
constamment de reduire l'ampleur de nos divergences de vues et nous n'avons pas reussi a
accroitre d'une facson sensible l'etendue de nos
accords. Il est plutot reconfortant de penser
qu'apres tout, les resolutions adaptees par I'Assemblee generale le 14 decembre 1946' impliquent de m:mbreuses enquetes et de nombreuses
discussions. Il y faudra done consacrer beaucoup
de temps et nous pouvons bien nous rejouir de
savoir que nous avans deblaye et prepare la
voie a une progression rapide dans tous les
domaines, des que les travaux de l'edification
de la paix toucheront a leur terme en Europe
centrale et au Japon.
Toutefois, il n'en est que plus inlportant que
rien ne vienne dans I'intervalle diminuer notre
aptitude a remplir notre tache jusqu'au succes.
Il nous faut reconnaitre que nous avons ete fortement impressionnes par les risques de tension
et d'incomprehension que la situation de la
Grece rend de plus en plus evidents. Le desir
de cooperer en evitant ou en surmontant ces
obstacles nous a encourages a presenter notre
point de vue, sans toutefois lui donner une
forme qui puisse constituer une nouvelle proposition, ni sans rechercher a l'etayer par toute
une argumentation.
M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): J'ai ete tres frappe de l'unanimite dans I'expression des pensees qui ont ete
exposees par les orateurs des differentes delegations que nous avons entendus au cours des
derniers jours. Les representants peuvent avoir
des opinions differentes en ce qui concerne les
causes de la situation actuelle ou peuvent attribuer une valeur relative aces differentes causes,
car il n'y a probablement pas qu'une seule cause.
Il existe neanmoins une singuliere convergence
d'opinions relativement au fait qu'une situation
virtuellement dangereuse et susceptible de mettre
en peril et de menacer la paix et la securite internationales, existe le long de la frontiere grecque.
Dans ces conditions, nous pouvons difficilement eviter de concIure que les membres de ce
Conseil sentent que leur responsabilite personnelle est engagee dans cette situation. La responsabilite prindpale du Conseil de securite est de
garder et de maintenir la paix et la securite
internationales. En exer~ant ce mandat que nouS
a confie la Charte, il n'est pas necessaire que
nous rejetions le blame sur tel ou tel, alors qu'une
1 Voir les Resolutions adoptees par l'AssemblBe generale pendant la seconde partie de sa premiere session,
pages 65 a 67.

•

1327
to international peace and security is before us
for action.

situation que nous regardons tous comme dangereuse et comme niena~ant la paix et la securite internationales attend que nous y portions
remede.

This afternoon the representative of Colombia
expressed, in eloquent and feeling terms, views
which are probably shared by all the small States
represented on this Council. They want to help
towards achieving a peaceful world and finding
solutions whic:'} will lessen the friction among the
major Powers.

Cet apres-midi, le representant de la Colombie
a exprime en termes eloquents 'et expressifs un
point de vue qui est probablement aussi celui de
tous les petits Etats representes a ce Conseil. Ils
veulent collaborer a l'edification d'un monde
pacifique et a la recherche de solutions qui diminueront la tension parmi les grandes Puissances.

Comment allons-nous atteindre ce but? ComHow are we going to accomplish tills purpose?
How can the Security Council take the various ment le Conseil de securite pourra+i! prendre
steps necessary to effect the end we all seek? The les differentes mesures qui s'imposent pour abouUnited States delegation thinks that, first of all, tir au resultat que nous recherchons? La delewe must deal with the situation as it is. That gation des Etats-Unis estime en premier lieu
situation is becoming increasingly patent each que nous devons nous occuper de la situation
day. The events of the last forty-eight hours, comme elle se presente.. Celle-ci devient chaque
though not yet confirmed by a report of the jour de plus en plus nette. Les evenements des
Subsidiary Group, are nevertheless sufficient to dernieres quarante-huit heures, bien qu'ils n'aient
indicate that a situation is developing danger- pas encore ete confirmes par un rapport du
ously along the Albanian-Gr~ek frontier, and Groupe subsidiaire, n'en suffisent pas moins a
may burst into an explosion at any, time.
indiquer qu'une situation se developpe dangereusement le long de la frontiere greco-albanaise,
qui peut, a tout moment, provoquer une explosion.
The resolution which the United States delegation has placed before the Security Council is,
in our opinion, imbued with the spirit of conciliation. The United States delegation, like every
other delegation on the Security Council, probably has its own private views as to the merits
of this situation. We have, however, endeavoured
in this resolution carefully to avoid giving any
expression to our personal views. We have not
asked the Council in this resolution t.o apportion
blame to anyone. We have asked the Council to
set up a commission which would have the dual
functions of conciliation, which are of great importance and which have been eloquently described by the representative of Colombia this
afternoon, and of investigation, which, as long
as the disturbed conditions exist in this region,
are indispensable to the effective functioning of
the commission.

La resolution que la delegation des Etats-Unis
a presentee au Conseil de securite est, a notre
avis, entierement inspiree de l'esprit de conciliation. La delegation des Etats-Unis, comme toutes les autres delegations du Conseil de securite,
a, sans doute, ses propres opinions en ce qui
concerne la valeur des donnees relatives a cette
situation. Nous n'en avons pas moins tente
dans cette resolution d'eviter soigneusement de
laisser apparaitre nos vues personnelles. Nous
n'avons pas demande au Conseil de rejeter ~e
blame sur quiconque. Nous lui avons demande
de creer une cOITLmission qui aurait une double
mission: mission de conciliation, d'une part (ce
qui est d'une grande importance, comme l'a
demontre avec eloquence cet apres-midi le representant de la Colombie), et, d'autre part, mission
d'enquete (tache, elIe aussi, indispensable au
fonctionnement efficace de la commission aussi
longtemps qu'une situation troublee existera
dans cette region).

The representatives of the northern countries,
who are opposed to Greece on this issue, have
advanced at this Council table some of the best
arguments heard since this case started for the
creation of a commission with the kind of terms
of reference we suggest. The representatives do
not want the commission-lam not criticizing
th.at-but they have all described and borne
WItness to the existence of a situation which is
like.ly to endanger international peace and secunty.

Les representants des Etats du Nord, qui
s'opposent a la Grece en cette matiere, ont presente devant ce Conseil quelques-uns des meilleurs arguments qui aient ete entendus, depuis
que l'affaire est soulevee, en faveur de la creation
d'une commission possedant le genre de mandat
que nous avons propose. Sans doute ces representants ne veulent-ils pas de commissio.a, et ce n'est pas cela que je critique, - mais ils
ont tous demontre et allegue l'existence d'une
situation qui const:"'ue tres probablement un
danger pour la paix CL la securite internationales.

Whatever subsequent events may be or whatever action the United Nations may subsequently
have ~o take, I think it is indispensable for the
Secu~Ity Council itself, in pursuance of its duty
a?? III accordance with its corporate responsibIlitIes, to set up a commission in the troubled

Quels que soient les evenements qui peuvent
se produire a l'avenir ou quelles que soient les
mesures que les Nations Unies peuvent etre
appelees a prendre par la suite, j'estime qu'il
est indispensable pour le Conseil de securite luimeme, dans l'accomplissement de s~ tach~ t;!

132~

region along the lines we' suggest, in order to
have its own agents on the spot for receiving _information and controlling the situation through
the dual functions of conciliation and investigation.

conformement a l'ensemble des responsabilites
qu'il assume, de creer, dans la region ou existent
les troubles, une commission etablie en s'inspirant
de notre proposition, afin que le Conseil possede
ses propres agents sur place pour recueillir les
renseignements et contrOler la situation par
I'exercice de la double fonction de conciliation
et d'enquete.

The reason why the United States delcegation
has proposed that the commission should be composed of all the members of the Security Council is not that in theory a smaller commission
might not be preferable, more mobile, or easier
to handle; but we feel that the responsibility of
the Security Council as the principal guardian of
the peace in the United Nations is such that it
should be represented in this region not merely
by a group of countries selected to be its agents,
but by a commission representing each member
of the Council as it exists. My delegation thinks
that there is a genuine moral point in-having the
entire Council represented in this region.

La raison pour laquelle la delegation des
Etats-Unis a propose que la commission se compose de tous les membres du Conseil de securite
n'est pas qu'une commission moins importante
ne serait pas preferable et plus facile a deplacer
ou a diriger en principe; mais nous estimons que
la responsabilite du Conseil de securite, en tant
que principal gardien de la paix des Nations
Unies, est si grande qu'il doit etre represente
dans cette region, non pas- seulement par un
groupe de pays designes comme devant etre ses
agents, mais par une commission representant
chaque membre du Conseil tel que celui-ci est
actuellement constitue. Ma delegation estime
qu'il y a obligation morale pour le Conseil tout
entier d'etre represente dans la region en cause.

Le travail de la future commission ne sera pas
The work of the proposed comnussIOn will
not be popular type of work. It is not going to bien vu. Ce ne sera pas un poste que recherchebe an assignment that any individual man would ront des individus ou des pays. La commission se
seek or that any country would seek. The com- trouvera placee entre deux groupes de populamission is going to find itself between two groups tion dont les sentiments sont exarcerbes et dont
of people whose feelings have been exacerbated I'orgueil est a vif.- Ce sera une tache ingrate.
and whose pride is being carried on their sleeves. Mais il me semble que tout opprobre ou tout
It will be a thankless task. It seems to me that inconvenient personnel qui pourraient resulter de
whatever opprobrium or personal inconvenience l' obligation de servir au sein de cette cominission
might result from having to serve on the com- doivent etre supportes, comme partie integrante
mission should be borne, along with the duty du fardeau qui incombe au Consf':il de securite,
imposed on the Council, by the Security Coun- par chacun des membres de ce Conseil et par les
cil, by each member of the Security Council, and pays representes a la commission en tant que
by countries that are represented on the com- membres de ce Conseil, et non pour d'autres
mission because they are in the Security Coun- raisons. Je le repete, cela donnerait a man avis
cil, and not for any other reason. I think that it plus de poids au statut de cette commission.
would give, I repeat, an added weight to the
status of that commission.

a

Furthermore, on the question of locality, I
J'estime, de plus, qu'en ce qui concerne la
think that much of the commission's effective- question du siege de la commission, celle-ci perness would be lost if it were to be resident out- drait beaucoup en efficacite si elle devait ne pas
side the troubled region. Its very presence at se trouver dans la region ou existent les troubles.
Salonika, as a representative of the Security Sa presence meme a Salonique, en tant que
Council-not of the United States of America, representant du Conseil de securite - et non pas
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Poland, en tant que representant des Etats-Unis, de
China, Brazil, Colombia, or any other country- l'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques,
would be of the utmost value in deterring sub- de la Pologne, de la Chine, du Bresil, de la
versive elements in that region and in putting a Colombie ou de tout autre Etat - contribuerait
spirit of caution into all of the four Govern- grandement a decourager les elements subverments. It would likewise facilitate in some meas- sifs qui se trouvent dans cette region et a inspirer
ure the accomplishment of its functions of con:- la prudence aux quatre Gouvernements. Cela
.-iliation.
faci!iterait egalement clans une certaine mesure
I'accomplissement des fonctions de conciliation
de la commission.
A group of eleven members representing the
Security Council would, by its very numbers,
have more reasonable mobility than a smaller
group. It would be possible for the cow..mission
to organize itself in such a way that it might
divide and visit more than O'1e capital· at the
same time, with each part working for the same
ends on its missions of conciliation. A small

Un groupe compose de onze membres representant le Conseil de securite serait logiquement
plus mobile, a cause de son effectif meme, qu'un
groupe de moindre importance. Il se:r:ait possible
a la commission de s'organiser de maniere a
pouvoir Se subdiviser et visiter plus a'une capitale
a la fois, et chaque sous-commission, dans sa
mission de conciliation, travaillerait aux mem~

1329
group of five or seven members would find that
task difficult to perform.

fins. Un petit groupe compose de cinq ou de
sept membres aurait des difficultes a accomplir
cette tache.

Those are some of the reasons why the United
States has advocated a commission of eleven
members representing the Security Council. We
hope that this recommendation, although not
included in the recommendations sublnitted by
the Commission, will be favourably received by
this Council.

Voila quelques-unes des raisons pour lesquelles
la delegation des Etats-Uriis a preconise la
creation d'une commission de onze membres
representant le Conseil de securite. Nous esperons que cette recommandation, tout en n'etant
pas incluse dans celle qu'a presentee la Commission actuelle, sera favorablement accueillie par
ce Conseil.

Whatever the ultimate fact" may prove to be,
the events· of the last four days indicate that
the situation has worsened since the receipt of the
report. The situation .has not improved. The
United States delegation would therefore like
to urge the Council to proceed with all possible
dispatch to set up this commission and to take
action which would continue the existence of the
Subsidiary Group until it has completed the investigations undertaken before this new commission takes over the permanent job.

Quelle que soit en fin de compte la nature des
faits, les evenements des quatre derni"l1l jours
montrent que la situation a empire depuis que
le rapport est parvenu. La situation ne s'est
pas amelioree. C'est pour cette raison que la
delegation des Etats-Unis desire .insister aupres
du Conseil afin qu'il prenne le plus rapidement
possible des mesures -pour etablir cette commission, ainsi que les mesures destinees a assurer
I'existence du Groupe subsidiaire jusqu'a ce que
celui-ci ait termine I'enquete qu'il a entreprise,
avant que la future commission ne le remplace
dans ce travail permanent.

We hope that the Council will also agree that
the situation is sufficiently urgent to justify continuous meetings of the Council until it has disposed of this case. I should like to ask the President to place before the Council the possibility
of our meeting twice tomorrow in addition to
the other two meetings on the Greek question
scheduled for this week. With the desire to reach
a constructive solution which, I feel sure, ani~
mates the Council, it may be possible for us to
complete this work during the present week.

Nous esperons que le Conseil reconnaitra egalement que la situation est suffisamment urgente
pour justifier des reunions continuelles du Conseil jusqu'a ce que cette question ait ete resolue.
J'aimerais demander au President de proposer
au Conseil de lui donner la faculte de se reunir
deux fois demain, en sus des deux autres seances
consacrees a la question de Grece, qui sont deja
prevues pour cette semaine. Mus par le desir
d'arnver a une solution positive, qui, j'en suis
sur, anime les. membres de ce Conseil, nous
pourrions peut-etre ainsi t~rminer le travail au
cours de la presente semaine.

The United States delegation would like to
see its resolution put to a vote as soon as possible.
Our only desire is to see the Council take action
which is constructive and which will really help
the unhappy countries in that part of the world,
particularly Greece, which has suffered more
than any of the other countries.

La delegation des Etats-Unis aimerait que la
resolution qu'elle presente soit mise aux voix
aussitot que possible. Notre seul desir est de voir
le Conseil prendre des mesures efficaces, propres
a aider effectivement les pays infortunes de cette
partie du monde, et particulierement la Grece,
qui a souffert plus qu'aucun autre pays.

There are certain parts of our resolution which
we consider fundamental in carrying out the
recommendations of our Commission and in
meeting the situation of fact. We have no pride
of authorship, however, in the exact balance of
the elements of this resolution. It has been suggested, for instance, that the recommendations
contained in paragraphs A, B, D and E' of the
Commission's report should be carefully written
?ut.in the resolution. Not only have we no obJection to that, but we enthusiastically agree that
It should be done. We are quite willing also that
the functions of conciliation should be given first
place in the resolution. We should gladly accept
an~ a?1endments to effect these changes if the
maJonty of the Council so desires. With r\?g-ard
tQ the substance of the matter and the tenn~ of
reference of the commission, the United States
w<?uld have to maintain its original position, but
we have no desire to retard the setting up of an

Nous considerons que certaines parties de la
resolution que nous presentons sont fondamentales pour la mise en application des recommandations de la Commission et pour faire face a
la situation de fait. Nous n'avons, cependant,
aucun amour-propre d'auteur en ce qui conceme le dosage des elements qui constituent cette
resolution. Il a ete suggere par exemple que les
recommandations qui figurent aux paragraphes
A, B, D et E du rapport de la Commission soient
soigneusement transcrites dans la resolution. Non
seulement nous ne nous y opposons pas, mais
encore nous y consentons avec enthousiasme. De
meme, n~.:.lS acceptons volontiers que les fonctions
de conciliation soient particulierement soulignees
dans la resolution. Nous accepterons avec plaisir
toute modification sanctionnant ces changements
si tel est le desir du Conseil. Relativement au
fond de la question, ainsi qu'au mandat de la
commission, les Etats-Unis se verront dans I'obli-

1330
effective commission by standing on the exact
phraseology and form of our resolution.

If necessary, I should be glad to move that
we have two meetings on this case tomorrow,
unless the President would care to handle it in
another way by making a suggestion or proposal
to the Council ~mself.

gation de maintenir leur position initiale, mais
nous ne desirons en aucune maniere retarder la
creation d'une commifsion efficace en nous arretant a la phraseologie precise et a la forme de
la resolution que nous presentons.
S'il est necessaire, j'aimerais proposer que
nous nous reunissions deux fois demain pour
etudier cette questio!l, a mains que le President
ne prefere la traiter d'une autre fa<;:on en faisant
lui-meme des propositions au Conseil.

M. EL-KHOURI (Syrie) (traduit de l'anglais) :
Mr. EL-KHOURI (Syria) : When I read the report of the Commission of Investigation for the Lorsque j'ai lu le rapport de la Commission
first time, before any meeting of the Security d'enquete pour la premiere fois, avant qu'aucune
Council had been held on this subjec:t, I thought seance ait ete tenue sur cette question, j'ai pense
that the task of the Security Council would be que la tache du Conseil de securite serait fort
very easy. I thought that the four Balkan States aisee. J'ai pense que les ,quatre Etats balkaniconcerned in this matter would come to the first ques interesses se presenteraient a la premiere
meeting of the Security Council and declare that seance du Conseil de securite et feraient savoir
they acquiesced in the recommendations of the qu'ils approuvaient les recommandations de
Commission, inasmuch as these recommenda- la Commission, d'autant plus que ces recomtions did not discriminate against or assess any mandations ne rejetaient le blame et la responsabilite sur personne.
responsibility to any of them.
Le rapport recOnnait simplement que la situaThe report simply recognizes that the situation in the Balkan States is not normal. Nobody tion existant dans les Etat5 balkaniques n'est
can deny the fact that the situation is not nor- pas normale. Nul ne peut nier le fait que la
mal. The relations between these States are not situation n'est pas normale. Les relations entre
as they should be. All the Balkan States con- ces Etats ne sont pas ce q~'elles devraient etre.
fessed here that there are many things between Tous les Etats balkaniques ont reconnu ici qu'il
existait entre eux de nombreuses divergences qui
them which make the situation so critical.
rendaient la situation aussi critique.
J'ai pense alors que ces Etats balkaniques seI thought at the same time that these Balkan
States would be ready to consider the great im- raient prets a reflechir a l'enorme responsabilite
portance of the responsibility which they may qu'ils peuvent etre appeIes a porter aux yeux
have to bear before the whole world for dis- du monde en troublant la paix et la securite et
turbing the peace and security, and for causing en creant l'incident susceptible de faire eclater
the spark which may set off an explosion that un conflit qui s'etendrait au monde entier, le
would extend over and injure t~e whole world, mutilerait, et atteindrait en particulier les petites
especially the small nations who are unable to nations incapables d'empecher qu'elles ne soient
defend themselves from being used as battle- utilisees comme champs de bataille.
fields.
.
Nobody can deny that the' actual situation in
the Balkans is critical and threatening to international peace and security. The Balkan States
ought to consider their great responsibility in
allowing this situation to continue to be aggravated from day to day. The recommendations
proposed by the Commission are simply the provisions and precepts of the Charter. They are in
conformity with Article'33 of the Charter, in that
they invite the States concerned to readjust their
relations among themselves and to negotiate in a
conciliatory way. At the same time they propose
to help those States to attain a favourable solution of their problem through an organ representing the Security Council in the name of the
United Nations. There is nothing in these
recommendations that would affect the prestige,
the national pride or the sovereignty of the
States. They should therefore welcome such a
proposition and accept it with pleasure and
gratitude.
I still believe that ultimately the four States
concerned will declare before the Security Council that they accept this proposition and will
adhere to it. As long as they are pledged to
loyalty to the provisions of the Charter and as
long as they appreciate and evaluate the great

1331
responsibility of the present situation, they are responsabilite qui leur incombe en raison de la
bound to corrct the situation and to find the presente situation, et qu'ils en mesureront la
remedy needed in order to prevent any sinister gravite, ils seront tenus d'y remedier et de trouver
la solution necessaire pour prevenir toute issue
results.
tragique.
Quant au projet de resolution presente par
As regards the draft .resolution prel?ented .by
lhe delegation of the UnIted States, It also aVOIds la delegation des Etats-Unis, il evite egalement
assessing responsibility to any of the States, but d'imputer la responsabilite a aucun de ces Etats,
puts them all on the same footing. There are tout en les mettant sur un pied d'egalite. n n'y
no grounds for any complaints. I am very· glad a aucun sujet de plainte. Je suis tres heureux
to know that the delegation of the United States d'apprendre que la delegation des Etats-Unis
is ready to define carefully paragraphs A, B, D est prete a definir avec soin les paragraphes A,
-B, D et E des recommanclations.
and E of the recommendations.
The other objections to this draft resolution
Les autres objections qui ont ete formulees
which we have heard should be discussed later. contre ce projet de resolution, et que nollS avons
When the general discllSsion which was opened entendues, devraient etre discutees ulterieureby th~ President of the Security Council is closed, ment. Lorsque la discussion generale, qui fut
the next step would be to discuss the draft reso- ouverte p::l.r le President du Conseil de securite,
lutions which have been presented. In that case, sera close, il faudra en venir a la discussion des
they would be studied here paragraph by para- projets de resolutions qui nollS ont ete presentes.
graph, and amendments would be accepted by Dans cc cas, ils seront etudies ici paragraphe par
the President, discussed by the members, and paragraphe, et des amendements seront acceptes
voted upon. The different points on which cer- par le President, discutes par les membres et mis
tain comments have been made, such as the aux voix. Les differents points au sujet desquels
headquarters or the composition of the com- des commentaires ont ete faits, tels que la quesmission, may be discllSsed and ameliorated or tion du siege ou de la composition de la comamended according to the wish of the appropri- mission, peuvent etre discutes et ameliores, ou
modifies selon le desir de la majorite prevue
ate majority of the Security Council.
pour les decisioru: du Conseil de securite.
Nous avqns discute pendant un certain temps
We have been discussing for some time the
report drawn up by the majority of the Com- le rapport redige et presente par la majorite des
mission of Investigation. The Commission whose memhres de la Commission d'enquete. Cette
report is now before us is fully representative. It Commission, dont nous avons le rapport mainterepresents all the members of the Security Coun- nant devant nollS, est une Commission nettement
cil. Its individuals were selected by their Gov- representative. Elle represente la totalite des
ernments with confidence and were entitled to membres du Conseil de securite. Les personnes
study the situation on the spot and to present qui la composent ont ete choisies en raison de la
their views. I do not think we are in a position, confiance que leurs Gouvernements respectifs
here in the Security Council, to analyse the back- pla~aient en eIles; elles ont ete autorisees a exaground and evidence on the basis of which the miner la situation sur place et a exprimer leur
Commission arrived at its proposals and con- opinion. Je ne peme pas que nous soyons id, au
clusions, unless there are some absurdities or sein de ce Conseil, a meme d'analyser la docuirregularities, or unless some points are out of mentation et les temoignages qui ont servi de
order or contrary to the terms of reference. In base aux propositions et aux conclusions emises
such a case, as in similar cases in the reports of par la Commission, a moins qu'il n'existe des
courts or bodies like commissions of inquiry, absurdites ou des irregularites ou que quelques
there would be reason to reconsider the report. points soient en dehors de la question ou non
But as long as there is nothing in Jhe report conformes au mandat. En pareil cas, de meme
of the nature described, as long as we do not que cela se fait pour les rapports des tribunaux
find any irregularity or absurdity in the Com- ou d'organismes tels que les commissions
mission's work, and cannot find that it went d'enquete, il y aurait lieu cl'examiner a nouveau
beyond its terms of reference, I do not see how le rapport. Mais du moment que le rapport ne
we .can withdraw the confidence which we gave contient element de la nature indiquee, que nous
to It and reject the report which it has made, ne rencontrons aucune irregularite ni absurdite
esp~ci~y since it does not include anything dans le travail de la Commission, et que nollS ne
whIch IS unacceptable to the four parties con- pouvons pas trouver qu'elle ait outrepasse son
cerned.
mandat, je ne vois pas comment nous pouvons
lui retirer la confiance que nous lui avons accordee et ne pas accepter le rapport qu'elle a
redige, d'autant que ce rapport ne contient
rien qui ne soit acceptable aux quatre parties
interessees.
I think that the President should close the
J'estime que le President devrait clore maingeneral debate on this matter now. All the mem- tenant la discussion generale de cette question.
bers have presented their views, and we can go Tous les representants ont fait connaitre leurs
on to the draft resolutions which have been points de vue et nous pouvons passeI' aux projets
given to us to be studied, amendec! '\nd voted de resolutions qui nous ont ete remis, afin de
upon.
les etudier, de .Ies modifier et de les voter.

1332
The PRESIDENT: I believe all the members of
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): 11 me
the Council have expressed their views on the semble que tous les repl'esentants au Conseil ont
subject.. I wanted to explain the position of the exprime leurs opinions sur la question. Je desidelegation of Poland; however, in view of rais expliquer la position de la delegation de la
the late hour I shall postpone doing so until the Pologne; mais etant donUi:~ l'heure tardive, je
beginning of the next meeting of the Security differerai cette explication jusqu'a l'ouverture de
Council.
la prochaine seance du Conseil de securite.
Before this meeting is adjourned, I want to
Avant de lever cette seance, je vais donner la
give permission to speak to the representatives parole aux representants de l'Albanie et de la
of Albania and Yugoslavia who desire to make Yougoslavie, qui desirent faire des declarations
additional statements.
complementaires.
Colonel KERENXHI (Albania) ( translated
from French): After repeated attacks by Greece
against our country, we are now accused of
having invaded Greece. This is not the first time,
Mr. President, that you have had to deal with
base provocations levelled by Greece against our
country.
Now they would have you believe that the
wolf has just been attacked by the lamb, though
statements have been made by the instigators
of this provocation campaign (due to the pressure of public opinion) casting doubt on the
accuracy of the shrill reports spread about the
so-called "international brigade" and its invasion of Greece.
No one will fail to· realize that this is simply a
case of provocation which has been going on for
some months already.
On 27 May last Mr. Kirou, Greek liaison
officer, commenting on part In of the report,
lightly dismissed the alleged peril which the
foreign legions constitute.
.
A few days later, Mr. Tsaldaris, the Greek
Minister of Foreign Affairs, himself raised cries
of alarm concerning an alleged "sizable concentration of anarchist forces on the northern
frontier of Greece". These cries of alarm caused
a great stir in the Greek Press and aroused public
opinion. On 11 June Mr. Tsaldaris was obliged
to admit that this statement (about an international brigade preparing to invade Greece) -was
perhaps not accurate, and that in any event the
report was intended for circulation abroad, not
in Greece. He added that in the national interest
it was often necessary to circulate such reports
abroad while at the same time taking care that
they were not spread inside the country. Unfortunately, he declared, some journalists disseminated such reports all over the country to the
detriment of Greek interests (see Elephteria,
Greek newspaper of the Centre) ..

Le colonel KERENXHI (Albanie): Apres tant
d'attaques perpetrees par la Grece contre notre
pays, nous voici maintenant accuses d'avoir
envahi la Grece. Ce n'est pas la premiere fois,
Monsieur le President, que vous vous trouvez
en face de provocations ignobles dirigees par la
Grece contre notre pays.
Maintenant, on veut faire croire que le loup
vient d'etre attaque par l'agneau, bien que,
meme du cote des instigateurs de cette campagne de provocations, rendue necessaire par la
pression de l'opinion publique, des declarations
aient ete faites mettant en doute la veracite
des informations tapageuses relatives a la pretcndue brigade internationale et a son inv3.sion
de la Grece.
Personne n'ignore qu'on est tout simplement
en presence d'une provocation qui date de que!ques mois deja.
Le 27 mai demier, en faisant, devant la Commission sa declaration verbale sur la troisieme
partie du rapport, M. Kirou, l'agent de liaison
grec, a pade d'une fa~on legere du pretendu
peril que constituent les legions etrangeres.
Quelques jours plus tard, ce fut le Ministre des
Affaires etrangeres de Grece lui-meme, M. Tsaldaris, qui lan~a des cris d'alarme au sujet d'une'
pretendue "concentration d'importantes forces
anarchistes aux frontieres nord de la Grece".
Ces cris d'alarme firent grand bruit dans la
presse grecque et emurent l'opinion publique. Le
11 juin, M. Tsaldaris etait oblige d'admettre
qu'il etait possible que cette declaration (au sujet
de la brigade internationale se preparant a
penetrer en Grece) ne correspondit pas a la
realite, mais qu'en tous les cas elle etait destinee
a l'etranger et non a la Grece. 11 ajouta que
maintes fois, dans l'interet de la nation, il est
necessaire de propager de tels bruits hors du
pays, tout en prenant soin qu'ils ne soient pas
repandus a l'interieur de celui-ci. Malheureusement, declarait-il, certains journalistes s'empressent de propager ces informations dans tout le
pays au detriment de la Grece (voir le journal
grec du centre, Elephteria).
On voit clairement a quoi l'on a affaire et on
sent bien les provocations premeditees.

It is clear what we are dealing with here, and
we are conscious of the premeditated provocation.
Cette nouvelle provocation n'est pas la preThis new provocation is not the first, nor will
it be the last. Greek governmental circles have miere et ne sera pas la derniere. Les milieux gourepeatedly resorted to such provocations, all of vernementaux grecs s'y sont livres a maintes
them patently absurd. All the Greek charges reprises, toutes marquees au signe du ridicule.
made before the Security Council since Decem- Toutes les accusations grecques formulees devant
ber 1946 have been nothing more than a series le Conseil de securite depuis decembre 1946 ne
of provocations directeC: against the other t~ree constituent pas autre chose qu'un ensemble...~

12

1333

w

Le

Do *10 4

peace-loving Balkan co~ntri~s,. to distract ~he
attention of world public oprnlOn from the illtemal situation in Greece.

provocations, dirigees contre les trois autres pays
paisibles des Balkans, pour detourner l'attention
de l'opinion publique mondiale de la situation
interieure de la Grece.

What is one to think of these fresh reports
from Greek sources "intended for circulation
abroad" (as Mr. Tsaldaris said) according to
which the Cham refugees are being mobilized
in Albania and concentrated on the frontier,
while other groups, led by a certain Nuri Dino
Bey, are already engaged in fighting inside
Greece?

Que peut-on penser des nouvelles informations
de source grecque "destinees a l'etranger" (comme l'a dit M. Tsaldaris), et selon lesquelles les
refugies tchamouriotes seraient mobilises en
Albanie, concentres sur les frontieres, tandis que
d'autres groupes, ayant a leur tete le nomme
Nuri Dino Bey, prendraient deja part a des
combats a l'interieur de la Grece?

What is one to think of reports from Greek
sources, "intended for circulation abroad", according to which Albania, by means of this
alleged invasion, is seeking to seize Greek territory, to seize Macedonia?

Que peut-on penser des informations de source
grecque "destinees a l'etranger" selon lesquelles
l'Albanie, au moyen de cette pretendue invasion,
chercherait a s'emparer des territoires grecs, de la
Macedoine?

Have the Greek authorities already forgotten
that the extermination by the military authorities
of the Albanian minority in Greece, the assassination of 2,877 Chams, and the burning of thousands of homes, are facts well known to everyone? Have they forgct.ten the finding of the
Commission of Investigation that national minorities have been subjected to harsh reprisals in
Greece, that Nuri Dino is a war criminal and
collaborator who fled to Italy after Albania's
liberation, and that our Government, quite recently in applications made to the British and
United States Governments, repeated its demand
for the extradition of criminals now in zones
under British and American control?

Les milieux gouvernementaux grecs ont-ils deja
oublie que l'extermination de la minorite albanaise en Grece par les autorites militaires,
l'assassinat de 2.877 Tchamouriotes. et la destruction par l'incendie de milliers de maisons,
sont des faits bien connus de tout le monde? Oublie-t-on que la Commission d'enquete a constate que les minorites nationales ont ete soumises
a de dures represailles en Grece, que le nomme
Nuri Dino est un criminel de guerre et un collaborateur qui s'est enfui en Italie apres la liberation de l'Albanie, et que notre Gouvemement,
tout dernierement encore, en s'adressant ~ux
Gouvernements du Royaume-Uni et des EtatsUnis, ~ reitere sa demand:; concernant l'extradition des criminels qui se trouvent dans les
zones sous controle britannique et americain?

Do the Greek authorities also wish to forget
Les milieux gouvernementaux grecs veulentso soon that, in that part of the Commission of ils egalement oublier si vite que, dans la partie
Investigation's report dealing with the accusa- du rapport de la Commission d'enquete relative
tions that her northern neighbours were trying aux accusations selon lesquelles les voisins du
to detach from Greece certain parts of her terri- Nord chercheraient a detacher de la Grece certory, the name of Albania is not even men- taines partie3 de son territoire, le nom de
tioned?
I'Albanie ne figure meme pas?
No one is unaware of these facts, and the
Mais personne n'ignore cela et les informations
false and tendentious reports from Greek sources mensongeres et tendancieuses de source grecque,
intended for circulation abroad cannot be sub- destinees a l'etranger, ne sauraient etre soutenues
stantiated for a single instant.
un seul instant.
Since its liberation our country has been the
vict?n of hundreds of provocative operations orgamzed by the Greek authorities. Not for a
moment have these authorities ceased to attack
in various ways our peaceful little country. It
may be observed, however, that during this
period of continual attack there were times when
!he Greek authorities were more busily engaged
ill p~ovocation. These periods of intensified provOCa!lOn against our country coincided with those
dunng which political problems affecting the
two countries were most acute. The purpose was
to e~ert the greatest possible pressure on the disCUSSIon of these problems.

Depuis la liberation, notre pays a ete victime
de centaines de provocations organisees par les
milieux gouvernementaux grecs. Pas un instant
ces milieux n'ont cesse d'attaquer notre paisible
petit pays par diverses methodes. Mais durant
cette periode d'attaques continuelles, on pouvait
cependant remarquer des moments OU les gouvernants grecs se sont montres plus actifs dans
leur besogne de provocations. Ces moments,
caracterises par l'intensification des provocations
dirigees contre notre pays, coincidaient avec ceux
ou des problemes politiques concernant les deux
pays se posaient de maniere plus aigue. Le but
en etait d'exercer la plus grande pression possible
sur la discussion de ces problemes.

. During the Peace Conference the intensification of armed provocation and other types similar to the recent provocation was evident.

Pendant la Conference de la pai", l'intensification des provocations armees, et d'autres
appartenant a la meme famille que la recent~
provocation, fut evident~,

Il en·fut ainsi lorsque le Gouverncment grec
porta ses accusations devant le Conseil de secu- .
rite, en decembre 1946.
Il en fut de meme lors de la preparation du
rapport de la Commission d'enquete.
Le 7 mai, notre delegation aupres de la Commission d'enquete, dans une lettre adressee a
celle-ci, s'exprimait en ces termes, en l'informant
d'une sene de nouvelles provocations:
"La Grece trouve bon, encore maintenant, de
se livrer a des provocations aux frontieres de
l'Albanie, dans le but de creer de nouveaux incidents et de pouvoir influencer ainsi les travaux de
la Commission, ses conclusions et la solution du
probleme."
La meme methode est employee actuellement'
The same technique is being used now that
the Security Council is discussing the Commis- alors que le Conseil de securite est en train de
sion of Investigation's report.
.
discuter le rapport de la Commission d'enquete.
But the aims of this new provocation are much
Mais les buts de cette nouvelle provocation
broader. The Greek authorities now want:
sont bien plus importants. Les milieux gouvernementa',Jx grecs, dans la situation actuelle, visent
This happened when the Greek Government
presented its accusations before the Security
Council in December 1946.
, The same thing happened when the Commission of Investigation's report was being prepared.
On 7 May our delegation to the Commission
of Investigation, in a letter' addressed to the
Commission informing it of a series of new provocations, expressed itself as follows:
"Greece once again chooses to resort to provocation on the frontiers of Albania in order to
create new incidents and thus influence the work
of the Commission, its conclusions and the solution of the problem."

a:

1. To justify the necessity of creating a permanent commission as proposed to the Security
Council by the representative of the United
States;

1. Justifier la necessite de la creation de la
commission permanente proposee au Conseil de
securite par la delegation des Etats-Unis;

2. To justify the existence and continued
maintenance in Greece of foreign troops and
military personnel;

2. Justifier la presence en Grece de troupes
etrangeres et de personnel militaire etranger,
ainsi que la prolongation du stationnement de
ces troupes;

3. To justify the unspeakable and incessant
terror now raging in Greece, a feature of which
recently has been the thousands of arrests and
hundreds of death sentences and executions for
the crime of participation in the alleged "movement organized by northern neighbours, designed to overthrow the Government";

3. Justifier la terreur inouie et incessante qui
sevit en Grece, terreur caracterisee, ces jours
derniers, par des milliers d'arrestations et par des
centaine3 de condamnations a mort suivies d'executions, sous l'inculpation de partic:pation au
pretendu "mouvement organise par les voisins
du Nord, tendant a renverser le Gouvernement";

4. To justify Greek policy which consists in
that country's considering itself to be in a state of
war with Albania, and thus convince public
opinion that not only does Greece consider herself to be in a state of war with Albania, but that
Albania likewise considers herself to be in a
state of war with Greece;

4. Justifier la politique de la Grece, qui consiste pour ce pays a se considerer en etat de
guerre avec l'Albanie; convaincre ainsi l'opinion
publique que non seulement la Grece se considere
en etat de guerre avec l'Albanie, mais egalement
que cette derniere se considere en etat de guerre
avec la Grece;

5. To influence the work of the Security
5. Influencer les travaux du Conseil de secuCouncil so that no favourable decision may be rite pour que n'intervienne pas une decision favoreached for the repatriation of refugees, the rable au rapatriem~nt des refugies tchamouriotes
restoration of all their property with compensa- dans leurs foyers, a la restitution de tous leurs
tion for losses sustained, and so to compromise biens et a l'indemnisation des pertes qu'ils ont
the refugees as people w.ho, if they were repatri- subies; compromettre ainsi les refugies tchamouated to Greece, would further aggravate the dis- riotes en les faisant considerer comme des gens
turbances.
qui, au cas ou ils seraient rapatries en Grece,
contribueraient a y aggraver les troubles.
Such is the real purpose of this new form of
Telle est la vraie portee de cette nouvelle proprovocation which has a disturbing effect even vocation qui tend a agit(;r les esprits, bien
though it is not based on any document, not qu'elle ne soit fondee sur aucun document, pas
even on a communication from the Subsidiary meme sur une communication emanant du
Group. For our part, we have come before the Groupe subsidiaire. De notre cote, nous venons
Security Council to prove the inanity of the prouver devant le Conseil de securite l'inanite
Greek accusations that support is being given to des accusations grecques relatives a un soutien
the Greek partisan movement; we reveal the aim donne au mouvement partisan grec; nous en
of such accusations, while at the same time we demontrons le but, tout en soulignant notre
emphasize our desire to live at peace with every desir de vivre en paix avec tout le monde, et
one, particularly our neighbQurs. The Greeks, on en particulier avec nos voisins. Du cote gre~

p

the other hand, go on practising the method of
provocation which prejudices the estab~hment
of good relations between the two countrIes.
These provocations must be stopped. This
would help to normalize relations between the
two countries.

pratique continuellement le systeme des provocations, ce qui nuit a l'etablissement de bonnes
relations entre tes deux pays.
Il serait necessaire de mettre fin a ces provocations. L'on contribuerait, par ce moyen, a
la normalisation des relations entre les deux
pays.
On behalf of my Government I strongly pro- . Au nom de mon Gouvernement, je proteste
test against these provocations, and emphasize energiquement contre ces provocations, en soulionce more our demand that they be stopped and gnant, encore une fois, que nous demandons qu'il
that we be left in peace to rebuild our country y soit mis fin et qu'on nous laisse proceder en
paix au relevement de notre pays afl"reusement
so horribly ravaged by war.
detruit par la guerre.
Mr. VILFAN (Yugoslavia) (translated from
M. VILFAN (Yougoslavie): Ma breve declaFrench): My brief statement will bear on the ration portera sur le meme sujet que celui qui a
same subject as that dealt with in the Albanian fait 1'0bjet de l'intervention du representant de
representative's speech; but I shall confine my I'Albanie; mais je limiterai mes remarques a un
seul aspect de la question.
remarks to a single aspect of the question.
Si je ne me trompe, tous les orateurs ont pade
If I am not mistaken, all the speakers this
afternoon have mentioned the aggravation of cet· apres-midi de l'aggravation de la situation
the Balkan situation; they have alluded to what dans les Balkans; ils ont fait allusion a des
has happened in the past forty-eight hours. evenements survenus au cours des dernieres quaNaturally they have been thinking of the famous rante-huit heures. Naturellement, on a pense aux
international brigade, and of the invasion being fameuses brigades internationales, a l'invasion
qui se preparerait en Albanie.
prepared in Albania.
.
Tout d'abord, je Tegrette que 1'0n ait oublie
First of all, I am sorry that they have failed
to mention also the latest reports. In the lobbies de mentionncr egalement les dernieres versions:
I have heard, even from official Greek sources, dans les couloirs, j'ai entendu dire, meme de
that these occurrences have been seriously exag- source officielle grecque, que les evenements ont
gerated. Again, I am sorry that speakers have ete gravement exageres. Je le repete, je regrette
omitted to say that, according to the latest re- que 1'on ait oublie de dire que, seIon les derports, things are not so serious as was reporter{. nieres versions, les evenements ne sont pas aussi
graves qu'on 1'a dit.
Mais je voudrais attirer votre attention sur un
I should like to draw your attention, however,
fait parallele.
to a parallel situation.
Au mois de decembre 1946, en pleine disIn December 1946, at the height of the discussion of the Greek question, the Greek Gov- cussion de la question grecque, le Gouvernement
ernment brought forward new witnesses and heIlenique a presente de nouveaux temoins et de
fresh testimony, the latter of a sensational nature. nouveaux temoignages; ces temoignages etaient
It was difficult to avoid the impression that there d'une nature sensationnelle. On ne pouvait se
was a connexion between this exact stage in the defendre de 1'impression qu'il y avait un lien
entre ce moment precis de la discussion et 1'indiscussion and the Greek action.
tervention grecque.
Or qu'en est-il resulte? Pas un - je le repete,
And what is the upshot of it all? Not one-I
repeat, not one-of these witnesses mentioned by pas un - de ces temoins mentionnes par le Gouthe Greek Government in its statement of 12 vernement grec dans son intervention du 12 deDecember 1946: was heard by the Commission. cembre 1946 n' a ete entendu par la Comr:.lission.
The Greek Government had obtained the dt:,· . Le Gouvernement grec a obtenu l'effet desire et,
sired effect and then had forgotten about its ensuite, il a oublie ses temoins.
witnesses.
.
I firmly believe that this situation will now be
Je suis tout a fait convaincu que cette situation
repeated, and that once again a connexion has se repetera maintenant; et l'on est force de voir
~o be discerned between the stage now reached un lien, cette fois encore, entre le stade auquel
ID. the Security Council's discussion of the Greek
est parvenu le Conseil de securite dans sa. discusquestion and the reports now being circulated sion de la question grecqu(. et les nouvelles qui
~Y Athens. I am sure that the actual investiga- sont maintenant repandues par Athenes. Je suis
tIon of the Subsidiary Group will prove that sur que l'enquete meme du Groupe subsidiaire
these reports are unfounded.
demontrera que ces notiveIles sont sans fondement.
What will be the result of all this? I believe that
Quel sera le r~sultat de tout cela? Je crois
we a~e !low witnessing a similar coincidence. que n011S assretons maintenant a une coincidence
Why mSlSt, so to speak, on rejecting the Yugo- similaire. Pourquoi s'obstiner, pour ainsi dire, a
s!av proposal that the majority of the Commis- repousser la proposition de la Yougoslavie, qui
SIon be asked why the witnesses presented on 12 voudrait que 1'on demandat a la majorite de la
December by the Greek Government, and after- Commission pourquoi les temoins presentes le 12
wards forgotten, are not quotec1 in the report? decembre par le Gouvernement grec, et ensuite
1

~

y 1 See Official Records of ;;n~ Security Council, First
ear, Second Series. No. 25.

1 Voir Ies Proces-verbaux ofJiciels du Conseil de securite, Premiere Annee, Seconde Serie. No 25.

If people still insist on rejecting this Yugoslav
proposal, the most obvious conclusion, in my
opinion, will follow from this que~tion: How long
is this going to last? What is the use of such
investigation commissions? It seems to me that,
in the present case, a question such as this, put
by the Government of Yugoslavia and by Yugoslavia as a whole, is entirely justified.
Naturally, I have not exhausted the entire
question in the course of this brief comment, but
I also wanted to call the Security Council's attention to it fer another reason. Fortunately, the
situation is not so difficult as the representatives
who have spoken today seem to believe when
they lay stress on these facts to justify the need
for keeping a permanent commission in the
Balkans.

oublies, ne sont pas cites dans le rapport? Si l'on
s'obstine encore a repousser cette proposition de
la Yougoslavic, je crois que la conclusion la
plus naturelle decoule, a mon avis, de la question
suivante: jusqu'a quand cela va-t-il durer? A
quoi bon de pareilles commissions d'enquete?
Il me parait que, dans le cas qui nous occupe,
une telle question, que posent le Gouvernement
yougoslave et la Yougosla"ie tout entiere, est
pleinement justifiee.
Je n'ai naturellement pas epuise toute la question au cours de cette breve intervention; mais
j'ai voulu egalement attirer sur elle l'attention
du Conseil de securite pour une au\re raison. La
situation, heureust:.ment, n'est pas aussi difficile
que sembleI.t le croire les representants qui ant
pris la parole aujourd'hui et qui ont insiste sur
ces faits pour justifier la necessite de maintenir
une commission permanente dans les Balkans.

M. DENDRAMIS (Grece): Je n'ai pas l'intenMr. DENDRAMIS (Greece) (translated from
tion
d'entrer en polemique avec les representants
French): I have no intention of engaging in a
des
pays
voisins et de faire perdre ainsi un temps
controversy with the representatives of neighprecieux
en distrayant l'attention de la question
bouring countries and of thereby losing precious
time by distracting attention from the funda- fondamentale, qui est le rapport de la Comm~­
mental question which is the Commission's re- sion et la necessite d'une action urgente de la
port and tre need for urgent action by the Coun- part du Conseil.
cil. .
Un des representants des pays VOlSms a nie
One of the representatives of a neighbouring
country has denied certain facts which are certains faits qui sont de notoriete publique. De
common knowledge, For two days regular battles vraies batailles se deroulent depuis deux jours
have been going on near the Albanian frontier r","es de la frontiere albanaise, a la suite d'invafollowing invasions by large forces from Al- SlOns de forces importantes venant du territoire
banian territory. If this representative had albanais. Si ce representant voulait que 1'0n
wanted his allegations to be given any credence, accordat un peu de foi a ses allegations, il n'auhe had but to advise his Government to co- rait eu, pOUf eela, qu'a recommander a son
operate with the Subsidiary Group and allow it Gouvernement de cooperer avec le Groupe subto enter his Government's territory to verify the sidiaire et de lui permettre de se rendre sur son
territoire pour verifier les faits.
facts.
D'apres les faits etablis par la Commission
In view of the facts established by the Commission of Investigation and the accusations d'enquete et les accusations portees par les haumade by the high parties to the dispute there is tes parties au differend, il n'y a pas de raison
no valid reason why the members of the Council valable pour que les membres du Conse!l ne
should not vote in favour of the Commission's votent. pas en faveur des recommandations de la
recommendations, nor is there any plausible Commission; il n'y a pas non plus de raison plaureason for further delay in voting on the United sible pour retarder davantage le vote sur la resolution des Etats-Unis.
States resolution.
Parmi les diverses mesures prevues par la
Of the various measures provided for in the
Charter to establish and maintain peace the Charte pour etablir et maintenir la paix, le rapmajority report of the Commission, as well as port de la majorite de la Commission ainsi que
the United States resolution, proposes the adop- la resolution des Etats-Unis proposent l'adoption
tion of one of the mildest and most conciliatory, d'une des plus faibles et des plus condliatrices, a
namely, the creation of another '.3ommission savoir 1" creation d'une autre commission qui
which would folIo.\' up the situation on the suivrait la situation pour le compte du Conseil
Council's behalf and offer its good offices to et offrirait ses bons offices dans le but de faciliter
facilitate agreements between the parties. Greece des accords entre les parties. La Grece a exprim~
had expressed doubts as to the efficacy of such ses doutes quant a l'efficacite d'une mesure aUSSl
feeble action even before her fears were con- faible, meme avant que ses craintes fussent confirmed by the events of the last few days. There firmees par les evenements de ces derniers jours.
would nevertheless seem to be no doubt that Il apparait neanmoins, sans aucun doute, que
the feeble measures proposed by the Commis- les faibles mesures proposees par la Commission
sion are essential. Thatwa:o, and continues v., ~'\ i sont eR'ientielles. Ceci etait et continue d'etre
clear. Leavmg recent events out of the qucftkm ! el,jrJwt. Abstraction faite des evenements plus
and 'Setting aside the present serious aggraV?tllfLl rec:nts, et laissant de cote l'aggravation serieuse
of an already danp'erous situation, one cannot actuelle d'une situation deja dangereuse, on ne
fail to realize that the creation of the commission peut que reconnaitre que la creation de la comrecommended is essential and absolutely urgent. mission recommandee s'impose comme etant
d'une necessite extreme.
.... ,~

On behalf of the Greek people I ask the mem- I Au nom du peuple grec, je demande aux
bers of the Council to remain in session until membres du Conseil de rester en session jusqu'a
action is taken to ensure the re-establishment of ce que soient adoptees les mesures qui assurepeace in south-eastern Europe.
raint le retablissement de la naix dans le sud-est
~
de l'Europe.
The PRESIDENT: I should like to adjourn the
meeting at this time. However, the representative
of France has asked to speak. I shall allow him
to speak but, in view of the late hour, I should
appreciate it if he would be brief.

Le FRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Je voudrais maintenant lever la seance. Toutefois, le
representant de la France a demande la parole.
Je la lui donne, mais puisqu'il est tard deja, je
lui serais reconnaissant d'etre bref.

M. PARODl (France): Mes remarques seront
Mr. PARODl (France) (translated from
French): I shall be very brief. I shall make tres breves. Je ferai sur les declarations que nous
three observations on the statements which we venons d'entendre, en particulier de la part du
have just heard, in particular that made by the representant de la Yougoslavie, trois observations.
representative of Yugoslavia.
Tout d'abord, le representant de la YougoIn the first place, the representative of Yegoslavia seemed upset that in the statements made slavie a paru emu que, dans les declarations que
here today we have referred to reports concern- nous avons faites ici aujourd'hui, nous nous
ing recent events in Greece. I am a little sur- soyons referes· aux nouvelles concernant les eveprised by this reaction on his part for, given the nements de Grece de ces derniers jours. Je suis
responsibilities which are ours, if we failed to un peu etonne de cette emotion du representant
pay some attention to reports' of this nature, we de la Yougoslavie, car, etant donne les responshould be unworthy of our office. In my earlier sabilites qui sont les notres, si vraiment nous ne
statement--and the representative of the United pretions pas quelque attention aux nouvelles de
States has spoken with equal caution-I reserved cet ordre, nous serions peu dignes de nos foncjudgment on these reports pendhlg their con- tions. Dans la declaration que j'ai faite tout a
I'heure - et le representant des Etats-Unis a
firmation.
parle avec la meme prudence - nous avons
reserve notre opinion sur ces nouvelles jusqu'a
ce qu'eIles soient confirmees.
Ma seconde observation est que, si les
My second observation is that, if the reports
we have been reading in the newspapers for the nouvelles que nous avons lues dans les journaux
past two days were nut correct, this fact would, depuis deux jours n'etaient pas exactes, ce serait
in my opinion, be the best proof of the value of la meilleure preuve, me semble-t-il, de l'utilite
our having on the spot observers capable of pour nous d'a"oir sur place des observateurs en
mesure de relablir rapidement l'exactitude des
ascertaining the true facts promptly.
faits.
Ma troisieme observation est, en un sens, un
My third observation is, in one sense, of a
slightly different nature. I feel that, in view of peu differente. Je crois, en effet, que nous devons
certain contradictions in the reports reaching us, maintenant, en presence de certaines contradicwe ought not to speed up the discussion as much tions dans les nouvelles qui nous parviennent, ne
as the representative of the United States pas presser la discussion autant que le represenwanted, but that we should await clarification tant des Etats-Unis le souhaitait et attendre que
of these reports. I do not ask that we should soient tirees au clair les nouvelles de ces derniers
delay our entire discussion, but I wondt:r whether jours. Je ne demande pas que nous retardions
it would be wise to hurry matters and deliberate toute notre discussion. Mais je me demande s'il
under the impression of reports which, for the serait bon de presser les choses et de deliberer
moment, have not been clearly confirmed. We sous le coup de nouvelles qui, pour l'instant, ne
have in Greece observers who, we are informed, sont pas nettement etablies. Nous avons en Grece
have gone to the localities involved. Personally, des observateurs, clont on nous dit qu'ils se 80nt
I. should prefer to await their reports t'lnd con- rendus sur les lieux. Je souhaiterais, pour ma
tmue our discussions at their normal pace, part, que nous attendions les nOlivelles qu'ils nous
thereby allowing time for the reports to reach us. enverront et que nous gardions a nos deliberations un rythme normal; afin de permettre aces
nouvelles de nous parvenir.
~r. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist ReM. GROMYKO (Union des Republique~ sodapublics) (translated from Russian): I feel that listes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Il me semwe.should carry on our work normally. We have . ble que nous devons effectuer notre travail de
~ tIme-table for tomorrow, which includes meet- fa~on normale. Nous avons un programme pour
mgs of the appropriate committees of the Atomic demain. C'est demain que doivent travailler les
Energy Commission. If I am not mistaken, the comites de la Commission de l'energie atornique.
Security Council was to meet the day aher Si je ne me trumpe, une seance du CO!')Eeil de
tomorrow. I can see no reason for changing this securite est prevue pour apres-demain. Je ne vois
arr~ngement now. It would be better not to have aucune raison de modifier l'ordre etabli. 11 vaua tIme-table, as we did before, than to arrange drait mieux n'etablir. aucun programme-

.1JJU

one and then upset it. It only inconveniences
everybody.

comme nous le faisions auparavant - que d'en
etablir un et de le modifier ensuite. Cela ne fait
que nous gener tous.
'

Le representant des Etats-Unis a voulu demonThe United States representative has been
trying to prove that some kind of extraordinary trer qu'il existe en Grece on ne sait quelle situasituation has arisen in Greece in the last twenty- tion anormale, qui se serait creee dans les
four, or was it forty-eight, hours. I feel that the dernieres vingt-quatre ou quarante-huit heures, Il
hubbub which the Greeks have been making in me semble que le bruit que font les Grecs depuis
the last twenty-four or forty-eight hours has a vingt-quatre ou quarante-huit heures repond a
specific purpose, and can be easily understood, une intention precise, et qui est facile a deviner,
at any rate by those who wish to understand it. tout au moins pour ceux qui veulent bien comOne gets the definite impression that somewhere prendre. On a nettement I'impression qu'il existe
there is a specific time-table of things which quelque part un horaire bien etabli des evenehave to happen in Greece when the Greek ques- ments qui doivent se derouler en Grece pendant
tion is being discussed by the Security Council. I'examen de la question grecque au Conseil de
That is the only possible explanation of the securite. C'est la seule explication possible du
hubbub which the Greeks have been making in bruit souleve par les Grecs avec l'encouragement
the last two or three days with the encourage- de ceux qui se tiennent derriere eux.
ment of the people behind them.
Je ne vois pas pourquoi le Conseil de securite
I see no reason why the Security Council
should blindly follow the Greeks, who make an devrait suivre aveuglement les Grecs, lorsqu'ils
extra hubbub for a specific purpose, or why our font du bruit dans une intention precise, et transCouncil meetings should imitate sessions on the former nos reunions en seances de Bourse. Le
stock exchange. The Council is not a stock ex- Conseil n'est pas une Bourse, mais un organe
change; it is an international body which has to international; il doit etudier avec soin, attention
give dose, careful and cool consideration to the et sang-froid les questions qui lui sont soumises.
questions before it. If, at times, huckstering is L'agiotage peut se justifier a la Bourse; il est
indulged in on the stock exchange, that does not deplace au sein du Conseil de securite.
mean there should be huckstering in the Security
Council.
The PRESIDENT: Originally, the next meeting
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): A I'onto be devoted to this question was scheduled for gine, la prochaine seance devant etre consacree
Thursday at 3 p. m. The representative of the a cette question etait fixee pour jeudi a 15 heures.
United States has proposed to hold a meeting Le representant des Etats-Unis a propose de tenir
tomorrow morning. Objections have been formu- une seance demain matin. Des objections ont ete
lated by the l'epresentatives of France and of formulees par les representants de la France et
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and I de I'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietishould like to know whether, in view of the ob- ques, et je voudrais savoir si, a la suite de ces
jections, the United States wi'3hes to press its objections, le representant des Etats-Unis perproposal. If so, I shall immediately submit the siste dans sa proposition. Dans I'affirmative, je
proposal to a vote. I think I should mention that vais mettre cette proposition aux voix, sans delai.
tomorrow morning there is a meeting of Com- Je crois devoir signaler qu'il y a demain matin
mittee 2 of the Atomic Energy Commission. Of une seance du Comite 2 de la Commission de
course, if we decide to meet, we shall have to I'energie atomique. 11 va de soi que si nous
ask the Chairman of that Committee to postpone decidons de nous reunir, il nous faudra demanhis meeting.
der au P'resident de ce Comite d'ajourner sa
seance.
Mr. JOHNSON (United Stares): The United
States delegation thinks that consideration of this
question should be accelerated within the limits
of reason. I had originally suggested that we
should have two meetings tomorrow. I am pe!'·
fecdy willing to reduce that to one meeting tomorrow, and then have the other meetings we
have already scheduled for this week. I think the
events of the last twenty-four hours have not
proved anything. We are waiting to hear the
results nf the Subsidiary Group's jnvestigations,
and what official information may come from
our various missions in Greece. There is, however, sufficient j"-,,dkation that there is a situation which is disquir.tingand of which it is this
Council's, duty to take cognizance. That is an
observation alre;:tdy rnad~, by the representative
of France.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique)' (traduit de l'anglais): La delegation des Etats-Unis
estime que. l'examen de la question dont nous
sommes saisis devrait etre hate dans des limites
raisonnables. J'avais propose, au debut, que nous
nous reunissions deux fois demain. Je suis tout
a fait dispose a reduire ces deux seances de
demain a une seule et a m'en tenir aux autres
seances qui ont deja ete fixees pour cette semaine.
J'estime que les evenements des dernieres vingtquatre heures n'ont rien prouve. Nous attendons
de recevoir les resultats des enquetes du Groupe
subsidiaire et les renseignements officiels qui peuvent nous parvenir de nos differentes missions en
Grece. Cela est neanmoins un indice suffisant
d'une situation inquietante, clont ce Conseil a
le devoir de connaitre. Le representant de la
France a deja fait une remarque semblable.

",..c4.d8

1339
Je ne crois pas que nous activions le cours
I do not think that we are accelerating our
discussion in any way by casting aspersions, at de nos discussions d'aucune manihe en denigrant
this table, on the integrity of Greece; certainly du haut de cette tribune l'honnetete de la Grece;
until we know the facts, it seems to me hardly avant c connaitre les faits, je pretends qu'il sied
compatible with t~e dignity of the. Security mal a la dignite de ce Conseil de toIerer que
Council for accusatIOns of such vulgarIty to be des accusations brutales soient lancees a la face
flung at the head of a representative of a State du representant d'un pays qui siege parmi nous.
seated at this table. The Council might at least Le Conseil devrait au moins reserver son opinion
jusqu'a ce qn'il soit en possession des faits.
reserve its opinion until it has the facts.
Si le President est d'accord, j'aimerais que le
If the President is willing, I should like for the
Council to decide whether we should have a Conseil decide si nous nous reunirons demain meeting tomorrow--either in the morning or the soit le matin, soit I'apres-midi, peu importe afternoon, it does not matter which-in order afin d'accelerer notre travail. Le President a
to speed up our work. The President has sug- declare, je crois, qU'il serait dispose a prendre
gested, I believe, that he would be ready to .speak la parole demain et que nous pourrions meme
tomorrow, and we might even get to consIdera- aborder l' examen des paragraphes detailles de
tion of tbe detailed paragraphs of our resolu- notre resolution.
tion.
Mr. HOnGSON (Australia): It is not a question of this Council's being stampeded, or, as
has been suggested, of its blindly following the
noise of Greece, We think that it is a matter of
some urgency that we should' reach a decision
on the resolutions before the Council. I fully
support what the representative of France has
said. As far as my delegation is concerned, we
have not made up our minds at all as to the
recent incidents, but we have our Subsidiary
Group there, and from it we shall be able to
ascertain the facts.
You will recall that in my statement the other
day I said that the representative of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics had approached this
problem with preconceived notions: It should
not be for me, the representative of a small
country, to remind him that he is representing
here not the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
only, but the whole of the United Nations; that
being so, we have to reach a just and impartial
decision in the light of all the facts. So far, we
have none of those facts; yet he has decided
ahead of those facts, and I just want to indicate
that we feel that that is a wrong approach to the
problem.

Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
l'anglais): Il ne s'agit pas pour le Conseil, comme on I'a fait remarquer, de se laisser bousculer
ou mener aveuglement par les evenements de
Grece. Nous estimons qu'il est urgent d'aboutir
a une decision en ce qui concerne les resolutions
qui sont presentees au Conseil. J'appuie sans
reserve les declarations du representant de la
France. En ce qui concerne ma delegation, nous
n'avons pas defini notre attitude relativement
aux recen~ incidents, mais notre Groupe subsidiaire se trouve la-bas et, grace a lui, nous
serons a meme de verifier les faits.
Je me permets de vous rappeler que, dans
mon intervention de l'autre jour, j'ai declare que
le representant de I'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques avait aborde ce probleme avec
des idees precon~uesl. Ce ne devrait pas etre a
moi, representant cl'un petit Etat, de lui rappeler
qu'il represente ici, non pas I'Union des Republiyues socialistes sovietiques uniquement, mais
l'ensemble des Nations Unies; dans ces conditions, nous devons arriver a une decision equitable et impartiale, a la lumiere de tous les faits.
Jusqu'a maintenant nous ne somme saisis d'aucun fait, et cependant il a pris une decision anticipee; je veux seulement signaler que c'est a
notre avis une mauvaise maniere d'aborder ce
probleme.

The PRESIDENT: I want -to ask one question
of the representative of the United States. We
have a meeting of Committee 2 of the Atomic
Energy Commission tomorrow morning and a
meeting of the Commission for Conventio.la!
Armaments in the afternoon. I think it will be
somewhat inconvenient to call off these meetings. I wonder whetller it . vould not be just as
well for us to hold two meetings on Thursday.
Meetings would also have to be called off on
Thursday, but at least those participating would
h.ave one day's notice in advance.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Je desire
poser une question au representant des EtatsUnis. Le Comite 2 de la Commission de l' energie atomique se reunit demain matin et la. Commission des armements de type classique se reunit
I'apres-midi. II me semble qu'il est difficile d'annuler ces seances. Je me demande s'il ne serait
pas tout aussi bien pour nous de tenir deux
seances jeudi. II faudrait egalement annuler
d'autres seances jeudi, mais ceux qui doivent y
sieger seront, au moins, prevenus un jour
d'avance.

Mr. ]OHNSON (United States of America):
My delegation would prefer to have one meeting
t~mo.rrow and one meeting on Thursday. The
meetmg tomorrow afternoon of the Commission

M.-, \lSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit c.<f ;: anglais) : Ma delegation pre£ererait que
nous tenions une seance demain et une seance
jeudi. II n'y aurait certainement aucun inconve-

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 57.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite, Deuxieme Annee, No 57.

1340
for Conventional Armaments would certainly
suffer nothing by being postponed a few days.

nient a. ce que la seance de la Commission des
armements de type classiq ue~ prevue pour
demain, soit remise a. quelques jours.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Puis-je
demander aux membres du Conseil qui desirent
se reunir demain de lever la main?
Six membres seulement ayant leve la main, la
proposition est rejetee.
V otent pour:
Australie
Belgique
Bresil
Syrie
Royaume-Uni
Etats-Unis d'Amerique
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Notre
prochaine seance est donc fixee, comme auparavant, pour jeudi a. 15 heures.
M. PARODl (France): Je voudrais reprendre
la suggestion que vous avez faite, tendant a. ce
que nous ayons une reunion jeudi matin. C'est
parce que je preferais cette reunion jeudi matm
que je n'ai pas vote en faveur de la proposition
des Etats-Unis. Mais je suis tout a. fait dispose a
tenir le plus grand compte de la demande de
M. Johnson, si on pouvait reporter a. jeudi matin
la seance qu'il demande, c'est-a.-dire avoir deux
reunions jeudi.

The PRESIDENT: I shall ask those members
of the Council who wish to hold a meeting tomorrow to raise their hands.
The proposal was rejected, having received
only six votes.
Votes tor:
Australia
Belgium
Brazil
Syria
United Kingdom
United States of America
The PRESIDENT: Our next meeting will therefore be scheduled, as originally, for Thursday at
3 p.m.
Mr. PARODl (France) (translated from
French): I should like to take up again your
suggestion that we should hold a meeting on
Thursday morning. It was because I preferred a
meeting on Thursday morning that I did not
vote for the United States proposal. I am quite
prepared, however, to give Mr. Johnston's request favourable consideration, if the meeting
for which he is asking can be postponed until
Thursday morning, that is to say, if we can have
two meetings on Thursday.
M. LOPEZ (Colombie) (traduit de l'anglais) :
Mr. LOPEZ (Colombia): I have no objection
whatever to having another meeting on the Je n'ai pas la moindre objection a. ce qLe nous
Greek question tomorrow afternoon, but there nous reunissions de nouveau demain apres-midi
ie; some doubt as to whether we are going to pOUf discuter de la question de Grece; mais il
have the information that we are expected to est douteux que nous soyons en possession,
have by tomorrow afternoon. If it is not certain demain apres-midi, des renseignements que nous
that we are going to have th~s information, I devons avoir. S'il n'est pas certain que nous
really do not see much advantage n'1 altering our possedions ces renseignements, je ne vois vraischedule. To my mind that is the important ment pas quel avantage il y a a ce que nous
point. Personally, lam perfectly willing to have I modifions notre emploi du temps. C'est la, a
a meeting tomorrow, either in the morning or mon avis, le point important. J'accepte tres
the afternoon, provided we have the assurance volontiers, pour ma part, que nous nous reunissions demain, soit dans la matinee, soit dans
that we will have the information.
l'apres-midi, pourvu que nous soyons assures
d'avoir les renseignements.
M. HSIA (Chine) (traduit de l'anglais): Je
Mr. HSIA (China): I wish to support what
the President and Mr. Parodi suggested. I think desire appuyer les propositions du President et
we should have two meetings on Thursday in- de M. Parodi. Je pense que nous devrions tenir
stead of a meeting tomorrow, because tomorrow deux seances jeudi au lieu de tenir une seance
afternoon I have called a meeting of the Com- demain, car j'ai convoque pour demaln apresmission for Conventional Armaments. I could midi une reunion de la Commission des armenot very well call off the meeting without good ments de type classique. Il me serait difficile
reason. I do not think that a difference of d'annuler cette reunion sans motif valable. Il ne
eighteen or twenty-four hours is so very im- me semble pas qu'une difference de dix-huit ou
de vingt-quatre heures soit tellement importante.
portant.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Avant
The PRESIDENT: Before I grant the floor to
th~ representati,:e of the United Kingdom, J de donner la parole au representant du Royaumight also mentIOn that tI1ere is an alternath..- mc-Unl, je puis aussi vous signaler qu'il existe
possibility of having two meetings on Frid,,<,- :.lDC: CiHtre solution consistant a. tenir deux seanThere is only one meeting scheduled for Fridav cc,> ";'endredi. Il n'y a qu'une seance prevue pour
~orning, and we could have another meetilig ~ c ,;iredi matin et nous pourrions nous reunir
m the afternoon. That would not call anything de nouveau dans l'apres-midi. Il ne serait pas
off, because there are no other committee or necessaire d'annuler une seance quekonque,
etant donne qu'il n'y a pas d'autre comite au
commission meetings planned for that time.
commission qui doive se reunir a. cette heure-Ia.
Sir Alexander Cl\DOGAN (United Kingdom) :
Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Royaume-Uni),
With reference to what was said by the repre- (trad1,lit de l'anglais): J'en reviens a. ce qu'a
__'.''C"'C'C='T~'"7·""C~''''''"

""'~"]rC" ",·'~"",~"

1341
sentative of Colombia, I do not think it would
be necessary for the Council to suspend discussion on this question until we receive information on the recently alleged incidents. We have
other business before us. We shall have the
pleasure, I hope, of hear~g the President conclude the general debate wIth a statement of the
attitude of his Government. We shall then, I
should hope, begin to discuss the resolution
which is before us.
But apart from that, it seems to me extremely
dangerous, and invites all kinds of trouble and
disorder, for the Council to suspend its discussion of the main question because incidents are
reported, and we are waiting to hear from the
Subsidiary Group in regard to the matter. I
think we ought to go straight ahead with the
work in which we are involved.
The PRESIDENT: The question of a meeting
tomorrow has already been decided negatively
by a vote of the Council. Tne question now is
whether we should ha-ve two meetings on Thursday or two meetings on Friday. I do not think
it makes any difference; the only difference is a
technical one in that certain other meetings
would not have to be shifted if we met twice on
Friday. The question of accelerating our debate,
which was mentioned by the representative of
the United States, would be taken care of either
way.
Unless there is any objection by the Council,
I shall call one meeting on Thursday and two
meetin.gs on Friday; this has the advantage of
not disturbing any of the arrangements which
have already been made.
Mr. LOPEZ (Colombia): The suggestion is
quite agreeable to me. However, I wonder
whether we might not follow the precedent established during the meetings of the previous
weeks and have two meetings on Thursday and
one meeting on Friday morning.
The PRESIDENT: If that is the desire of the
Council, I am perfectly ready to grant it. Therefore, we shall have two meetings of the Council
on Thursday and one meeting of the Council on
Friday, all devoted to the Greek question.
Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Re-

~ublics) (translated from Russian): I should

like to remind you that one of the committees of
~he Ator,nic Energy Commission is due to hold
Its meetmg on Thursday. If that meeting is to
~e postponed until Friday I shall raise no objectio~. If it is not postponed, it will be inconvenIent.
The PRESIDENT: I shall request the Chairman
of the Working Committee of the Atomic
Energy Commission to transfer his meeting
scheduled for Thursday morning to Friday afternoon. I am sure he will accept this request. Consequently~ we are all agreed upon our schedule;
two rneetmgs of the Council on Thursday and
?ne meeting on Friday morning. The next meetmg of the Council is Thursday at 10.30 a.m.
The meeting rose at 645 p.m.

declare le representant de la Colombie; il ne me
semble pas qu'il soit necessaire que le Conseil
ajourne les debats sur cette question jusqu'a ce
qu'il recsoive les renseignements relatifs aux pretendus incidents de ces derniers jours. Il y a
d'autres questi~ns dont nous sommes saisis. Nous
aurons, je l'espere, le plaisir d'entendre le President presenter la conclusion du debat d'ordre
general et faire une declaration sur l'attitude
de son Gouvetnement, et c'est alors que nous
commencerons, il faut l'esperer, la discussion de
la resolution qui nous a ete presentee.
Il me semble, en outre, qu'il existe un danger
extreme et des risques de difficultes ou de desordre, si le Conseil ajourne la discussion de la
principale question, sous pretexte que des incidents sont signaIes et que nous attendons d'en
etre informes par le Groupe subsidiaire. J'estime
que nous devrions aller de l'avant dans le travail
qui noilS occupe actuellement.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): La question de la seance de demain a deja ete resolue par
un vote negatif du Conseil. La question est maintenant de savoir si nous nous reunirons deux fois
jeudi ou deux fois vendredi. Je ne pense pas que
cela importe beaucoup: la seule difference est
d'ordre technique, du fait que l'horaire d'autres
seances n'aura pas a etre modifie si nous nous
reunissons deux fois ~ _ndredi. La necessite d'activer nos debats, dont a parle le representant des
Etats-Unis, sera satisfaite de toute facson.
A moins que le Conseil ne formule des objections, nous tiendrons une seance jeudi et deux
seances vendredi; cela presente l'avantage de ne
contrarier aucune des dispositions qui ont deja
ete prises.
M. LOPEZ (Colombie) (traduit de l'anglais):
Cette proposition me semble fort acceptable.
Toutefois, je me demande si nous ne pourrions
pas nous inspirer du precedent cree au cours
des seances des semaines preceden~es, et nous
reunir deux fois jeudi et une fois vendredi matin.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Si le
Conseil pre£ere cette solution, je suis tout a fait
dispose a l'accepter. Dans ces conditions, nous
tiendrons deux seances jeudi et une seance vendredi, consacrees toutes trois a la question grecque.
M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traditit du russe): Je voudrais faire remarquer que l'un des comites de la
Commission de l'energie atomique doit se reunir
jeudi. Si cette seance est renvoyee a vendredi,
je n'aurai pas d'objection a soulever. Si elle ne
l'est pas, cela creera des difficultes.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'a,nglais) : Je prierai le President du Comite de travail de la Commission de l'energie atomique de remdtre a vendredi apres-midi la seance que ce Comite doit
tenir jeudi matin. Je suis certain qu'i! acceptera.
Nous sommes donc bien d'accord sur notre
emploi du temps: le Conseil tiendra deux sean~'
ces jeudi et une seance vendredi matin. La prochaine seance aura lieu jeudi a 10 h. 30.
Laseanceeft,{eZl4f!~1?;4,'!l~"iY""""'k"_

SALES AGENTS OF UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
DEPOSITAIRES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
Argentina-Argentine
Editorial Sudamericana
S. A.
Alsina 500
BUENOS Anms

Australia-Australie
H. A. Goddard Pty. Ltd.
255a George Street
SYDNEY, N. S. W.

Belgium-Belgique
Agence et Messageries de la
Presse, S. A.
14-22 rue du Persil
BRUXELLES

Munoz Hermanos y CIa
Nueve de Octubre 703
CasiIla 10-24
GUAYAQUIL

Egypt-Egypte
Librairie "La Renaissance
d'Egypte"
9 Sh. Adly Pasha
C;\..IRO

Finland-Finlande
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa
2, Keskuskatu
HELSINKI

France

Bolivia-Bolivie
Librena CientHica y
Literaria
Avenida 16 de JuIio, 216
CasiIla 972
LA PAZ

Canada
The R yerson Press
299 Queen Street West
TORONTO

Editions A. Pedone
13, rue SoufHot
PARIS, Ve

Greece-Grece
"Eleftheroudakis"
Librairie internationale
Place de la Constitution
ATHENES

Guatemala
Jose Goubaud
Goubaud & CIa Ltda.
Sucesor
5a Av. Sur No. 6 y 9a C. P.
GUATEMALA

Chile-Chili
Edmundo Pizarro
Merced 846
SANTIAGO

Haiti-Haiti

China-Chine
The Commercial Press Ltd.
211 Honan Road
SHANGHAI

(:osta Rica-Costa-Rica
Trejos Hermanos
Apartado 1313
SAN JOSE

Max Bouchereau
Librairie "A la Caravelle"
BOlte postale 111-B
PORT-Au-PRINcE

India-lnde
Oxford Book & Stationery

Co.
Scindia House
NEW DELHI

Cuba

Iran

La Casa Belga
Rene de Smedt
O'ReiIly· 455
LA lIABANA

Bongahe Piaderow
731 Shah Avenue
TEHERAN

Iraq-lf'ak

Czechoslovakia
Tchecoslovaquie

Mackenzie & Mackenzie
The Bookshop
BAGHDAD

F. Topic
Narodni Trida 9
PRAHA 1

Lebanon-Liban

Denmark-Danemark
Einar Munskgaard
Norregade 6
KJOBENHAVN

Librairie universeIIe
BEYROUTH

Luxembourg

.Dominican Republic
Republique DomitJ,;caine
Librerla Dominicana
Calle Mercedes No. 49
Apartado 656
CIUDAD TRUJILLO
Printed in the U.S.A.

Ecuador-Equateur

Librairie J. Schummer
Place GuiIIaume
LUXEMI30URG

Netherla.nds-Pays-Bas
N. V. Martinus Nijhoff
Lange Voorhout 9
S'GruWENHAGE

Price in the United Si:ates: $0.50

New Zealand
N ouvelle-Zelande
Gordon & Gotch, Ltd.
Waring Taylor Street
WELLINGTON

Norway-Norvege
Norsk Bokimport A/S
Edv. Storms Gate 1
OSLO

Philippines
D. P. Perez Co.
132 Riverside
SAN JUAN

Sweden-Suede
A.-B. C. E. Fritzes KungI.
HofbokhandeI
Fredsgatan 2
STOCKHOLM

Switzerland-Suisse
Librairie Payot S. A.
LAUSANNE,GENEVE,VEVE~

MONTREUX, NEUCHATEL,
BERNE, BASEL
Hans Raunhardt
Kirchgasse 17
ZURICH I

Syria-Syrie
Librairie universeIIe
DAMAS

Turkey-Turquie
Librairie Hachette
469 Istiklal Caddesi
BEYOGLU-IsTANBUL

Union of South Africa
Union Sud-Africaine
Central News Agency Ltd.
Commissioner & Rissik Sts.
JOHANNESBURG, CAPETOWN,
DURBAN

United Kingdom
Royaume-Uni
H.M. Stationery Office
P.O. Box 569
LONDON, S.E. 1
and at H.M.S.O. Shops at
LONDON, EDINBURGH,
MANCHESTER, CARDIFF,
BELFAST and BRISTOL

United States of America
Etats-Unis d'Amerique
International Documents
Service
Columbia University Press
2960 Broadway
NEW YORK 27, N. Y.

Yugoslavia-Yougoslavie
Drzavno Preduzece
Jugoslovenska Knjiga
Moskovska UI. 36
BEOGRAD
25 March 1948
