SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

2465”’

MEETING:

NEW

12 AUGUST

1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional
Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/2465)
of the agenda

1

....................................

...............................................

1

Letter dated 2 August 1983 from the Permanent
Representative
of Chad to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15902).
..

SiPV.2465

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a ‘symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Ojjflciaal Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions hnd Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2465th
Held

in New York on Friday,

Mr. Luc de La BARRE
(France).

-President:

MEETING
12 August

de NANTEUIL

cussion of the item on the agenda. In conformity withthe
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council;
to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland; Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Soglo (Benin), Mr.
Kaba (Guinea). Mr. Okeyo (Kenya), Mr. Oumarou (Niger)
and Mr. Towo Atangana (United Republic of Cameroon)
took the pIaces reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2465)
1. Adoption
2.

1983, at 10.30 a.m.

of the agenda
3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
first speaker is the representative of Liberia. I invite him
to take a .place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

Letter dated 2 August 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Chad to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(SJ15902)

4. Mr.- KOFA (Liberia): My delegation wishes most
heartily to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency for the month of August. May I also
express to you and the other members of the Council the
appreciation of the Liberian delegation for acceding to
our request to address this body during its consideration
of the situation in Chad. It is indeed a source of immense
satisfaction that I do so under the presidency of a diplomat of your proven qualities, representing, as you do, a
country which has established a reputation as a staunch
supporter of the purposes and principles of the United
Nations and with which my Government enjoys the most
cordial and friendly relations.

The meeting was called to order at 11.15 a.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Letter dated 2 August 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Chad to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15902j
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from &e&h):
In
conformity with decisions taken .at previous meetings on
this item [2462nd and 2463rd meetings], I invite the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs and Co-operation of
Chad and the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to take places at the Council table; I invite the representatives of Egypt, the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Ivory Coast, Liberia and the Sudan to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

5. At this moment international tensions and frustrations are high because of uncertainties in some quarters.
The rumble of tanks, the menacing sounds of invading
military aircraft and the presence of some 2,000 Libyan
troops in Chad have shattered the peace of that small
non-aligned nation. By consenting~ to hold this debate the
Council has risen to its responsibilities under the Charter
of the United Nations and deserves the appreciation of all
States, particularly small ones and those belonging to the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Korom Ahmed
(Chad) and Mr. Burwin (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) tookplaces at the Council table; Mr. Khalil (Egypt), Mr. RajaieKhorassani (Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Essy (Ivory
Coast), Mr. Kofa (Liberia) and Mr. Erfaki (Sudan) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

6. This meeting of the Council is taking place against
the sombre background of an expansionist policy of
Libya, which aims to bring Chad, a sister African State,
into its sphere of influence in Africa, which has caused a
number of innocent civilians to be killed and valuable
property to be wantonly destroyed. That country’s
attempt to impose its political will upon a sovereign
people and its policies of external aggression against

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
should like to inform members of the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Benin, Guinea,
Kenya, the Niger and the United Republic of Cameroon in
which they request to be invited to participate in the dis1

.

neighbouring States have reached such enormous proportions that they have placed international peace and security in imminent jeopardy. Such a continuing threat to
other States cannot be tolerated and should be forcefully
addressed by the Council. My Government views the present deteriorating situation in Chad as a gross violation of
the territorial integrity of that country and expresses its
regret at the intensification of Libya’s intervention and
the escalation of the fighting in our sister African nation.

is witnessing ever more open interference by certain States
members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO).
12. The cynical forms and the increasing magnitude of
that imperialist intervention in Chad are today clear to
every impartial person. An airlift has been set up between
Paris and N’Djamena
for the stepped-up delivery of
sophisticated weaponry and military mat&id to the Chad
capital. The overall cost of this operation already
amounts to $40 million. A fresh step in the escalation of
foreign military interference in Chad was the decision
urgently to send to that country 500 French paratroopers.

7. The fundamental principle ‘of international law that
binds all members of the international community is
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all
States. Accordingly members of the community
of
nations, and particularly those of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU), have an obligation to uphold that
sacred principle and to contribute to a peaceful resolution
of the conflict in Chad and preserve Chad’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity.

13. In turn, new units of mercenaries and regular troops
of foreign interventionists accompanied by American military advisers are being sent to Chad on American military planes. There is an increasing flow of American
weapons to Chad, the overall cost of which is already
more than $25 million.

8. Since the Government of President Hissein H&r6 has
been recognized by the United Nations, the OAU and the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, all Member States
have an equal obligation to lend their undivided support
to that Government at the time of its greatest need.

14. Finally, the Western Powers are trying to embroil
certain African countries in the conflict, using for that
purpose all available means of pressure. ?!ms, interference by the imperialist forces in the events taking place in
Chad is becoming ever more broad-based and dangerous
in character. New colonialist regimes are openly being
imposed on the people of Chad. They want to transform
the territory of that sovereign State into a new imperialist
bridgehead in the African continent. It is becoming quite
clear that an attempt is being made to use the internal
conflict in that African country to implement the farreaching political aims and designs directed against the
peoples of Africa as a whole.

9. Liberia therefore frowns upon any attempt by any
State to undermine the security of the Chad Government,
to subvert Chad’s sovereignty and to impose its will on
the Chad people. We request that peace be restored to
Chad at all costs and that all uninvited foreign forces be
withdrawn immediately and unconditionally
from that
troubled African country.
10. The international community can no longer remain
indifferent to all the inhuman crimes being perpetrated by
the Government of Libya. Nor can we remain mute spectators of the endless travail and, trauma suffered by the
people of Chad. In the name of that people, whose rights
and precious peace have been trodden underfoot. and
whose land has been laid waste, the aggressor must be
called to account by the international community. The
present brutal threat to peace precipitated by the hegemonic policy of Libya is both totally inadmissible and
unworthy of a modemday State. Therefore the failure of
the Council to act firmly and decisively will not only
encourage Libya to intensify its aggression against Chad
but will also increase the risk that the current conflict will
spread and attain broader proportions. In this connection
my delegation calls upon the Council to proceed urgently,
with all the authority at its command and all the resources
at its disposal, to take effective and concrete measures
which will bring about the cessation of hostilities and the
withdrawal of Libyan forces from Chad.

15. That is whv certain Western Powers cvnicallv disregard the position adopted by the OAU on the question of
the events in and surrounding Chad. It is well known that
in the middle of July, the Bureau of the nineteenth session
of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
OAU adopted a special communiquC which contains an
appeal to all States, both African and non-African, to
refrain from any interference, whether direct of indirect,
what might exacerbate the situation in Chad. However,
despite the appeal of the OAU, interference by the United
States, France and certain other countries in the internal
events in Chad continues and is becoming even worse.
16. That increasing imperialist interference in the internal affairs of Chad is impudently being covered up by a
pretentious propaganda campaign against Libya. Under
that diversionary noise of the drums of propaganda, they
are trying to expand their punitive expedition by the colonizers in Chad and against Libya.

11. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist Rep&lies) (interpretation from Russian): The Soviet delegation
deems it necessary at this stage to state its view on the
item on the agenda. In essence, it is the question of the
recent serious worsening of the situation around Chad, a
country situated in the centre of the continent of Africa.
AS ,the Council is aware, the armed conflict taking place
between the opposing political groupings of that country

17. We must call a spade a spade here. The military
involvement by a number of Western Powers in the affairs
of Chad and the acts of provocation against Libya present
a danger that is being pursued by imperialist forces. We
are speaking here about an attempt by the West to return
to the last century when the colonialists believed it to be
the norm to send their troops to Africa, to set up their.
2

puppets and to carve and to recarve the African continent
as they saw tit.

24. On 14 October 1982, the head of the Guinean delegation and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Abdoulaye
Tour& made a statement in the general debate of the
thirty-seventh session of the General Assembly, in which
he pointed out, with some optimism, his satisfaction at
seeing the beginning of an internal improvement in Chad
that might lead to political stability and the strengthening
of national unity. On that occasion, from the rostrum of
the General Assembly he launched a resounding appeal to
all men of goodwill to support the efforts of the then
Council of State of the Republic of Chad, so that the
work of national reconciliation could be completed.’

18. Yesterday, in speaking to journalists, the President
-of the United States gave an example of the type of thinking in which certain circles in the West were engaged.
With respect to Chad, his words were: “It is not our main
sphere of influence; it is the main sphere of influence of
France.’ But those words are a direct challenge to all
non-aligned countries which have spoken so often about
the fact that they categorically reject that imperialist
argument of dividing the third world into spheres of
influence.

25. While at that time we hailed the beginning of a
resumption of normal life in Chad, already in January
1983 hostilities had resumed in that martyred countryhostilities which this time have taken on even more alarming proportions.

19. The Soviet Union decisively condemns the escalation of imperialist meddling in the internal affairs of
Chad. Those actions are illegal and are a threat to international peace and security. The Soviet Union fully supports
the efforts of the OAU which seek to bring about a peaceful settlement to the situation in that country, The Soviet
Union demands an immediate cessation of interventionist
actions undertaken to the detriment of the national unity
of the Republic of Chad and the cause of peace in Africa
and throughout the world. Such actions and hegemonistic
claims are in flagrant violation of the fundamental principles of the Charter of the United Nations and other international documents signed by both the United States and
France.

26. Thus, at the nineteenth session of the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the OAU, held at
Addis Ababa in June, the Supreme Leader of the Revolution, President Ahmed Stkou Tour&, called upon the
OAU to shoulder its historic responsibility and affirmed
that the OAU was the pride of Africa and that, without it,
African States-individually
or collectively-would
be
deprived of their means of struggle.
27. I wish to reaffirm here that Guinea has never hesitated to support just causes. Whenever it is a case of
defending just causes throughout the world, and in particular in Africa, Guinea does not engage in polemics,
let alone does it pit peoples one against the other or
hurl abuse. Our abiding wish is that, together, the international community- go beyond what divides it and
hence reflect the higher interests of our peoples and
begin seeking sound solutions to the problems facing
our nations.

20. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Guinea. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
21. Mr. KABA (Guinea) (interpretation from French):
Sir, it gives me pleasure to congratulate you ‘on your
assumption of the presidency for the month of August. I
am convinced that, thanks to your long years in an outstanding diplomatic izareer, your experience in the conduct of international affairs and your personal qualities,
the current deliberations on this painful problem-the
situation in Chad-will
at last fulfil the legitimate desire
for peace and security throughout this country racked by
17 years of fratricidal war. In any case, the people of Chad
and all the other peoples of Africa, as well as the forces
that cherish peace and justice throughout the world, are
closely following the deliberations of this lofty world
forum, which is‘entrusted with the maintenance of international peace and security. This demonstrates, Mr. President, just how important your responsibilities are at this
particular tense period in African history.

28. In June when the war seemed to challenge the very
existence of Chad as a State, the Current Chairman of the
OAU, with the consent of his colleagues, convened a
meeting of the OAU Bureau, which took place on 15 and
16 July at Addis Ababa. Also at that meeting Guinea,
through its leader, President Ahmed Stkou Tour& reaffirmed its position on the painful problem of Chad, recalling that, although the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government
of the OAU, at its nineteenth session,
unanimously adopted strongly worded resolutions on
Chad, the conflict in that country nevertheless had several
dimensions to it, including in particular, a political dimension stemming from alliances with various external,
Powers.

22. I should like, through you, to express my delegation’s
gratitude to Mr. Ling Qing, representative of the People’s
Republic of China, for the exceptional way in which he
guided the Council’s work during the month of July.

29. While the Council cannot take up and resolve all the
problems of Chad aspect by aspect, my delegation
believes it is nevertheless duty bound to refer to the Charter of the United Nations, which is its strength and which
remains the only legal power of the international
community.

23. I wish to thank all the members of the Council for
having given me an opportunity to make my country’s
contribution to these deliberations by inviting me to make
a statement.

30. If there is one incontrovertible fact, it is that Chad
has been a sovereign State since 1960.
3

3 1. Through the voice ‘of its highest competent authority, that of President Ahmed Stkou Tour& Guinea
recalled the following at Addis Ababa last July:

39. Mr. OUMAROU (Niger) (interpretationfromFrench):
Thank you, Mr. President, -for allowing my delegation to
participate in this debate.,1 extend my thanks also to the
members of the Council whose hard work we praise, as
well as their readiness to consider the events which disturb
the world, on different continents perhaps, but always
with the potential for anguish and the same risk of grave
prolongation of conflict.

“The Charter of the Organization of African States
also forbids that, in another country of the OAU, there
should be constituted a force for destabilizing another
country member of the OAU.”
And the Supreme Leader of the Revolution
say:

went on to
40. We extend our congratulations to Mr. Ling Qing of
China, who presided so well over the Council during the
month of July &d whose diplomatic tact, perspicacity
and courteous firmness were appreciated by all.

“The principle is not valid for the national liberation
movements because these movements are directly
opposed to imperialism, and the mission of the independent States of Africa is to support the national liberation movements. But when it is a question of a
political struggle in support of one or another faction,
no African State is entitled to harbour a group of
people arming themselves with a view to attacking
another independent member State.‘*

41. We congratulate you, Mr. President, as .well, you
who from the very beginning of your oflice inherited a
very difficult dossier on the question of the Middle East
and who succeeded so strikingly in drawing the needed
balance between reason and emotion.
42. Now once again you have another issue before you
that is of concern to Africa and to the entire international
community and in which, we might add, French sensitivity is particularly sharp, and legitimately so. There can be
no doubt that thanks to your outstanding qualities you
will be able once again to guide the Council on the course
of wisdom, correctness aiid a sense of responsibility. This
is an opportunity for me to say how pleased my country,
the Niger, is at the privileged ties, both multifaceted and
long-standing, which unite it to the French Republic, ties
that are the more especially exemplary and. apjjreciated as
they become further strengthened in mutual respect, in
the observance of high standards. and in a fruitful and
beneficial co-operation.

32. It is no secret to anyone that the OAU has already
set. up several standing committees -on the problem of
Chad, namely, an Ad&c Committee to resolve the conflict among Chadians and a second Committee to settle
the border dispute between Chad and Libya.
33. Not only does Guinea abide by all appeals for
national reconciliation in Chad but it is also at one with
these appeals.
34. My Government has entrusted me with the explicit
task here of expressing before representatives the concern
of my country at the worsening situation in Chad; we are
determined to join our efforts to those of the international
community in order that the most emphatic measure% be
taken to bring about an immediate cessation of hostilities
:
in Chad.

43. It was. in-April of this year that the Council last
discussed the question of Chad [24.3&h meeting], whose
coexistence with its neighbour to the north seemed particularly difficult; I refer to Libya. It was at the time a very
thorny border question and the Council in its wisdomfound the proper words :to allay what seemed to be the
beginning of ti dangerous storm. It indicated a good
framework for restoring calm in the relations between the
two countries and solemnly urged them to conduct a dialogue for the peaceful settlement pf ihe dispute. It also
prescribed resort to the OAU in order to restore understanding between them on the basis of the sacred principles of respect for the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the countries [see S/156883.

35. However, we believe it is imperative to bear in mind
one basic fact, namely, that there ‘are not two governments in Chad. There is but one Government in Chad,
that formed by Hissein HabrC. Guinea therefore believes
that to tell a leader who has constituted a legal govemment to lay down his arms while he is busy regaining the
whole of the territory of his country is inadmissible.
36. That is why Guinea hopes that these present deliberations of the Council will reach conclusions expressing the
determination of the people of Chad and of Africa as a
whole to see a cessation of that war and to put an end to
all foreign intervention.

44. Since then, four months have gone by and,.nekdless
to say, not only have matters not been resolved between
those two countries but the meeting that the Council is
holding today is unfortunately the result of sharp deterioration of relations between them. Suspicion has yielded to
rancour and dialogue to confrontation.

37. I shall conclude my brief statement by stressing, on
behalf of my country, the approach to be adopted in due
course by members of the Council. We ardently hope that
the Council, after these debates, will do some good work
by not equating a Government with those who violate the
legality of the country.

45. In the Niger we have been particularly attentive to
this situation and we are deeply distressed to see our
region serve as an arena for troubles which we hoped it
would be spared; and because of the magnitude of these
events and of. the daily destruction, we are obliged to
assert that the combat now taking place in Chad extends

38. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of the Niger. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
4

far beyond the framework of a simple internal rebellion.
Indeed, if our brother Goukouni Weddey-whom,
I must
stress, the Niger actively supported in the past and
actively provided with fraternal co-operation and disinterested support in order to promote the national reconciliation sought by all Chadians-had
had resources to obtain
in a few months an air squadron, tanks and armoured
cars, Stalin organs, and all sorts of bombs and artillery, as
well as all the personnel recently thrown into the retaking
of Faya-Largeau, he certainly would not have left N’Djamena in June 1982 in the circumstances with which we are
all familiar, and Chad’s name would long before June
1982 have come off the all-too-lengthy list of poorest and
least-developed countries.

to be of assistance. We have a saying that “when you see a
mouse running towards a flame-it means that the pursuit
is hotter than the fire.” I put that to the Council for
reflection, while I urge it speedily to see to it that Chad
can regain its territorial integrity and peace so that ‘its
hard-working and innocent population can return soon to
the tasks which bring it the pittance it needs for the
already difficult job of survival.
49. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Benin. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
50. Mr. SOGLO (Benin) (interpretation from French):
First of all, Sir, I should like to convey to you the great
satisfaction of the delegation of Benin at seeing you presiding over the work of the Council. No one is better
qualified than you to do so at the precise moment when
the Council is discussing the thorny question of Chad.
Not only are your competance and human qualities universally admired, but you are the representative of a great
country, France, whose vast work has not been limited to
its own “hexagon’* of territory, but has extended throughout all the continents, especially in Africa and in Chad.
We are therefore convinced that the present debate cannot fail to have a successful outcome.

46. AS was the case with Mr. Goukouni Weddey in the
past, the legitimacy of Mr. Hissein HabrC at the head of
the State of Chad is for us today undeniable and it is on
behalf of that -legitimacy recognized and respected by all
the States of the France-African union, by the Organization of African Unity, by the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and by the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries that his combat today is the struggle of all peoples
dedicated to the rule pf international law for the safeguarding of a peaceful and fruitful coexistence among
nations. It is not a matter of liking or not liking Mr.
Hissein HabrC; it is a matter of defending-all
of us
together-a certain order which makes the world what it
is to&y, an order which would not have the peace and
calm of any country fall prey to the whims of its neighbours. The time of the law of the jungle and of imperial
conquest is past; at least that is what is proclaimed in the
Charter of the United Nations and what justifies our presence here.

51. I would be remiss in my duty if I did not take this
opportunity to thank the representative of China, who
with his customary skill presided so well over the work of
the Council. last month.
52. Four months ago, those who have come again today .
to complain to the Council against Libya would have had
us believe that the present regime in N’Djamena had
brought peace and harmony to Chad. The delegation of
Benin was among those who did not share that point of
view, and now reality has imposed itself on us, with all its
brutal force. It is a reality composed of bloody confrontations which have caused the death of thousands of our
Chadian brothers.

47. We cannot fail, thus, to conclude-and
to deplorethat in the affair before the Council the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Chad have been
violated and that there has been a deliberate attempt to
take away from the people of Chad the opportunity one
day to choose its own government and institutions. It
must even be added that armed penetration into the territory of Chad-both
in principle and on the groundgravely disturbs the peace and stability of our region to
the extent of being an inadmissible precedent in Africa,
where the full weight of our efforts must be oriented
rather towards consolidating the independence of our continent, organizing our solidarity, and the waging of a
fierce struggle against everything that hinders freedom,
dignity and the harmonious flourishing of Africans.

53. Thus, the return of Mr. Hissein Habre to N’Djamena did not bring with it that desired peace. The combat
which now rages in that country, with the participation of
non-African forces, was foreseeable. The facts are there:
undeniable, stubborn facts. Did not the Armed Forces of
the North enter N’Djamena by force, despite and counter
to repeated appeals for national reconciliation?

48. Now, in response to those who see everywhere the
poisonous tentacles of the imperialist hydra I would
simply say that it is by avoiding ill-feeling and conflictwhether open or hidden-among
its States that Africa
will be able effectively to bar the way to foreign intervention. Very well: Africa for the Africans. But that does not
mean that Africans should go for each other with impunity. Here as elsewhere, aggression always calls for a
counter-offensive. Whoever finds his rights threatened in
- a conflict which ‘he has not provoked should be able to
rely on his friends-indeed,
on all generous parties ready

54. Did they not chase out by force the leaders of the
Transitional National Union Government, on which the
OAU had conferred uncontestable legitimacy through the
Lagos Accord [S/14378, annex IJ? How can one be surprised, then, if the leaders of the Transitional National
Union Government are now trying by force to restore the
power which had been taken away ‘from them by force?
That was only too foreseeable, since it is legitimate. As far
as we know, no organization has denied the Transitional
National Union Government its legitimacy, and precisely
because it still represents the people of Chad no one can
5

call into question its right to ask for assistance wherever it
sees fit to do so.

are those inherited from colonization and are the ills of
young independence, exacerbated by a desire for personal
power.

55. Who is the rebel? That is a question that most of the
speakers who preceded us did not venture to raise. Who is
rebelling against whom? Is it Mr. Goukouni Weddey? Is it
Mr. Hissein Habre?

__
.’__
‘_
‘,‘_
._
‘.‘_
‘_
‘,
_*

62. It is highly regrettable that this fratricidal conflict
could not be restricted to intemal‘dimensions
and that
forces outside Africa saw fit to become involved. The
reasons invoked for that intervention cannot, unfortunately, convince my delegation. Were the agreements on
the basis of which intervention was decided invalid at the
time when the Transitional National Union Government,
legal and legitimate, underwent Mr. Hissein Habre’s
assaults? What is the unconfessed goal of such’intervention? Is it likely to establish that muchdesired peace in
Chad7 Can it make the two enemy brothers sit down at
the negotiating table? Has it not been undertaken solely
with the sinister intention of some to destroy the Libyan
Revolution, which struggles daily for the progress and
independence of its people and other oppressed peoples,
in genuine defiance of the forces of international
_’
imperialism?

56. There are those to whom the answer is not obvious
and who refer to the nineteenth session of the Assembly
of Heads of State and Government of the OAU, held at
Addis Ababa last June as having restored the virginity of
the new leaders in N’Djamena, and for them it will sufftce
to recall that the refusal of the Transitional National
Union Government to recognize the @it accompli was
clearly within the framework of the legitimacy of the
Lagos Accord-predating
by far the convening of the
Assembly.
57. All those elements clearly show the true nature of
the combat now taking place in Chad: it is a fratricidal
struggle. But unfortunately there has been an attempt to
see in this conflict between enemy brothers an outside
hand, that of Libya. In politics-and
not only ,in
politics-it
is true that looking for a scapegoat has ‘often
been a clever strategy.

63. The only real enemies of the African peoples against
which we call for general mobilization are those who deny
them the exercise of their most basic rights. Those who
uphold racism, apartheid and colonialism, those who
exploit and plunder them and keep them in poverty: they
are the real enemies of Africa, and it is against them that
punitive expeditions should rally. Today, once again, the
entire province of Cunene in Angola is occupied by
Savimbi’s puppet troops assisted by the regular army of
South Africa. This act of war, like all other acts of aggres‘sion, has not attracted as much solicitude from those who
are today rushing to the aid of Hissein Habre.

58. The statement here by the special envoy of Mr. Hissein Habre was studded with too many inaccuracies,
untruths and lies [2463rd meeting].
59. Thus it is that my country, the People’s Republic of
Benin, a country which has always and in every way
shown solicitude and compassion towards the martyred
people of Chad, is accused of being a transit point for
mercenaries said to. be recruited .to the service of Libya.
That is a gratuitous, false accusation which my delegation
rejects with all the scorn it deserves. The only interference
which the People’s Republic of Benin would allow itself in
the internal affairs of Chad would be to continue as in the
past to be as concerned as it can be about the fraternal
people of Chad.

64. A double standard. -In imperialist logic, whether a
victim or the aggressor, you will be supported or fought
against, according to whether you .are a puppet or
responsible.
65. The vast sums so generously devoted to weaponry in
Chad will unfortunately not go to feed what remains of its
population. Such generosity is sinister indeed.

60: But, above all, Libya has been accused of aggression
against Chad and of being the.cause of all the misfortunes
affecting chad for over 20 years. On that point I could say
a great deah however, ‘we shall confine ourselves to a few
comments. Did King Idris have some plan of aggression
that he bequeathed upon his downfall to President Qaddati? Has irrefutable. proof been offered by those who
make such accusations? Is Mr. Goukouni Weddey a
Libyan because he asked for and received Libya’s support? If that were so then countries.which served as sanctuaries for Mr. Hissein Habrb and gave him armed
support when he was fighting against the Transitional
National Union Government, which was ,legitimately in
force in N’Djamena, should be the first to be brought
before the Council ,for having supported aggression
against the legitimate Government of Chad.

66. The People’s Republic of Benin has stated and states
once again that a solution to the problem of Chad must
be national and African. The People’s Republic of Benin
is in favour of holding a national conference or reconciliation under the ,auspices of the OAU, the only body really
in a position to consider the problem of Chad. The Council, while making an appeal for an end to the fratricidal
combat, should also call upon forces from outside Africa
to withdraw their contingents and deadly weapons from
that country.

61. No, we should not allow the trees to hide the forest
or appearances that result from a certain state of affairs to
conceal the true situation in Chad. Chad’s real problems

68. The PRESIDENT
(in&pretation /ram French): The
next speaker is the representative of Kenya. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

67.

6

Ready for the revolution.

The struggle continues.

69. Mr. OKEYO (Kenya): On behalf of my delegation
and on my own behalf, I wish to express my sincere congratulations to you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency for the month of August. My delegation is pleased
to see France, the country which you represent in the
United Nations and which enjoys good relations with my
country, presiding over this body’s deliberations. My delegation is confident that your vast diplomatic experience
will enable the Council to discharge its responsibilities to
the international community.
70. I should also like to thank your predecessor, the
representative of China, for the excellent manner in which
he conducted the business of this Council during the
preceding month.

force of general conduct of member States in relation to
each other. These basic principles are also embodied in
the Charter of the Organisation of African Unity and in
the Charter of the United Nations.
77. The Council should, therefore, examine the facts
involved in the conflict and make recommendations that
will lead to the peaceful settlement of the problem currently created in Chad. The Council should not fail to
discharge its responsibility to maintain peace and security
in the world. It should address that responsibility in this
particular case also.
78. The case before the Council today was also seized by
the OAU during the eighteenth session of the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government, at the time that my
President, Mr. Daniel Arap Moi, was Chairman of the
Organization of African Unity. At that time, during the
Assembly, held at Nairobi from 24 to 27 June 1981, the
OAU called for assistance to Chad for it to establish a
national army.3 The African leaders wanted Chad to reestablish the administrative machinery which had been
destroyed during the 17 years of fighting. It was the hope of the OAU to set up a formula that was to contain the
two forces of President Hissein HabrC and Mr. Weddey.
What African leaders had in mind was to conduct a
national referendum and national elections that would
ensure an atmosphere of reconciliation and negotiation.
The African leaders also wanted the OAU to assume the
responsibility of raising funds for the reconstruction’ of
Chad’s economy. This was to be achieved through a
pledging conference organized by both the OAU and the
United Nations.

71. This year, during the month of March [24Z?rh m&tz?zg],the Council was seized of the problem of the border
dispute between the two sister countries of Chad and
Libya. Although my country did not participate at that
time in the debate, it has always been Kenya’s position
that the border dispute should be settled with the guidance of resolution AHG/Res.l6
(I), adopted by the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the OAU
at its first session; held at Cairo from 17 to 21 July 1964,
which states that all member States should respect the
borders existing on their achievement of national independence. That decision was reached after realizing that
nearly every African country was vulnerable to border
disputes. Had we participated in the debate we would
have encouraged that territorial disputes be solved within
the spirit of the Cairo decision.
72. In this respect it is my delegation’s view that all
international agreements concluded earlier in relation to
border conflicts were superseded by Article III of the
Charter of the Organization of African Unity.2

79. With all these African good intentions enumerated
above, we still find the civil war waging seriously in Chad.
It is now the responsibility of this body to find the causes
of these disruptions and bring them to an end. The intervention by Libya in this situation has not made it easier,
and, in fact, has complicated it.

73. My delegation has decided to take part in this debate
because- of the flagrant manner in which the territorial
integrity of Chad has been flouted by Libya, and also
because of our deep concern at the deteriorating security
situation in the northern part of Chad. We decided to
participate in this debate so as to assist the Council to find
a solution to the problem threatening the peace and security of the people of Chad.

80. The OAU’s efforts to bring a spirit of reconciliation
in Chad were frustrated by the negative attitude of the
former President, Mr. Weddey, when he turned down the
OAU’s idea of holding national elections. It is, therefore,
Kenya’s view to suggest the following steps be taken in the
circumstances.

74. The Council has a big responsibility and should
take swift steps which would stabilize the explosive situation in Chad. The international community should act so
as to bring about an atmosphere of good neighbourliness
between two OAU member States, namely Libya and
Chad.

81. First, to condemn Libya’s incursion into Chad’s territory and ask the Government of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, in the spirit of compromise, to withdraw its forces
from Chad Territory, immediately
and without any
conditions.,

75. My delegation finds it quite unacceptable for any
State to violate the principles of territorial integrity of
another State and, therefore, interfering in the internal
affairs of that particular State. We also reject outright the
settling -of conflicts by threats and/or use of force among
States.

.82. Secondly, the Council should make every effort to
devise ways to bring about a government of national
unity in Chad, arranging negotiations that could be undertaken, knowing full well that the Government in Chad is
that of Mr. Habre. My Government feels that in the circumstance of events in Chad, Mr. Habrt has control of
the country as a Government, and we recognize his
Government in that respect.

76. We believe these are the basic principles of intemational relations between States and should be the guiding
7

-

83. Thirdly, Kenya strongly opposes the use of force as
a means of settling disputes; therefore, the Council should
condemn the acts of aggression against Chad.

all the greater since your competence, your qualities as a
diplomat experienced in international relations and your
talents as a seasoned negotiator strengthen our conviction
that the discussions of the Council under your guidance
will be successful. Your concern for justice and your perfect knowledge of international politics, and in particular
of the question of Chad, which is before the Council
today, bode well for a happy conclusion to this debate for
the martyred people of Chad.

84. Fourthly, the Council should employ all means
available to halt any further hostilities in Chad and
endeavour to restore order and to ensure the safety of
civilians.
85. Fifthly, the Council should respond to Chad’s
appeal for assistance in recovering its territorial integrity
in order that it may resume its development programmes
for the people of Chad.

92. I should also like to express the appreciation of the
delegation of.Sengal to Mr. Ling Qing, representative of
the People’s Republic of China, that great country with
which my country enjoys relations of cordial cooperation,
for his wisdom and the effective and commendable way in
which he conducted the Council’s work last month.

86. Sixthly, Libyan military forces in the Aouzou area
should be withdrawn entirely from Chad, and those that
are currently in Faya-Largeau must also be withdrawn.

93. Finally, may I thank you very sincerely and all
members of the Council, for the honour you are all paying
me by inviting the delegation of Sengal to participate in this
debate. In doing this, you have given my delegation an
opportunity to make its contribution to the discussion of
this important item on the agenda, a matter which is ofgreat
concern not only to Africans, because they are directly
involved, but also to the whole of the international community, since failure to resolve thisquestion would doubtless
constitute a serious threat to the stability of the region and a
real danger to international peace and security.

87. It is Kenya’s contention that we cannot live in a
world in which States that consider themselves militarily
equipped to do so can at their own wish, whenever they
like, invade their neighbours and over-run their territories
whenever they feel it in their interest to do so. This behaviour would suggest anarchy and in effect the law of the
jungle, as previous speakers have said.
88. It is inconceivable that an African State can deliberately, without provocation and without being threatened
in any way, literally invade another State by entering its
territory openly, as has been done so far by the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya. Kenya cannot be silent on this kind of
behaviour. We therefore condemn Libya’s attack on
Chad and in this case support President HabrC’s Government and request the international community, and the
Council in particular, to accept their responsibility by calling the Government of Libya to order.

94. As many previous speakers have said, the situation
now prevailing in Chad is clearly a serious threat to peace
and security in that part of the continent. Indeed, at the
same time as seriously threatening the very existence of
Chad as a sovereign State, it could, because of its possible
consequences, basically challenge the fragile balance on
which our States have been based for more than two
decades.

89: The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
should like to inform members of the Council that I have
just received a letter from the representative of Senegal in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item ‘on the agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite that representative to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

95. For reasons of principle, African solidarity and
humanitarian concern, the dark times through which is
passing the fraternal people of Chad-who has known
practically no civil peace for more than 20 years-are for
my country a constant cause of concern. The important
issues at. stake in the conflict prevent our remaining passive or indifferent to that painful problem.

90. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
invite the representative of Senegal to make his statement.

96. The Secretary of State for Foreign’Affairs and Co.operation of Chad yesterday [2463rd meeting] presented a
clear outline of the situation prevailing in his country.
Therefore, our purpose will not be to go into the background of what has now become a war sustained by flagrant interference in the internal affairs of the people of
Chad.

91. Mr. SYLLA (Senegal) (interpretation from French):
Allow me, Sir, before I get down to the matter in hand, to
extend to you on behalf of the delegation of Senegal our
heartfelt congratulations on your assumption of the presidency for the month of August. The long tradition of
historical and cultural bonds between our two countries,
France and Senegal, as well as the excellent relations that
unite them, amply justify the pleasure that we feel in seeing you discharging these lofty functions. Our pleasure is

97. Rather, our contribution will be to take the opportunity given to us by this debate to identify, on the basis of
the de facto situation, the principles which we beiieve
must be .respected if peace is to be restored to that martyred country. To put it in its simplest term, the problem
of Chad can be summed up as follows. A sovereign country led by a legitimate Government, recognized by the
OAU and a member of the United Nations, has been the
victim of an attack from outside.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sylla (Senegal)
took a pIace at the Council table.

8

only if those ,now guilty of interference formally go along
with them. That is another line for Council action.

98. The subtle nature of the interference and the protestations of innocence can in no way change the nature of
the problem. Certainly, citizens of Chad who are opposed
to their Government are participating in this interference.
But, as far as we know, this painful conflict is basically
being sustained from outside.

108. Then we could, as has been requested by the
Government of Chad, reactivate the Ad Hoc Committee
of the OAU on the Chad-Libya dispute, a dispute that we
feel has considerable weight in the present conflict.

99. In fact, some countries which for ideological
reasons-and more likely, for unadmitted interests-have
chosen to challenge the legitimacy of those people of
Chad who are governing their country, in order to benefit
other people of Chad who are refugees abroad, using the
latter to intervene in the country under the cover of a war
that is apparently a civil war but is in fact much more
than that. Information given us by the Government of
Chad and by various independent press bodies confirm
this argument about interference.

109. The lot of the people of Chad is a very sad one. For
more than 20 years they have languished under the yoke
of many bloody struggles, which have been worsened by
foreign interference. Other African countries may share
their lot if the Council does not discharge its responsibility
to see to it that legality is respected in accordance with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. Today
Chad is playing an important part vis-ri-vis the future of
the continent. The challenge is too serious not to be taken
up.

100. Of course any sovereign State can recogniie or not
recognize the Government of another sovereign State, but
it would at the very least be dangerous and reprehensible
to use failure to recognize a country as a convenient alibi
for flouting the sacrosanct principle of non-interference.

110. Some believe that partition of Chad could provide
a solution to the conflict in that country. My country,
faithful to the principles to which it has subscribed within
the OAU and the Uhited Nations, would like to stress
here the particularly serious and dangerous nature of this
current of opinion. We have done so in the past, and we
do so again today. In no circumstances can we go along
with the idea of any partition of an African country. Chad
must be restored to itself and enjoy full territorial integrity
and sovereignty so that finally its people can enjoy its
inalienable right to live in peace and to build a future on
the basis of its own options.

101. Tolerance of such an attitude in the African context would have consequences that are easy to -predict:
chaos and war would for a very long period of time
reduce to nothing the desperate efforts we are conducting
to ensure a decent future for our countries.
102. Thus, since it is concerned with the preservation of
peace and security in our continent, the action of the
Council should, we feel, be aimed at putting an end to
foreign interference and restoring Chad’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity.

111. The PRESIDENT
(inferpretutionfiom
French): The
next speaker is the representative of the United Republic
of Cameroon. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

103. The national reconciliation that some have mentioned is doubtless’8 necessary condition for a return to
peace and stability, but it cannot be brought about-and
we insist on this-without
prior respect for the sovereignty of Chad.

112. Mr. TOW0 ATANGANA
(United Republic of
Cameroon) (interpretation from Eiench): It is, Sir, with
great pleasure that my delegation greets you as President
at a time when this prestigious body is considering, for the
second time in less than six months, the painful problem
of Chad, which is for your Government and mine a
source of serious concern. Given your talents as an outstanding diplomat, your dedication to the independence
of States and to peace, and your dynamic commitment to
the defence of the freedom of peoples, these deliberations
will, we are convinced, have a positive outcome consistent
with the requirements of law and international ethics.

104. While ideological divergencies and ethnic and
regional rivalries do exist in Chad, they should be considered purely internal matters.
105. The Bureau of the OAU, which met on 16 July last
at Addis Ababa, said as much when it expressed its conviction that the future of Chad should be determined
solely by the people of the country.

113. Please allow me also most sincerely to congratulate
the representative of the People’s Republic of China, Mr.
Ling Qing, for the excellent way in which he guided the
work of the Council last month.

106. Once foreign interference has been established, the
international community is, we feel, duty bound to assist
the Government of Chad and help it restore the sovereignty of the State so as to make possible effective exercise
of the country’s sovereignty.

114. I should also like to thank you and the other
members of the Council for the honour you have bestowed on my delegation by inviting it to participate in this
debate, which began on 3 August [2462nd meeting] following a letter dated 2 August addressed to the President of
the Council by the representative of Chad to the United
Nations. In that letter the Government of Chad accused
its neighbour to the north of having undertaken a destabil-

107. Taking up the recommendations of the Bureau of
the OAU, some countries have here proposed dealing
with the most urgent thing first: the cessation of hostilities
and the withdrawal of foreign troops from Chad. My
country feels that these are constructive proposals, but in
the light of experience they can be effectively implemented
9

izing action against it by launching a wide-ranging armed
attack that led to the conquest of several towns in the
north and east of the country. A statement to the same
effect was made here yesterday by the Secretary of State
for Foreign Affairs and Co-operation of Chad, who in the
course of that statement described in detail the seriousness of the situation now prevailing in his country [2463rd
meeting].

ing commendable effortsto restore the national unity and
peace which Chad so dearly needs.
120. As regards the serious situation now prevailing in
Chad, my Government had foreseen such developments
from the beginning and expressed its position in a communique by the President of the Republic on 8 July, which
reads as follows:
“The Government of Cameroon is profoundly concerned at the grave developments in the military situation in Chad, an African country neighbour of
Cameroon. In the face of this new situation, the
Government of-Cameroon, loyal to the principles of
sovereignty and territorial integrity of African States as
proclaimed by the Charter of the Organization of African Unity, reaffirms its conviction that the problem of
Chad must be resolved without foreign interference, by
peaceful means and in respect of lawfulness. It
solemnly appeals to the international community, especially to the members of the OAU, to give the legal
Government of Chad all the support it needs to safeguard the national sovereignty, territorial integrity and
stability of Chad and so that all efforts can be made for
the restoration of peace, national reconciliation and
the reconstruction of that tom country.”

115. The Council therefore has before it a particularly
distressing situation which pits two fraternal countries
against each other, two neighbours that on 6 April last
were invited to resolve their disputes through negotiations
[see S/15688]. We are certain that all the members of the
Council are aware of the importance that the international community attaches to this debate, taking into
account the concern of many States and above all the
weakest among them, which view with concern the
increased tendency to use force and the threat of force in
international relations.
116. We also hoped that the decisions taken at the nineteenth session of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the OAU, held at Addis Ababa last June,
set the most appropriate framework for the search for a
just solution to this painful problem. The heads of State
and Government of Africa unanimously asked all the parties to refrain from any action that might further worsen
the situation. They also asked the Ad Hoc Committee
specially established for this purpose to continue its activities in order as soon as possible to find ways and means of
resolving the dispute.4 But today we see that, on the contrary, the situation has dangerously deteriorated to the
extent that we are once again witnessing on Chad territory
a real war with international ramifications that are highly
disturbing as regards the peace, security and stability of
the region.

121. We expect that the Council will fully shoulder its
responsibilities pursuant to the Charter of the United
Nations and that it will rapidly consider ways of responding to the hopes placed on it by the people of Chad.
122. Sir John THOMSON
(United Kingdom):
Mr.
President, I have no doubt that in my absence on holiday
my delegation expressed to you our congratulations and
our admiration for the way in which you have conducted
the affairs of this Council. May I, on my return, express to
you personally both those congratulations and also perhaps I may be allowed to add my sympathy and commiseration. I do so because I had the experience of presiding
over the Council when it last discussed this question at the
end of March. At that time we had a long, difficult and
contentious debate in which, I must say, the non-aligned
members of the Council played a notable and constructive part. We reached a conclusion. It is, I am sorry to say,
symptomatic of the state of the world and of the attitude
of the world towards the operations of the Council that
that conclusion seems to have been of no effect
whatsoever.

117. The event now taking place in Chad bear no relation to guerrilla operations that sowed destruction and
distress in that country for many years.
118. Today the rebellion, which is taking place against
the legal power in force in N’Djamena, has embarked on
a real conventional war with the use of massive sophisticated weaponry, including different means of assault by
land and air. It goes without saying that this type of rebellion can only use such an impressive arsenal of weapons
with the aid of a foreign Power with large resources. That
unreserved external support for the rebellion, which
gravely undermines the efforts at national reconciliation
supported by the OAU and the Council, has been
recognized.

123. Here we are some four months later with exactly a
repetition of the earlier situation-only
more so, a worse
situation. And perhaps it is simply because I have had the
good fortune to be away on leave and not been bothering
myself about the detailed affairs of the world, but I come
back to the comments of the Secretary-General in his
report on the work of the Organizatiot? for 1982 about
the responsibilities of the Council and about the way in
which we must all take those responsibilities very
seriously. It is something more than just our own national
interests. We have a collective responsibility, if possible,
to solve problems, but, at any rate, to try to ameliorate
them. We cannot expect to do that-and I think this is in

119. Mr. President, I welcome the clarification that you
made yesterday concerning the legitimacy of the present
Government of Chad. 1 shall not deal with the allegations
of some speakers on this point. For my delegation, there
is only one Government in Chad. As was stated on 31
March last in the Council [2428th meeting] by Mrs.
Simone Mairie, our representative, Cameroon maintains
the best relations of friendship and co-operation with the
Government of President Hissein HabrC, which is pursu10

the spirit of the Secretary-General’s
words honestly.
-

report-unless

we use

124. I had not intended to speak this morning. But I
cannot help feeling, as I have listened to some of the
debate, that we do very readily slide into cliches without
considering what they actually mean and without really
thinking about whether we may be applying double standards or different statements to different parts of the
world.
125. My Soviet colleague urged us all to call a spade a
spade. I think that is an excellent principle. But I should
like to recall that at one and the same time he also said
that his Government fully supported the OAU but did
not, it seemed to me, quite support the decision of the
nineteenth session of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the OAU, held at Addis Ababa last June,
on the question of which is the legitimate Government of
Chad. If we are to support fully the OAU, then let those
words mean what they plainly do mean.
126. Then he went on to talk about how his Government fully supported the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, which he rightly said categorically rejected the
idea of spheres of influence. Well, that is an important
statement, but does it apply also to Eastern Europe and to
Afghanistan? Spheres of influence are spheres of
influence.
127. And then he went on to condemn the interference
by the United States and France in the affairs of Chad,
neglecting, I think, to mention that they had been invited
by the legitimate Government of that country. He described as imperialist those actions by those two Governments and as amounting
to the imposition
of a
neocolonial regime. I would have to ask the members of
the Movement .of Non-Aligned Countries, which voted by
an overwhelming
majority
for the resolution on
Afghanistan-I
think 118 yotes in favour-whether
they
do not feel.that to be a rather accurate description of the
situation in Afghanistan.
128. There was not a word about Libyan intervention
Chad.

in

129. I was prompted on the spur of this movement to
make this intervention not so much because of the substance of the situation that we are discussing under this
agenda item, to which I may recur at a later point, but
because, if the Council is to function in the way in which
its founding fathers intended and to which we were called
to our responsibilities by the Secretary-General’s annual
report on the work of the Organization, we really must
use words honestly,
130. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
shall now make a statement in my capacity as the representative of FRANCE.
131. Yesterday the Council heard the statement made
by the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the Government of Chad [2463rd meeting].

Need we recall that his is the Government of a State
Member of the United Nations, that his Government has
been recognized by the OAU and by.the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, that its representative is seated
here at the United Nations and that the Council itself
recognized its legitimacy in its statement of 6 April last
[S/15688].
132. The legitimate Government of Chad has unceasingly expressed its intention to settle by peaceful means
the disputes it may have with its neighbours. Now, it has
just become the victim of outright aggression by a foreign
Power, evidence of which has been clearly submitted,
being subjected, in particular, to repeated heavy bombing’
directed not only at military targets but also at the civilian
populations, resulting in many casualties.
133. The military aggression to which Chad has fallen
victim is of course followed by its aftermath of victims
and destruction. The moving and often staggering descrip
tion of these events has been provided to,me by the Secretary of State of Chad upon his arrival in New York.
134. In the face of the tragic nature and the extreme
seriousness of the .situation, the Government of Chad,
headed by Mr. Hissein Habre, appealed to the French
Government for implementation
of the provisions of the
co-operation agreement signed by the two countries in
1976.
135. In keeping with the commitments it undertook at
that time, and as it was duty bound to, do, France
responded to this appeal according to the conditions that
had been laid down, by adapting and apportioning its
assistance in a manner consistent with the fighting.
.

136. BY resuecting
- its commitments and shouldering its
responsibilities, the French Government is pursuing no
other goal but that of allowing Chad to exercise fully its
right to self-defence, in full conformity with international
law, as enshrined in Article 51 of the Charter of the
United Nations.
137. Indeed, France hopes that the problems of Chad
may be resolved peacefully among Chadians. Hence, we
believe that any foreign intervention directed against the
Government of Chad must come to’ an end and, consequently, that armed intervention from outside must cease.
Such intervention could lead to intemationalization
of the
situation, something which France has always wished to
avoid. It is in this way that it will be possible for the OAU
once again to play its rightful role in this issue, in accordance with the resolution adopted by the Heads of State
and Government at the nineteenth session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the OAU, held
at Addis Ababa last June,’ a resolution inviting the two
parties at war today, which are named in it, to seek
through negotiation a solution of their dispute within the
framework of the Ad Hoc Committee of mediation, established by the OAU.
138. The Government of Chad has urgently appealed to
the Security Council, the organ primarily responsible for

11

the maintenance of international peace and security. This
appeal must be taken into very serious consideration.

ally is the policy of the United Kingdom. The United
Kingdom divided Africa into spheres of influence, giving
itself the biggest chunks. Nor did the United Kingdom
want to leave Africa voluntarily. The Prime Minister of
the United Kingdom, Sir Winston Churchill, said that he
had not become Prime Minister to preside over the dismemberment of the British Empire, and we saw the atrocities perpetrated by the United Kingdom in Africa when it.
did not wish to leave Africa. Suffice it to recall what the
British colonists did in Kenya.

139. I now resume my functions as PRESIDENT..
140. The time is now 1.05 p.m. It was agreed yesterday
that the debate on the complaint by Chad would be considered at this morning’s meeting and that this afternoon
we would resume our consideration of the Libyan complaint. I understand that the representatives of Chad, the
Soviet Union and the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya have all
asked to speak on the present item. As everyone knows, I
have invited the members of the Council and the
Secretary-General to a luncheon; hence I believe it might
be more consistent with the way we should act towards
the Secretary-General and representatives for us to’meet
at 3.30 this afternoon in order to hear these three
speakers.

148. Lastly, I take today’s statement by the United Kingdom representative as a manifestation of that country’s
renewed interest in imperialist spheres of influence in
Africa.
149. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
shall now suspend this meeting until 3.30 p.m.

141. I believe the representative of the Soviet Union
would like to speak on the proposal I have just made, and
I call on him on this point.

150. I recall that the Council agreed to resume consideration of the complaint by the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
today at 4 p.m. We will resume its consideration immediately after we complete our list of speakers on the complaint by Chad this afternoon.

142. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpketation from Russian): Mr. President, I
think that as an objective.person you will allow me to
speak in response to the statement just made by the representative of the United Kingdom.

The meeting was suspended at. 1.15 p.m. and resumed at
4.20 p.m.

151. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
call on the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

143. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): My
concern is to ensure that the debates may remain
within the time-limits set yesterday, bearing in mind also
what I have just recalled. So I believe it would be more
appropriate for us to resume at 3.30 this afternoon, for I
do not see why I should treat ~differently the representatives of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, the Soviet Union
and Chad.
only

152. Mr. BURWIN (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (interpretation from Arabic): Yesterday and again today I asked to
be called upon to exercise my right of reply, but regrettably I was not able to do so because the meeting was
adjourned. Since I am making a statement now, I should
like to present the following observations.

144. Nevertheless, if the representative of the Soviet
Union has but a few words to say, I shall not deprive him
of the pleasure of saying them.

153. Hissein Habrt’s spokesman stated that his presence
here was an indication of legitimacy, but we say that one
of.the reasons for raising the question of the situation in
Chad was to endow HabrC’s regime with legitimacy by
having the Council consider the question. The second reason was to obtain an opportunity to extend the virulent
media campaign that is being waged by the United States
Administration,
the Zionist organizations and South
Africa against the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, using Mr.
HabrC as a tool for that campaign. The Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya pursues a non-aligned policy and supports liberation movements, especially those against the two racist
regimes in South Africa and Palestine. That will certainly
not please the United States.

145. I call on the representative of the Soviet Union.
146. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): When I listened
to the statement of the representative of the United Kingdom, I was amazed at how the member countries of
NATO pass the football from one to the other. ,It seems
the representative of the United States was .exhausted
enough by the fight to allow Sir John to enter the game
full of fresh vigour after his vacation. I must say that the
representative of the United Kingdom did not deny that
the policy of the West in Africa was one of dividing Africa
into spheres of influence. Indeed, it would be difficult to
deny it now after yesterday’s acknowledgement of it by
the representative of the supreme power,. the United
States. However, the United Kingdom representative tried
to attribute these intentions of dividing the world into
spheres of influence to some one else and of course imme.diately departed from the agenda of the Council.

154. We should like to repeat: if Mr. Hissein Habrt is
popular in Chad, why is it necessary for him to be
guarded in N’Djamena by thousands of troops from the
United States, France, Zaire and by European mercenaries? Why are certain eastern areas under his control
guarded by troops and mercenaries from the Sudan that
have left Khartoum to be guarded by Egyptian troops
who are there to protect the regime from the fury of the

147. I shall speak strictly on the agenda item. If we are
talking about spheres of influence in Africa, this tradition12

Sudanese people? Those mercenaries and Sudanese forces
were organized and transported to Chad with the help of
the United States.
155. Who was it that occupied AWcht and Oum Chalouba? None other than the Chad nationalist forces under
the leadership of Goukouni Weddey.
156. The situation in Chad serves only to justify the
return of the colonial Powers to Africa in order to pursue
their policies of hegemony. The tragedy of Chad is a
direct consequence of French colonialism, under which
the people of Chad have languished, as well as a result of
the continuation of France’s policy of intervention.
157. We wonder about the statement concerning the
sending of 680 paratroopers from France for the sole purpose of training;since all available information indicates
that the forces of Hissein HabrC do not exceed 3,000 men,
who are outside N’Djamena. It seems that in the French
military system it is necessary for every four soldiers to
have one member for training. The sending of those
troops cannot be viewed within the framework of the
agreement of co-operation between France and Chad and
is nothing but stark military intervention in the civil war
which is taking place. Why did the French troops not
intervene to stand by the Transitional National Union
Government led by Goukouni Weddey when he was tighting against Hissein Habre? Why~did the French Government state that it would not furnish any help to Chad
before the withdrawal of the, Libyan troops which were in
Chad, at the formal request of a legitimate Government
and according to a treaty with this Government? Why did
France provide Hissein HabrC with equipment and
math-ief? It was so that HabrC could usurp authority after
the departure of the Libyan troops. The information available to US confirms the fact that French troops were sent
to Chad to lead the troops of Zaire in their push towards
the north of Chad in order to confront the forces of the
Transitional National Union Government, after Hissein
Habre lost most of his troops and had only a handful of
mercenaries left.

the racist regime in South Africa is a legitimate
those countries? Of course not.
-

one for

161. Consequently, the Council does not compel any.
State to recognize the- Government of another, because
that is the sovereign right of States, and we in Libya recognize but one Government in. Chad-that
is, the Tmnsitional National Union Government, led by Goukouni
Weddey.
162. Our position concerning. the situation in Chad is
clear in this respect. However, we,are still neutral, as far
as the civil war is concerned. We still stand on the side of
national reconciliation on the basis of the Lagos Accord
[S/Z&78, annex Ij, which has the blessing of the OAU.
We still support the efforts of the OAU in this respect. We
call for the withdrawal of all foreign troops from Chad
and for a halt in the flow of arms to the rebel, Hissein
HabrC.
163. We must rectify the records of the Council with’
regard to claims of the downing of a Libyan aircraft and
the capture of its pilot. The pilot of that aircraft was
actually a member of the Libyan Aviation Club; his aircraft was downed over Chad territory in 1981, and Hissein Habre was able to imprison him. This news was
actually disseminated by N’Djamena Radio and the Sudanese news agency at the time. Hissein Habtt! then freed
that pilot from prison in order to support his allegation
about Libya’s intervention.
164. I should like now to refer to those statements in the
Council attempting to conceal the facts and portray this
incident as a dispute between Libya and Chad. Otherwise,
how could these delegations speak of a Libyan intervention that has not been proved so far and avoid speaking of
the presence of foreign troops belonging to various States
that explicitly declared their intervention in Chad? But it
seems that principles have been ignored because of greed
for American dollars and pressure from the United States,
France and other countries.
/)
165. The Chadian people is not in need of imperialist
interventions. It needs a sincere initiative towards achiev- ing its national reconciliation and putting an end to the
rebellion led by Hissein Habrt, supported by mercenaries
from all over the globe.
_
166. As for the observations and criticisms of the representative of -Zaire, he made inappropriate references to
thievery and thieves. In this respect I shall quote from
certain Western sources, which will serve to give him a
crystal-clear answer.
’
‘,.

158. ,Mr. President, I should like to comment now on
the statement that you made in your capacity as President
of the Council. I wonder whether your statement had
been approved beforehand by all the members of the
Council. As President of the Council, you can quote any
statement or resolution of the Council, but it is not your
‘right to give any explanations of those quotations or statements in your capacity as President of the %ouncil and as
an impartial person. You can, of course, freely express the
point of view of your country as the representative of
France and we would respect it.

167. From Time magazine of 10 January 1983:
“ . . . much of the loan money that flowed in was not
sPent wisely . . .
_

159. ,I should like to state here that my country does not
recognize the observations th~at- you made yesterday as
President; we consider those observations to represent the
point of view of France only.
-.
160; In this respect, would a statement from the Council
mentioning African countries and South Africa mean that

“Worse still, corruption percolates through the
regime. ‘It is widely accepted’, a U.S. Senate Foreign
Relations- Committee staff report completed in March
noted, ‘that he [Mobutu] has matiged to amass a
13

.

legendary personal fortune at the nation’s expense.’
Kickbacks are the order of the day, with the President’s
cronies controlling significant slices of the economy.
‘It’s the greed of,a handful at the top that keeps this
country in an economic mess’, says one Belgian businessman. Complains one of Zaire’s former financial
advisers: ‘We had great hopes but they are all gone. It
is a country that makes people dream and then makes
them go crazy.’

favouritism to cronies and to members of his minoritv
tribe, profligate spending and indifference to the piight
of his people. ‘He has been head of State for 14 years,
and how many hospitals has he built? Not one*, said a
Zairian businessman.
“Instability is a way of life. Twice in the past ‘three
years Zairian exiles in Angola-supported
by Cuba and
Russia-invaded Shaba. The Zairian Army pilfered and
ran. Only with the help of Belgian, French. . . [and other]
troops were the invaders repulsed.“*

“Businessmen are not the only people to despair. In
1978, the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) sent
Erwin Blumenthal, formerly a top official of West Germany’s Bundesbank, to take over as the director of
Zaire’s central bank. Time has obtained a copy of the
secret report he wrote to IMF Managing Director
Jacques de Larositre early last year. In it, Blumenthal
describes refusing high offtcials’ requests for bundles of
cash of up to $50,000, finding a government payment
of $4 million to a Belgian professor who was the guardian of Mobutu’s son, and uncovering a discrepancy of
$32.6 million between what was supposed to be in the
government’s bank accounts abroad and the money
that was actually there.

170. That is the subject of thievery and corruption
imputed to the leadership in my country by the representative of Zaire. In this respect I wish to say that Colonel
Muammar Qaddafi, Leader of the Revolution in my country, does not have special private accounts in Switzerland
or in any other country and does not tour the capitals of
Europe and America accompanied by concubines, but
devotes his time to the interests of the Revolution and of
his people.
171. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
The Council has heard the statement of the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, who challenged the
comments of the President of the Council. This is a
serious matter. Nobody has the right to call into question the acts of the Council.

“Blumenthal left Zaire in 1979. But he continued his
investigations in Western Europe, obtaining from
former Zairian Prime Minister Ngum Karl-I-Bond,
now living in exile, the estimate that Mobutu’s private
fortune exceeds $4 billion. Most of it was said to be
held in Swiss bank accounts . . .“*

172. As President of the Council yesterday, I only
reminded you of the reality of the acts of the Council,’
and all members of the Council can bear witness to this.
Consequently I cannot possibly, as President of the.
Council, accept the statement made on this subject by
the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.

168. From The Wall Street Journal of 26 June 1980:
“David J. Gould, a University of Pittsburgh professor
who did a 1977 field study here, says he interviewed
businessmen large and small who were paying a total
of $100,000 a month in bribes to the regional commissioner of Shaba Province. The man’s salary was $2,000
a month.’

173. I should also like to point out that a statement of
this kind made in a debate on a complaint by the
Government of Chad calling into question the legitimacy of that Government leads to an absolute internal
contradiction.

“So the commissioners stay loyal. High-ranking
officers in the military are said to have their arrangements too. At the lower levels of the military, soldiers
are more or less licensed to steal.“*
169.. From The New York Times of 11 November

174.

Speaking now as the representative of FRANCE.

175. I will not dignify with a reply any shameless falsehoods that call into question acts of the Council.

1979:

176.

“Essay question for student diplomats: ‘You are the
ambassador to a large, once-prosperous African State
nm,by a dictator installed with the help of the Central
Intelligence Agency. Widely feared, he presides over
corruption and mismanagement which have brought
his people to the brink. of starvation* . ., .

I now resume my function’of

PRESIDENT.

177. Mr. NGUAYILA
MBELA
KALANDA
(Zaire)
(interpretation from French): We have just heard the representative of interventionist Libya, which is meddling in
the affairs of Chad and which wants to reach out and
meddle in the affairs of Zaire too.

6‘
.

.

178. I challenge anyone who read the verbatim record to
show me any reference on my part to “theft” in Libya.
Yet the representative of Libya comes to the Council like
a snake cut in half-the head on one half and the tail on
the other. The head cries out: “I am going to bite you, I
am going to bite you”-even though a dead snake cannot
bite. That is all the Libyan representative is doing; hemhas:
no arguments. He talks about corruption in my country,

.

“The economy is a shambles, with foreign debts of
nearly $4 billion, more than 100 per cent inflation and
an annual per capita income under $160 . . . His many
critics charge the President with personal corruption,
*Quoted in English by the speaker.

14

about foreign accounts, the unequal distribution of goods
and property in my country. I ask him simply: Are Zairian troops in Chad at the request of the Government at
N’Djamena or not? What about the Libyan troops: Are
they in Chad at the request of the N’Djamena Govemment? He will not be able to reply to that. I will give him
time to think it over; perhaps he will send a cable to
Tripoli so that we can have a reply.
179. There was talk of hunger and famine in Zaire, of
a debt of $4 billion. I do not know whether he has followed
the evolution of the world’s economy or reads the reports
of the IMF to learn how many countries have debts of
that magnitude. Is Zaire at the top of the list? Does he
want to be given a list of the African countries that are
in debt? What about friends of Libya? How much does
Libya give those countries to pay off their debts? Evidently, it is the Islamic Legion. In fact, he is right.

185. This being the case, it will be recalled that when the
representative of Qaddafi yesterday ran out of arguments
he confined himself [2463rd meeting] to reciting out of
hand, as he has just now done again, a series of articles
from United States newspapers which, he claims, deny
that his country has directly intervened militarily in Chad.
As far as I am concerned, I will not subject the Council to
such a boring exercise. I will simply quote a small passage
from an article in this morning’s edition of The New York
Times which says exactly the oppos,ite of what he claimed.
The passage reads as follows:
“A Western military expert said that 50 Libyan
planes had strafed the oasis [of Aouzou], pinning down
its defenders, as troops supported by armoured vehicles pushed toward the town.“*
186. This is what it says in The New York Times, which,
according to the representative of Libya, should be denying the participation of his country in the genocide it is
now committing against the people of Chad. The article
casts a bright light on the overt, unprovoked aggression
by Libya against Chad.

180. Reference was made to a mansion built by my
President with national funds. I thought he wanted to talk
about Libyan funds and not about national funds, but I
shall .not reply to him: it would not be of any use.

187. I turn now to the matter of the Libyan aeroplane
which was shot down on 5 August 1983, at Faya-Largeau,
whose pilot was presented to the public on 8 August at a
press conference. During that press conference, the pilot
stated clearly before the international community that his
plane had been shot down at Faya-Largeau during a 12plane bombing raid on Faya-Largeau [S/Z5928, annex].
The Libyan representative should not come here and
mock us by echoing his country’s official press agency,
which said that the pilot had supposedly been captured
during fighting in 1981. Where did this fighting take place
in 1981? And why would the Government of Chad present the pilot to the public only now if the fighting was in
198 l? Did this pilot tell the members of the press where he
had been kept for those two years? No, I do not believe
this is a serious matter. It is well known that he was a
member of an aviation club and that he was a combat
pilot who had been trained in a number of countries. How
could he not be a military man? He named the countries
where he had been trained. He also stated that he had
been taken prisoner during the Faya-Largeau operation
during the present month of August. We can make available recordings of this press conference; they prove the
level of the Libyan representative’s mendacity.

18 1. He likes to use newspaper clippings, as he did yester-’
day, from certain years. Well, in 1979, which is a year he
mentioned, did Zaire interfere in the affairs of Chad? When
he spoke of what was described in a 1979 article in The New
York Times, was that supposed to mean that Zaire was in
Chad then to occupy a part of it, looking for money
there-that
because we have debts we went to Chad to
exploit that country’s riches? He cannot say that. We are
paying our debts. As my representative said on 3 August,
“when you want to stop a naked madman, you must be
dressed yourself because if you are not you will be considered a madman yourself’ [2462nd meeting, para. 621.
182. That, I think, is my last response to the representative of Libya.
183. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
representative of Chad has asked to speak in exercise of
the right of reply, and I now call on him.
184. Mr. BARMA (Chad) (interpretation from French):
Indeed, the representative of Libya mocks the Council,
which, under the terms of the Charter of the United
Nations, however, is the principal body responsible for
the maintenance of international peace and security. I
think that it is serious that the representative of a Member
State of the United Nations should be able with impunity
to mock such a prestigious body charged with maintaining peace the world over. Newspapers are read by everyone and the representative of Libya is not telling us
anything new by reading out selected cuttings. I do not
think the members of the Council need the representative
of Colonel Qaddafi to play the role of press attache. I
think that all missions here in New York have their own
press attaches who deal with this.
*Quoted

in English

188. This morning the representative of the Soviet
Union too made a statement concerning the complaint of
Chad. I did not really intend to reply to his statement, but
I should like to point out to him that the Soviet Union at
present maintains military bases in a dozen countries, and
that it is basing its nuclear missiles in countries bordering
on the West and stockpiling large numbers of MiGs,
artillery and other conventional weapons in countries
where it has been ,able to ‘impose its authority so as to
make them the spearheads of social-imperialism.
The
Soviet Union will tell the Council that this is merely the
result of agreements of friendship and defence it has concluded with those countries. We would reply to it, then,
that it is the result of those same types of agreements that

by the speaker.

,

15

we have appealed to friendly countries, which have been
kind enough to respond to our appeals. We are not surprised that the Soviet Union can completely gloss over the
genocide now being committed by Libya against the
people of Chad. It’s a secret to no one that Colonel Qaddafi is only stirring up trouble on behalf of Soviet expansionism in Africa.

Coast is experiencing economic difficulties and asserted
that. its position regarding the question of Chad was
formed by some sort of promises of assistance from the
United States. I should like simply to ask the representa-’
tive of Libya to name some developing countries-or
even developed countries-which
are not experiencing
economic difficulties right now. We could, as a matter of
fact, begin with Libya itself.

lg9. I should like to refer to the statement made by the
representative of Benin. As he unfortunately did last
March the representative of Benin, my brother, Mr.
Soglo, has once again taken up the cause of Libya, and he:
is the only one to do so. This is understandable once we
know the nature of the relations between his country and
Libya. We can see that Colonel KCrekou, who came to
power and stays in power by force, and his representative
might advocate the use of force to destabilize Chad. This
is truly an unfortunate, sad thing from an African
country.

195. Libya was a very poor country, and we know that
its financial resources are not the result of any effort on
the part of its people. That is the reason why it can be so
lavish in its generosity to others. The Ivory Coast knows
the value of effort.
196. -The Ivory Coast co-operates with all countries of
the world: with Western countries, with the United States
and with others-we have no reproach to makeincluding Arab countries which cooperate in the building
of hydro-electric,dams in the Ivory Coast. Moreover, the
Ivory Coast is not a country which accepts political
strings when it receives co-operation.

190. At any rate, the representative of Benin is not in a
very good position to speak of legitimacy, and the Council is not here to discuss the legitimacy of the Government
of Chad. That is a question which does not arise here; the
very serious matter before the Council concerns open
aggression in flagrant violation of the Charter of the
United Nations, of the Charter of the Organization of
African Unity and of the principles of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries. That is what the Council is discussing, not legitimacy. The representative of Benin has
been unable to call into question the legitimacy of the
Government of Chad either in the Movement of NonAligned Countries or in the OAU, so he ought not to try
to do so here in an attempt to divert the attention of
world public opinion from the real problem: Libyan
aggression. The Council should take appropriate steps to
put an end to that aggression.
.

197. There is a wise man in Africa who says there are
two kinds of incurable madness. The first is that of a rich
man who suddenly becomes poor: he becomes incurably
insane. The second is that of a very poor man, who has no
resources whatsoever and suddenly becomes a millionaire
or a billionaire: he becomes. incurably insane. Unfortunately, it is the second case which has occurred on African
soil, which explains the support for so-called national lib
eration movements in Asia, in Latin America-more
or
less everywhere.
198. I think, as the representative of Chad said yesterday [ibid.], Libya is trying to divert the Council’s attention
from the true subject of debate. HOW can this man who
left N’Djamena without even a suitcase and apparently
crossed the frontier explain that a few months later he
returns with a squadron of aircraft, MiGs, and an armada
of tanks? That is what we should like to find out here.

191. President K%kou,
his tutor Qaddafi and their
maitre-chanteur here-an instrument of blackmail; unfortunately: the representative of Benin-have
no business
trying to teach us lessons about legitimacy. All Africa-generous, humanitarian Africa-is ashamed of the representative of Benin and history will judge him and the
other so-called revolutionaries.

199. I think everything is quite clear. What we have to
do is identify an act of aggression: I think there is irrefutable proof of that, of Libyan aggression against Chad.
What we are asking is that this be recognized by the Council and that we not put on the same footing the aggressor
and the victim of aggression.

192. -As we have already stated, Libya excells in-the art
of falsehood and diversionary tactics. If lies were eliminated, there would be no more Qaddafi, and no more of
his representatives.

The meeting rose at ‘5.05 p.m.

193. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
representative of the Ivory Coast has asked to make a
statement. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

NOTES

’ Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-seventh Session,
PIenary Meetings, 32nd meeting;para.
210.
z United
Nations,
Treatv Series, vol. 479, No. 6947.
3 A/36/534,
’ A/38/312,

1?4. Mr. ESSY (Ivory Coast) (interpretation. from
French): In his statement yesterday evening [2463rd meeting], the representative of Libya observed that the Ivory

an&x
annex,

II, iesolutioh
AHWRes.102
resolution
AHG/Res.l06

(XVIII)/Rev.l.
(XIX).

’ Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-seventh Session.
Supplement No. 1 (A/37/1).

‘16

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UMES

Les publications des Nations Unies sent en Verne.dam les librairies et les agences d@ositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous a : Nations Unies,
Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAK l-IOJW%iTb
H3&4EMR
OPPAHH3AHHH
OFb~~IX
HAL@iH
kimmix Opran~3anmt OB~emrnemmtx Hat@ MOXEO XymTb
B KHmHb1x
Mara3WHax
H aremmax
no Bcex pafto&w
hmpa.
HasomiTe
crrpanroi 06 ~3~amiRx
B BaIJIeM ionfmxo~
mrasme
mm
rmmme
no aztpecy: Opran~3a~um 06~emmernibxx
Hasutt, Cexmra no
nponaxe ~3Aa~fiTi,
Hbro-fiopx
m m XeHeBa.
COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLXACIONT3S
DE LAS NACIONES
UNIDAS
Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas est&t en venta en librerlas y cams distribuidoras en
todas partes de1mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirfjase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

MJ400

9040205-October

1991-2,050
