S/PV.6510 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6510th meeting
Wednesday, 6 April 2011, 3.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Holguín . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Colombia)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Vukašinović
Mr. Kipman
Ms. Li Jijuan
Mr. Pecassou
Mr. Mandoukou Ombegue
Mr. Eick
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Assaf
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Kravchenko
Ms. Dye
Ms. Sheard
Mr. Cenzer

Agenda
The question concerning Haiti
Haiti: A renewed commitment by the international community
Letter dated 31 March 2011 from the Permanent Representative of Colombia
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2011/218)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (S/2011/183)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-29077 (E)

*1129077*

S/PV.6510 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.40 p.m.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to
remind all speakers to kindly limit their statements to
no more than four minutes in order to enable the
Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Nicaragua.
Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): Allow me, first and foremost, to thank
your country, Madame President, for having convened
this important meeting on the situation in the sister
Republic of Haiti. On behalf of the President of
Nicaragua, Commander Daniel Ortega Saavedra, I also
wish to convey a warm greeting to President René
Préval. I also welcome the presence of the Special
Representative of the Caribbean Community for Haiti,
Mr. Percival James Patterson, and I thank the
Secretary-General and his Special Envoy for their
respective briefings.
The history of the Haitian people continues to be
one of great suffering and martyrdom. From the
suppression of the independence movement led by the
heroic Toussaint Louverture to the tragedies of the
political and military intervention of various Powers
and the many natural and human disasters, Haiti
continues to face the demons of its past and the equally
daunting challenge of eradicating poverty and
achieving its right to development.
It seems that it took last year’s devastating
earthquake for the international community as a whole
to understand the pressing need for reconstruction on a
new basis and the fact that without development, in the
broadest sense of the word, the dream of a better future
for the Haitian people would remain a fantasy. Now
that the emergency and the time for compassion have
passed, we have somewhat forgotten that Haiti remains
in intensive care. The focus of the international
community’s assistance must change radically.
Nicaragua finds it surprising that, following five
peacekeeping missions in Haiti, it is still thought that
Haitian problems can be resolved without really
tackling the inherent problems of development facing
the country. We are doing the people and Government
of Haiti little service by maintaining a peacekeeping
mission, whose cost amounts to $854 million, without
adopting a holistic approach to underpin international
solidarity for Haiti.

2

The time has come to move from compassionate
rhetoric to concrete acts, to honour all pledges and to
genuinely launch a Marshall Plan for Haiti’s
reconstruction on the basis of Haiti’s requirements and
in full respect of its sovereignty, without impositions or
conditions on the part of donors. In that regard, we do
not understand why it would not be possible to
mobilize and disburse the $14 billion that, according to
the Inter-American Development Bank, are needed for
that reconstruction. At the end of the day, that
$14 billion only represents 1.45 per cent of the cost of
the war in Iraq. Such efforts can obviously not be
coordinated within the Security Council, but through
the General Assembly or the Economic and Social
Council.
After the earthquake, despite Nicaragua’s limited
resources, President Daniel Ortega Saavedra did not
hesitate to respond immediately to the needs of the
people and Government of Haiti by providing teams of
civil defence doctors specialized in medical care in
emergency situations, who undertook more than 25,000
medical interventions in a single month. We continue
to offer our tireless solidarity to the people of Haiti and
the new Haitian authorities. We will further strengthen
our efforts so that the scourges affecting Haiti will
vanish from the daily lives of its people.
In addressing this matter, Nicaragua cannot fail to
mention the exemplary solidarity shown by the heroic
people and Government of Cuba, which once again
demonstrates that, with political will and a deep-seated
sense of solidarity, despite the unjust blockade, we can
help when we want to.
Nicaragua would like to conclude by paying
tribute to the selflessness of the staff of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti in fulfilling their
duty.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Spain.
Mr. Yàñez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
On behalf of Spain, I would like to take advantage of
this opportunity to express our gratitude to the
delegation of Colombia for convening this open debate
on the situation in Haiti. The decision to hold this
meeting at such a high level is the best indication of
the importance that the international community
attaches to development in that country. We wish to
welcome in particular the participation of President
Santos Calderón, President Préval of Haiti, former

11-29077

S/PV.6510 (Resumption 1)

President Clinton of the United States and United
Nations Special Envoy for Haiti, and our
Organization’s Secretary-General.

my country supported the work of the verification
mission and sent 20 election observers to the second
round.

All of us gathered here are aware of the crucial
stage that will soon begin following the announcement
of the final results of the presidential and
parliamentary elections that have just been held in
Haiti. In recent decades, the Latin American and the
Caribbean region has successfully strengthened
democratic regimes, based on the rule of law, while
achieving new levels of prosperity and social progress.

The post-electoral scenario will continue to call
for our presence among the Haitian people. In this
sense, Spain has contributed to MINUSTAH since its
establishment in 2004 and is resolutely determined to
continue supporting the Mission as long as necessary.
For this reason, we co-sponsored last year’s resolution
1944 (2010) extending MINUSTAH’s mandate, and we
are determined to continue to provide a Spanish police
contingent to the Mission.

Haiti cannot continue to be the exception. The
traditional fatal outcomes in that country cannot serve
as a justification for a reversal of the process of
consolidating democracy and reconstruction. For this
reason, the international community has forged a
decisive compromise with Haiti, represented by the
United Nations, the Organization of American States
(OAS) and the Group of Friends, to mention but a few.
The mandate of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the organization of
last year’s conference were the results of that
commitment to strongly supporting the rebuilding of
the country following the devastating earthquake of
January 2010.
I would like to express my appreciation for the
ideas and suggestions contained in the concept paper
distributed by Colombia for this debate (S/2011/218).
Spain believes that only a legitimate Government
resulting from elections can assume the responsibility
to lead Haiti in the framework of a difficult process to
rebuild the country. It is also very important for the
international community to continue to support the new
Haitian authorities. Sustainable solutions for the people
must be developed in all areas: political, social and
development. It is essential to help the country build its
own capacities and thereby avoid indefinite
dependence on external partners in a process that the
Haitian authorities and citizens should maintain.
Spain is committed to this endeavour at both the
multilateral and the bilateral levels, from humanitarian
emergency assistance to collaboration in the
reconstruction process, assistance to the electoral
process, and efforts to establish the rule of law. In
order to ensure smooth progress in the Haitian electoral
process, Spain deployed 10 observers in the
OAS/Caribbean Community electoral observation
mission during the first electoral round. Furthermore,

11-29077

MINUSTAH began with a mandate focused on
peacekeeping, security issues and stabilization. Its
unique role became evident after last year’s tragic
earthquake. The presence of MINUSTAH was revealed
to be decisive given the magnitude of the catastrophe
and the failure of Haitian institutional mechanisms,
which were decimated by the disaster. Consequently,
MINUSTAH should continue its essential work and
take an integrated approach, together with other United
Nations bodies in the field, by reinforcing its support
to institutional consolidation and economic and social
development. Its presence in the field and the promise
of stability are crucial to facing the challenge of
rebuilding the country and ensuring ongoing
international cooperation.
The Mission has also proved its usefulness in the
preparation and holding of elections. Furthermore, the
Mission’s work is key to meeting such outstanding
challenges as the resettlement of internally displaced
persons and the establishment of the rule of law,
including the armed forces, the judicial and
penitentiary systems, the strengthening of judicial
security and the protection of human rights.
Spain’s presence was already significant before
the earthquake as the third-largest bilateral donor in
Haiti. Spain has the greatest interest in contributing to
the coordination of the international community’s
efforts in the rebuilding and strengthening of the
Haitian authorities’ capacity to lead the process, in
close coordination with the Interim Haiti Recovery
Commission led by the Prime Minister and United
Nations Special Envoy Clinton.
At the conference that took place in New York on
March 2010, Spain promised to contribute €346
million to the rebuilding process from 2010 to 2013.
This amount is being channelled, inter alia, through

3

S/PV.6510 (Resumption 1)

contributions to the multilateral Haiti Reconstruction
Fund, cooperation with Inter-American Development
Bank and direct cooperation with the Haitian
authorities.
We must be aware that the success of
MINUSTAH and the United Nations as a whole will
also depend on a positive perception of its work on the
part of the Haitian population. We must all therefore
redouble our efforts to broadcast the positive results
that the Mission has achieved for the country. The
Spanish Government reiterates its support and
appreciation for the work performed by MINUSTAH,
and welcomes the Mission’s ongoing activities and
renewed momentum. I also wish in particular to
express Spain’s gratitude for the extraordinary work of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and head of MINUSTAH, Mr. Edmond Mulet.

the Caribbean States in Venezuela are emblematic of
that policy. Similarly, the Bolivarian Government
further promotes bilateral relations with all countries of
our region, including Colombia, on the basis of
solidarity.
Venezuela’s cooperation with Haiti increased
following the disastrous earthquake of 12 January
2010. But, as President Préval has noted, Venezuela
and the countries of ALBA-TCP were already present
in the country of Pétion at the time of that tragic
natural phenomenon. Among other things, we wish
here to underscore that the generous cooperation of the
Government and people of Cuba in Haiti has been
exemplary. This morning, Minister Bruno Rodríguez
Parrilla provided ample details of his country’s and
ALBA’s solidarity with, and assistance to, the Haitian
people.

In spite of all the difficulties, the establishment of
a new Government in Haiti is an opportunity to begin
anew, as stated by the Secretary-General in his recent
semi-annual report on MINUSTAH (S/2011/183*). The
people and Government of Haiti can rest assured that
Spain will do whatever it takes to make it a reality.

Following the earthquake, the Government of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela issued its plan for
the solidarity and contribution of ALBA countries to
efforts to rebuild Haiti. That plan set out eight steps in
various areas for the long, medium and short terms, to
which I would like to refer briefly.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.

In the area of health, Venezuela has made an
initial contribution of $20 million to Cuba’s medical
mission, with a view to expanding health plans begun
in the context of the Cuba-Venezuela-Haiti tripartite
agreement.

Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, I congratulate you,
Madame, on Colombia’s assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council this month and on your
Government’s initiative to convene this open debate on
the current situation in Haiti. The challenges facing
that brotherly Caribbean country are enormous in the
context of its reconstruction and in overcoming the
age-old structural problems inherited from the age of
colonization, neocolonialism, despotism and political
oppression.
I reaffirm Venezuela’s commitment to Haiti. Our
country’s participation in all initiatives to promote
Haiti’s comprehensive development is ongoing. The
foreign policy of the Bolivarian Government shares a
new vision for Latin America and the Caribbean that
strongly promotes humanist integration processes. The
Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our AmericaPeoples’ Trade Agreement (ALBA-TCP), Petrocaribe,
the Union of South American Nations (UNASUR), and
the soon to be created community of Latin America and

4

With regard to financial support, we have
established the ALBA humanitarian fund for Haiti,
funded with an initial Venezuelan contribution of $50
million. The fund provides financing for social
organizations from voluntary financial contributions
from member States and from corporations, including
the Venezuelan companies Petróleos de Venezuela and
Citgo.
In the area of energy, Venezuela cancelled Haiti’s
$405 million debt to Petrocaribe. In addition, on an
ongoing basis, we frequently guarantee Haiti direct
humanitarian fuel supplies for 45 health centres’
electrical plants throughout the country.
With regard to agricultural and nutrition
initiatives, the ALBA agricultural commission has
distributed corn seed donated by Venezuela’s National
Agricultural Research Institute.
On education, since 2006 Venezuela has hosted
174 Haitian students to attend university courses in

11-29077

S/PV.6510 (Resumption 1)

various areas of interest related to the development of
their country. In addition, since the end of 2009, with
Venezuelan financing, Cuba has provided technical
advice for the Yes I Can literacy programme.
On migration, we have regularized the
immigration status of Haitian citizens in ALBA-TCP
countries. In July 2010, Venezuela granted residency to
855 Haitian men and women.
With regard to reconstruction, we have build 128
low-income housing units in the Village Renaissance
area of Cité Soleil in Port-au-Prince.
In the areas of security, transport and logistics, at
the time of the original emergency, the Venezuelan
company Citgo guaranteed the transfer of supplies,
materials and equipment for reconstruction plans. That
included 679 tons in food supplies, 127 tons of
equipment, 120 tons of tents and 225,000 barrels of
gasoline and diesel fuel.
Venezuela has joined solidarity efforts promoted
by the Union of South American Nations by providing
technical and political assistance for the country’s
reconstruction and by contributing to the development
of an inclusive, participatory and equitable
development model. Venezuela has also supported the
establishment of UNASUR’s technical office,
including its plan of action.
Our country believes that efforts aimed at
achieving the long-term sustainable development of the
fraternal country of Haiti should be based on the
principles of solidarity, complementarity and
reciprocity. In that regard, there is a need to implement
a development policy that replaces the paternalistic and
economically driven vision. Such a policy should be
carried out in a sovereign manner by the Government
and people of Haiti, who are aware of their own reality
and needs. Full respect for institutions and elections
legislation, in the context of a sovereign institutional
reconstruction process in Haiti, constitutes an essential
precondition to achieving political stability.
There can be no development without peace and
stability; nor can there be peace and stability while
there is hunger, poverty and illiteracy. Achieving social
justice and eradicating poverty are the two main
challenges facing Haiti at this point in its history. The
Government and people of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela are prepared to continue to contribute to the
achievement of those noble objectives.

11-29077

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Granguillhome Morfín (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): On behalf of the Government of Mexico, I
would like to express our gratitude for the invitation to
participate in this debate convened by the Government
of Colombia. The moment could not be more
opportune, given the conclusion of the second phase of
the current electoral process in Haiti. Mexico hopes
that it will be concluded successfully, with full
observance of the law and respect for institutions. We
hope this will be a new stage in the democratic life of
the country.
The earthquake in Haiti and the devastation that
ensued was an unprecedented challenge for the
international community, given the scope of the
destruction and the subsequent epidemic. The
earthquake also revealed the weaknesses of
international development assistance. In reply to one of
the questions raised by the presidency, the international
response to the earthquake and the epidemic could
have been more efficient and effective.
As soon as the tragedy occurred, we in Mexico
set up an emergency air bridge to deploy rescue
personnel and approximately 15,000 tons of
humanitarian assistance. In both the emergency
response and reconstruction stages, Mexico became
involved in the greatest effort at international
cooperation in the history of its foreign policy.
We carried out innovations in modalities for
cooperation and established the public-private Mexican
Alliance for Haiti, to which the Mexican Government
provided $8 million for projects to strengthen
institutions and carry out health and education
initiatives. In addition, six Mexican private foundations
provided an additional $3 million for those purposes.
Moreover, in coordination with the Haitian Ministry of
Health, the Government of Mexico is building six
multi-purpose clinics in various camps for displaced
persons.
In providing assistance to Haiti, Mexico has
observed the increasingly accepted principles of
harmonization, complementarity, ownership and, of
course, sustainability. Mexico’s assistance programmes
and projects in Haiti attach special attention to creating
capacities and strengthening institutions, which are
necessary conditions for achieving lasting and effective

5

S/PV.6510 (Resumption 1)

solutions, as pointed out by Colombia’s presidency in
its concept paper (S/2011/218, annex).
During its recent membership of the Security
Council, Mexico advocated for the Council to act
immediately and decisively to address the emergency
caused by the earthquake and strengthen the activities
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). Also in the Council, Mexico
emphasized the close link that exists between
development and security in putting in place measures
to address the conflicts on the Council’s agenda,
including the case of Haiti.
The Government of Mexico is pleased, therefore,
to welcome the Colombian proposal aimed at
strengthening MINUSTAH’s mandate by adding a
development component to the security component.
The recent presidential and legislative elections in
Haiti represent a new opportunity to create a political
framework that would include the economic and social
instruments necessary to promote development in
Haiti. This is an opportunity to move forward in the
area of political and democratic stability, which would
lead to greater international support in terms of
cooperation as well as greater trade and investment
flows to support the reconstruction process and the
long-term development of that country.
The long-term reconstruction and development of
Haiti remain a tremendous challenge for the country
and for the international community as a whole. The
international community must continue in this great
undertaking on the basis of the interests and priorities
of the Government and the people of Haiti. It is also
crucial to enhance the coordination of international
cooperation and related processes so as to make them
more effective and efficient. Mexico will continue to
be committed to this task.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. José Miguel Insulza,
Secretary-General of the Organization of American
States.
Mr. Insulza (spoke in Spanish): Madam
President, I wish to thank you, President Santos
Calderón and your Government for having invited us to
participate in this meeting of the Security Council on
the question of Haiti.
As members of the Council are aware, since
August 2010, the Organization of American States

6

(OAS) and the countries of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM) have had a joint electoral observation
mission in Haiti with the goal of monitoring all aspects
of the electoral process.
This observation mission, the first such joint
mission, is part of the efforts of the OAS to support the
strengthening of the rule of law and governance in
Haiti, which, we hope, will ultimately lead to the
creation of a more permanent institution for organizing
future elections in that country. The joint mission is
also an example of the importance of coordination
among the various international actors in Haiti,
including the United Nations, through the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
and the representatives of the Friends of Haiti, the
OAS, CARICOM, and, of course, the international
financial institutions, especially the Inter-American
Development Bank.
As noted by the chief of the mission, Ambassador
Colin Granderson, the elections of 28 November 2010
took place in circumstances that were not very
propitious, as we all are aware. It is important,
therefore, that we give proper credit to the President of
Haiti, Mr. René Préval, who, in spite of all of the
difficulties encountered, never prevaricated with regard
to the need to ensure that the elections took place on
the agreed date, as democracy must prevail over any
difficulties that may be encountered.
Of course, there were problems surrounding the
first round of elections, and we all are aware of the
efforts that were made to facilitate a resolution of that
crisis.
The second round of elections, held on 20 March
2011, were better organized and were conducted in a
more peaceful atmosphere. We had a second electoral
mission of more than 200 observers who were
deployed in the field, in addition to the other activities
that our mission was coordinating.
One of those challenges — and this is reflected in
the mission’s first report — involved the preliminary
results that were announced by the Provisional
Electoral Council, which were confirmed on 16 April.
Haiti will have a new President and once again a
peaceful handover of power, which is the hallmark of a
democratic process. Once again, as we heard this
morning, President René Préval will play a leading role
in this peaceful transition.

11-29077

S/PV.6510 (Resumption 1)

Thus a new chapter begins in Haiti. This will not
be an easy chapter, as it will focus on the many
political challenges that the country and its new
President will face in terms of State power divided
between two branches of Government. The preliminary
results indicate that the parties that lost or which did
not participate in the presidential elections will hold
the majority in the two houses of Congress, which has
to approve the nomination of the new Prime Minister.
There is therefore a need for ongoing political dialogue
among all relevant actors, which is a prerequisite for
effective governance. This is an area in which we will
continue to support the efforts made by Haiti working
together with the Caribbean community through
CARICOM.
This is easier said than done. Not only are the
parties from different ideological persuasions, but the
divisions created by the recent elections are obstacles
to reconciliation. However, good governance will
require a new approach to politics in terms of seeking
out a compromise and a consensus between the
executive and legislative branches that will lead to
stability and promote a successful reconstruction
process. It will also be necessary for the various
interests to find expression and to contribute to the
progress of society, moving forward as one and not as
disparate, feuding groups.
It is therefore all the more important that there be
a dialogue, so that the international community can
continue to support reconstruction efforts, which are
critical. To that end, as has been said here, Haiti must
lead its own recovery process, with a clear vision as to
what the Haitian people need for their future and the
reconstruction of the country, on the basis on an
agreement among the political powers.
We have heard here some of the concerns
regarding the involvement of the Interim Haiti
Recovery Commission (IHRC) with respect to its focus
and operations. There are concerns about the limited
resources that have been disbursed vis-à-vis the funds
that were pledged to the Haiti Reconstruction Fund,
and about an apparent shift in the approach of countries
and institutions towards an approach that is aimed
more at bilateral planning and use of resources than at
coordination. This, perhaps, may not bode well for
addressing the priorities identified by the Haitian
Government in its long-term action plan.

11-29077

With a new President to be inaugurated shortly, it
is therefore crucial that the working methods of the
IHRC be reviewed in order to ensure that the priorities
of the Haitian Government are met on an urgent basis
during the remainder of the life of the Commission.
At this time, I wish to reiterate the call on the
international donor community to provide the funds
that were pledged to the Reconstruction Fund and, to
the largest extent possible, harmonize their bilateral
activities, as well as the input of non-governmental
organizations, with the priorities of the Government of
Haiti.
Statements have been made recently on the
advisability of maintaining or modifying the character
of MINUSTAH. We have no doubts about the need to
extend its presence, because we believe that it is
essential for maintaining the peaceful and stable
environment that is necessary for reconstruction. But
the international community has to be able to act in a
more coordinated and orderly fashion and must direct
all its resources to achieving goals that are decided
upon by and with the Government of Haiti.
Most Haitians and many of their leaders are under
the impression that a large part of the resources are not
really being spent in Haiti and are not being spent to
meet its people’s needs. That impression must be
dispelled through fast, coordinated and transparent
action. In that regard, we welcome the statements made
by former President William Clinton with regard to the
manner in which the resources in the Reconstruction
Fund are to be channelled.
The OAS is willing to support Haiti in the
promotion of a policy of dialogue and compromise, in
the strengthening of institutional governance, and in
the creation of an effective public sector. Equally
crucial in this phase is to work together with the
Government in order to further develop the cadastral
infrastructure project, which was recently submitted to
the IHRC for approval. In addition to the ongoing civil
registry project, which is almost complete and the first
phase of which we are implementing, we are working
on a joint project with the Electoral Council; the
cadastre project is also crucial in order to strengthen
the rule of law in Haiti. It is also the basis for
economic progress through investment, as order and
predictability in the area of property rights and land
ownership are essential contributing factors to ensuring

7

S/PV.6510 (Resumption 1)

economic development and reconstruction as well as
foreign and internal investment.
The time is ripe to re-establish trust between
Haiti and the international community. That trust was
apparent in the months immediately following the
earthquake of 12 January 2010, but it was severely
tested in the aftermath of the first round of elections. In
the new chapter unfolding in Haiti, we hope that we
will join forces for the democratic development of that
dear country.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Luis Alberto Moreno,
President of the Inter-American Development Bank.
Mr. Moreno (Inter-American Development
Bank) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to focus my
statement on the recent work of the Inter-American
Development Bank (IADB), and recall what was said
by President Santos — that this is the time to think
about the long term. I think that now, over a year since
the earthquake, there is no doubt that this is the phase
that we are in.
I would like to start by expressing my great
gratitude to President Préval. There have been
earthquakes and hurricanes in Haiti, but during his
presidency, democracy prevailed. I believe that this is
one of his great legacies for the future, in addition to
many other things. I would also like to say that, in the
period preceding the earthquake and even earlier, the
Inter-American Development Bank, which has worked
in Haiti for over 50 years, had significantly increased
its contributions to Haiti in the form of donations.
Exactly a year ago, with the increasing capital
provided by the IADB, we became one of the major
donors in Haiti. Thanks to a large contribution from
Latin American countries, the IADB has earmarked
$200 million a year to Haiti for the next 10 years,
along with debt forgiveness of almost $500 million.
This obviously provided us with a very broad range for
action and allowed us to create an action group devoted
exclusively to Haiti. Today, we have over 50
professionals in Port-au-Prince, enabling us to carry
out very important work there and complement the
efforts of other donors. I think this was one of the best
experiences that we could have had following the
earthquake, thanks to the establishment of the Interim
Haiti Recovery Commission (IHRC).

8

In this way, we support a long-term vision. I
would also like to mention briefly a few of the sectors
in which we have been working. There are six priority
sectors where we have been working with different
donors, in addition to the contributions of the IADB.
These areas are infrastructure, transportation, water,
sanitation, energy and education. On this last issue, I
would like to highlight one of the great visions of
President Préval. For many years, he has been working
on the first education policy to include all Haitians. In
this context, there is one important fact. In Haiti, 80
per cent of education is private, and of course the
quality varies according to the school; more important,
however, is the fact that about 1.2 million children do
not have access to education today.
Thus, our Bank will initially contribute $250
million to this very ambitious education programme,
involving $2 billion over the next five years; we have
also managed, with other donors, to come up with
another $250 million. I say this because we are
basically making direct transfers to teachers, making
use of best practices and really generating profound
change in Haiti.
The third issue is related to infrastructure. When I
recently met President Préval, just after his election, he
told me that he would like to start in Jérémie, go
through Port-au-Prince and arrive in Cap-Haïtien. I
think that we could have achieved that if it were not for
the earthquake. The most important lesson here is that
there are many ideas but few projects. How we carry
out projects is one of the main issues. I think that, here,
the work with the IHRC has been crucial. For example,
on roads, we have worked with the Canadian
Government and IADB resources, as well as with the
European Union, with which we have basically been
working along these lines.
There is also the issue of private sector
development. Here, before talking about this issue, I
would like to mention something else concerning
education. We sometimes forget that the earthquake
destroyed almost 50 per cent of the schools in Haiti,
but today many students are still going to school. I
think this is something that is very important to
highlight. It is very easy to speak negatively about
Haiti, but many positive things are happening there.
The other matter that I wish to raise concerns the
development of the private sector, which I believe is
one of the most important issues. When President

11-29077

S/PV.6510 (Resumption 1)

Clinton was appointed United Nations Special Envoy
for Haiti, we organized, well before the earthquake, a
conference for investors. More than 600 investors
attended it, many of whom were from the Latin
American region. Now, thanks to cooperation provided
by Spain, we have a fund that should support the
development of small and medium-sized businesses;
the fund now totals over $60 million, with a component
that includes extensive training.
We must also take into account the fact that
95 per cent of companies in Haiti are informal. On the
other hand, we are working on a project that has been
referred to here and that I would also like to highlight.
In northern Haiti, there is an industrial park that should
create 20,000 jobs. In today’s world, any president of
any developed country would be pleased to inaugurate
a project that would generate 20,000 jobs. This is going
to happen within the year, when we conclude the
arrangement with the United States Government, the
IADB and a Korean investor. We hope that this type of
initiative will continue, because we think that the
development of the private sector in a country like
Haiti is absolutely crucial.
I would also like to tell you, Madame, that we are
working with the National Federation of Coffee
Growers of Colombia to develop coffee production
involving Haiti. Haiti cultivates coffee on a large scale,
which has been neglected for some years. Furthermore,
thanks to Coca-Cola, today a brand of mango juice is
being distributed in the United States and Canada. This
has made it possible for the IADB to organize 25,000
mango producers, and Coca-Cola is buying all their
products.
To conclude, I note that we have also worked
with the Union of South American Nations
(UNASUR). The Bank has established an account to
which many UNASUR countries have made
contributions that have gone directly to the
Government of Haiti. Of course, we also work with the
Organization of American States. We are partners and
brotherly institutions within the inter-American
system.
Finally, I would also like to acknowledge the
work that has been done by Prime Minister Bellerive
and President Clinton with the Interim Haiti Recovery
Commission. I believe that, given all the complexity in
Haiti, the fact that they have been able to bring
together all the different donors has made it possible to

11-29077

start speaking more about projects and less about ideas;
those projects, of course, will be the main challenge.
But the most important thing is that these have been
developed in the context of a strategy that, in the final
analysis and as has been reiterated several times here,
originated with the Government of Haiti.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Special Representative of the Caribbean
Community for Haiti.
Mr.
Patterson
(Caribbean
Community):
Colombia deserves the highest commendation for its
timely initiative to promote this open debate of the
Security Council on the question concerning Haiti. I
regard it as a singular privilege to have been invited by
the President of the Security Council to participate in
this debate and to share insights as the Special
Representative of the Heads of Government of the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM) — a community
of 14 sovereign nations, including Haiti.
We gather here 15 months after an earthquake
that killed, maimed and dislocated unprecedented
numbers of the population of Haiti, decimated the
economy and destroyed large sections of the natural
and built assets of that country. And yet, two days ago,
despite the formidable challenges of holding elections
during the turmoil and turbulence associated with such
severe catastrophe, the Provincial Electoral Council
was still able to announce the preliminary results of the
national elections. The outcome is a testament to what
can be achieved through partnership. President Préval
is to be applauded for his steadfast position and
courage to ensure that there has been no interruption of
the democratic chain.
The incumbent leadership of Haiti, the operators
of the electoral system and political contestants,
working together with an array of external support
from international and regional organizations and a
number of committed nations, all combined to
overcome formidable odds. This represents a victory
for democracy that must not fail to be rewarded with a
premium to enhance the success of reconstruction
efforts during this phase of democratic transition and
throughout the tenure of the new political
Administration.
When the action plan for the reconstruction of
Haiti was adopted by the international community here
at United Nations Headquarters in March 2010, we
proclaimed with great fanfare that it was to be led,

9

S/PV.6510 (Resumption 1)

steered and driven by Haiti. The action plan was
posited on four main pillars: territorial, economic,
social and institutional. No one can question that these
four sectors are mutually reinforcing and vital to
optimum development. But if Haiti is really to exercise
leadership in the process of reconstruction and the
development of its people, we only delude ourselves if
we expect the Government of Haiti to deliver its full
share in the absence of adequate administrative
capacity.
Before the earthquake, Haiti’s institutional
capacity was admittedly weak, and it was further
decapitated by the disaster. The restructuring,
strengthening and building of Haiti’s institutional
capacity are the lynchpins that lie at the heart of any
plan for national recovery and sustainable
development. CARICOM regards strong, robust and
flexible institutional capacity as a sine qua non for
sustainable development, good governance and
security.
The reinforcement of the capacity of the Haitian
State is therefore now of the utmost urgency. The pace
of progress will be retarded and the most immediate
priorities of Haiti will remain at the bottom of the
ranking unless the State has the requisite administrative
and technical capacity, as well as access to the
necessary financial resources, to provide the public
with goods and services that are unquestionably the
responsibility of all States.
The Caribbean Community has decided to
concentrate its direct support to Haiti in the area of
institutional development and augmentation by making
available experienced personnel in different areas of
governmental administration, providing opportunities
for training in areas of high need, and helping to
establish regional standards in such areas as the
establishment of a building code, as well as regional
standards for goods and professional services. We seek
to work with United Nations agencies and hemispheric
groupings that have expressed an interest in working
with us in these areas.
We will need to avoid duplication. Our ultimate
goal must ensure that, when the Interim Haiti Recovery
Commission’s mandate expires, the Haitians have the
tools and the capacity to continue on their own. Now
more than ever, the people of Haiti are entitled to see
tangible democratic dividends that have a significant
impact on the quality of their lives, in particular

10

durable shelter for the internally displaced and access
to basic services, which include water and sanitation,
as well as the provision of jobs.
Throughout its existence, CARICOM has
maintained the inseparable links between governance,
security and development. Social and economic
development are tightly interconnected with security,
stability and the rule of law. The recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/183*) is a useful document
that highlights the important role played by the United
Nations and the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) so far. Within that context, the
Community endorses the view that we have reached the
juncture where MINUSTAH must be guided in order to
become even more actively engaged with the United
Nations agencies in supporting and strengthening the
core structures and capacities of Haiti. This should
extend beyond security and stability to embrace
support for strengthening the institutions of that State
in order to accelerate economic, social and territorial
rebuilding.
We believe that the current MINUSTAH mandate
is sufficiently wide and flexible to permit, without
requiring any change at this time, a better coordination
of resources with those from other sections of the
United Nations system and to allow it to be the key
development partner in assisting the Government to
address the critical areas of reconstruction and
development.
The time has come to turn all our weapons into
ploughshares and to contribute to the realization of the
bold strategy approved 15 months ago, which will
result in the economic, social, political and institutional
development of Haiti. The mission statement must be
to enable Haiti to stand firmly on its own two feet and
to move forward to fulfil its manifest destiny.
While we recognize and appreciate the
accomplishments so far, we are concerned that the
pledges made by the international community have
fallen short and that the inflows to the Haiti
Reconstruction Fund have been insufficient to make a
visible impression on the ordinary Haitian as another
hurricane season draws nigh. We contend that there is a
compelling need for greater coordination between the
multilaterals, the bilaterals and the non-governmental
organizations in order to fulfil the urgent needs and
priorities of the Government of Haiti and its people. If

11-29077

S/PV.6510 (Resumption 1)

nothing
else,
the
presidential
statement
(S/PRST/2001/7) will, we hope, serve to that end.
Members may rest assured that CARICOM
remains determined to work for Haiti as we seek, with
the help and support of the international community, to
rebuild and develop the most populous State within the
single Caribbean Community to which we belong.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the Colombian presidency of the Council for
having convened this open debate. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2011/183*) on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). I further wish to
express our respect and admiration for former
President Bill Clinton, United Nations Special Envoy
for Haiti, and for my compatriot Edmond Mulet,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General’s report before us leaves
no doubt about the gravity of the situation in Haiti. It
appears that this country, in addition to its longstanding problems as the least developed country in the
hemisphere, has over the past 15 months encountered a
perfect storm caused by various factors — some manmade, others natural disasters — that have become
truly daunting obstacles. Yet, as the report concludes,
today Haitians and the friends of Haiti have the chance
to make a fresh start. Guatemala is among those
friends. Haiti is in our neighbourhood and we share
common challenges and aspirations. For this reason,
along with many other Latin American countries, we
have committed a large contingent of peacekeepers and
peacebuilders to MINUSTAH.
The fresh start to which I have alluded will
require a concerted effort on the part of Haitians
themselves, beginning with the formation of a new
Government following the elections held two weeks
ago. It will also require a concerted effort on the part
of the international community, beginning with
honouring the pledges made in this very building
almost exactly a year ago. And it will require a
concerted effort on the part of the United Nations.
While it is clearly much too early to begin to discuss
an exit strategy for MINUSTAH, it is to be hoped that
that moment will also arrive. The fact is that, for now,
it is essential to maintain a substantive international
military and police presence on the ground, as has been

11-29077

obvious from the wide range of support activities that
the Mission provides. We would like to convey our
gratitude to Mr. Edmond Mulet and his colleagues for
the outstanding work that they have done in
exceedingly difficult circumstances.
Before 12 January 2010, the Mission had been
entering a period of consolidation. A renewed effort
will be needed in the coming year, with the Mission
continuing to help the Government to preserve the
stabilization progress made before the earthquake and
to ensure a smooth transition to long-term
consolidation. Much of that renewed effort can be
achieved by strengthening the existing mandate, paying
particular attention to the rule of law, security sector
reform and ending impunity.
The new beginning also stems from the electoral
process. We welcome the recent presidential run-off
election, take note of the preliminary results and await
the final results. A new Administration will provide an
opportunity to tackle the numerous and complex
challenges facing Haiti, with the support of the
international community. Our collective effort is as
much about the transformation of Haiti as it is about its
reconstruction. In that regard, we urge the international
community not to waver in its support and to act in a
coordinated fashion in accordance with the priorities of
national authorities.
In conclusion, I wish to may tribute to President
René Préval, who, in spite of all the difficulties he has
faced, is leaving his country with great potential for
recovery and a transition towards both greater
development and greater democracy, for which we are
most grateful.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Waxman (Israel): Allow me to congratulate
you, Madame President, on Colombia’s able
stewardship of the Security Council this month. I
would also like to thank Colombia for organizing this
timely and important debate on the question of Haiti.
I wish to join previous speakers in welcoming
President Préval to today’s debate. I would like to
express my admiration for the strength and resilience
of the Haitian people, which continue to inspire my
country and countless others around the world.
Today’s debate highlights the progress that we
continue to see in the recovery of the Republic of Haiti

11

S/PV.6510 (Resumption 1)

following the tragic and devastating earthquake of last
year. It also makes clear the many challenges that lie
ahead in this effort. From the moment that the news
broke about the tragedy, Israel resolved to assist in
whatever way it could. As such, within three days of
the earthquake, Israel had already deployed more than
200 personnel to Haiti, including Israel Defense Forces
search-and-rescue, forensic and medical teams. Israel
rapidly constructed and operated a field hospital in
Port-au-Prince, with the capacity to treat more than 500
patients daily. In total, the hospital treated more than
1,000 patients, performed 317 surgeries` and delivered
16 babies, including three by Caesarean section.
When international efforts moved from the phase
of rescue to recovery, Israel’s National Agency for
International
Development
Cooperation,
in
consultation with the Government of Haiti, began to
develop projects specific to the needs of the people of
Haiti. As part of that effort, just last week, a team of
Israeli and Haitian contractors began the construction
of a new trauma unit at the Hôpital Justinien in CapHaïtien. A joint venture between the Israeli
Government, the Office of the Haitian Prime Minister
and the Haitian Ministry of Health, that collaborative
effort will bring a modern trauma centre to the people
of Cap-Haïtien. The centre will offer high-quality
medical care for trauma and other emergency medical
needs and provide important surge capacity in the
unfortunate case of future disasters. In addition to
supporting the construction of that trauma unit, the
Government of Israel will provide the medical
equipment and specialized training necessary for the
hospital’s staff to operate this unique centre.
Israel has also played a part in the
intergovernmental peacekeeping efforts in Haiti that
followed the tragedy, deploying a police unit to
participate in the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti. As the first deployment of its kind by Israel,
the unit consisted of 14 Israeli policemen with
specialized capabilities in crowd control. Israel’s police
officers served under Italian command — the first
international formed police unit to participate in a
peacekeeping mission.
Israel believes that promoting democracy and
stability remains a crucial component for advancing the
process of full recovery in Haiti. We welcome the
preliminary results of Haiti’s second round of elections
as an important step in that effort. Israel will remain
closely engaged with the authorities in Haiti and with

12

the international community in order to play our part in
a sustained and comprehensive recovery process that
will build a bright and prosperous future for the
Haitian people.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Kodama (Japan): At the outset, I wish to
express my deep appreciation for the condolences and
support offered by many Member States and
international organizations, as well as people from all
over the world, to the people and Government of Japan
following the devastating earthquake and tsunami.
Since last year’s earthquake in Haiti, the Haitian
people have made determined efforts to address many
challenges similar to those that the Japanese people
now face. I strongly believe that Haiti and Japan will
overcome
these
difficulties
through
mutual
encouragement and the assistance of international
partners.
We welcome the fact that the final stage of the
presidential election last month was largely peaceful
and conducted without significant confusion. Japan
assisted the Government of Haiti in implementing the
elections through logistical support and by supplying
election observers. We hope that the President’s
inauguration will proceed smoothly and that the new
Administration will begin work immediately to address
the many challenges ahead. Japan intends to establish
close cooperation with the new Administration in order
to accelerate the reconstruction efforts in Haiti.
As all members are aware, the final results of the
presidential elections will be announced by the
Provisional Electoral Council on 16 April. We would
like to stress that all political actors have a solemn
responsibility to call on their supporters to remain
calm, refrain from violence and resolve any electoral
disputes through established legal mechanisms.
We commend the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the troop- and
police-contributing countries for their efforts to
maintain relative calm in the security situation in Haiti.
We also welcome the fact that the operational
performance of the Haitian National Police has
generally improved. At the same time, there are some
concerns about the occurrence of sexual violence
around camps for internally displaced persons (IDPs),
the increase in gang activities and the presence of
escaped inmates from collapsed prisons. In that regard,

11-29077

S/PV.6510 (Resumption 1)

we further encourage MINUSTAH to make every effort
to maintain a secure environment and to provide
sufficient capacity-building support for the Haitian
National Police.
In addition, the Haitian Government must ensure
a durable socio-economic foundation through efforts to
strengthen the rule of law in order to achieve
sustainable development. In Haiti, the needs for
capacity-building support in the area of the rule of law
are still considerable. The various contributions by the
international community should be continued. It is also
essential to appropriately ensure ownership for the
reinforcement of the rule of law. In that regard, we
wish to underscore that all international partners
should coordinate their efforts closely with the Haitian
Government, and that the Government itself must make
a further commitment to these efforts.
In addition, the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral on MINUSTAH (S/2011/183*) mentions that
the United Nations will conduct a comprehensive
security assessment in Haiti in the near future. We look
forward to learning the outcome of the assessment, as
it will have a major impact on decisions regarding the
future mandate and scale of MINUSTAH.
At this juncture, more than a year after the
earthquake that devastated Haiti, we recognize that
reconstruction efforts must be further accelerated
through comprehensive measures, including the
rebuilding of infrastructure, the creation of
employment and support for State institutions. In that
regard, we encourage MINUSTAH to continue to
utilize its capacity for the reconstruction of Haiti.
The Government of Japan has dispatched Japan
Ground Self-Defence Forces to MINUSTAH, who have
made a contribution to the reconstruction of Haiti by
engaging in tasks such as the removal of rubble,
levelling ground for IDP camps, road repairs, the
construction of orphanage facilities and water
distribution efforts in response to the outbreak of
cholera. The Government of Japan has also provided
assistance,
in
cooperation
with
international
organizations, in providing temporary housing, taking
measures against infectious diseases and distributing
food.
Japan has pledged $100 million for Haiti, which
has already been implemented or disbursed, including a
contribution of $30 million to the Haiti Reconstruction
Fund. The remainder of the pledge has been

11-29077

authorized. I would like to stress that the quick
disbursement of pledges by all relevant partners is
highly encouraged for the early reconstruction of Haiti.
Let me conclude by providing assurances that
Japan, together with the international community, will
continue to provide maximum support far Haiti’s
efforts towards reconstruction and stabilization.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Shin Dong Ik (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like express my appreciation to you,
Madame President, for having organized this
meaningful open debate on the question concerning
Haiti.
Following the destructive earthquake of January
2010, Haiti is now showing signs of recovery and
reconstruction, and seeing a semblance of normalcy
return to daily life. Our task is to ensure that this
continues while we simultaneously do everything we
can to facilitate security, humanitarian relief,
institution-building and political and economic
development.
With regard to the political situation, my
delegation was encouraged by the announcement, on
4 April, of preliminary electoral results by the
Provisional Electoral Council, which provided
evidence of the spirit of peace and fair play in Haiti.
My delegation hopes that the results of the final tally,
due on 16 April, will be accepted by all parties
involved, so that Haiti can move forward into a new
era of leadership and development in the post-quake
era.
In the same vein, strengthening the rule of law
and building institutions across the board is imperative
for the long-term security and development of Haiti.
Indeed, reconstruction and humanitarian programmes
in Haiti must be pursued with a view both to promoting
a sustainable security situation and furthering
economic, social and political development. It is
therefore essential that peacekeeping, peacebuilding
and sustainable development be pursued by a parallel
approach that takes into account the various challenges
of institution-building.
Institution-building in Haiti must ensure that
basic national capacities are restored at the earliest
possible juncture in order to stabilize the delicate postdisaster situation. The rule of law, effective governance

13

S/PV.6510 (Resumption 1)

and security-sector reform are the areas that require the
highest priority.

maintaining peace and security and leading the way in
recovery and reconstruction efforts.

We must also take into consideration the
complementary relationship between development and
security. As the Council recently concluded,
underdevelopment is a root cause of insecurity and
conflict. Taking a broad approach to political insecurity
that takes economic and social factors into account can
yield results.

My delegation is extremely concerned by the
recent report of the Secretary-General on MINUSTAH
(S/2011/183*) and reports by non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) on Haiti that detail widespread
incidences of rape and sexual violence occurring
within camps for internally displaced persons and the
broader community. We urge the Haitian Government,
as well as the Department for Peacekeeping Operations
and NGOs on the ground, to do their utmost to protect
vulnerable women and girls within the camps.

My delegation believes that development in Haiti
continues to require the engagement of a variety of
stakeholders, including the United Nations, the
international financial institutions and civil society. By
harnessing our collective efforts to promote sustained,
long-lasting development today, we can tackle the root
causes of Haiti’s security concerns of tomorrow.
One tangible way that this can be pursued is to
actively focus on creating employment opportunities
for young people. This would allow many young
people options beyond joining armed groups and
resorting to crime, which are often the only providers
of immediate wages and sustenance. As such,
development, and economic development in particular,
must be undertaken in a sustained, inclusive and
equitable manner.
The Korean people and Government have the
utmost sympathy for the Haitian people in the
aftermath of the devastating earthquake and the
subsequent humanitarian crisis. We take note of the
overwhelming international response following the
quake and the many improvements that have been
implemented to provide basic necessities such as water,
food, temporary shelter and medical care. In that
regard, the Korean Government and private sector have
contributed more than $47 million to provide postquake humanitarian relief to support key reconstruction
projects, such as strengthening the basic health
infrastructure, improving the water supply and
providing job training.
Beyond humanitarian contributions, Korea also
dispatched a 240-strong engineering company to the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). The company is currently active in the
Léogâne area of responsibility, one of the hardest-hit
areas of the country. At the present juncture, Korea is
focusing on providing targeted relief in the areas of
debris removal and completing road construction. We
commend MINUSTAH for its invaluable role in both

14

As noted in the report of the Secretary-General,
the United Nations initiated an operational plan to
increase women’s security in August 2010. This is a
step in the right direction, but problems persist in the
reporting of crimes of sexual violence, data collection,
the climate of impunity and the overall lack of
institutions. These hinder the rule of justice in finding
and prosecuting perpetrators of such crimes.
As we move from post-disaster humanitarian and
security relief to long-term reconstruction, it is
imperative that the international community remain
resolute in doing everything it can to strengthen Haiti’s
capacities. In the near future, however, the
international community is still needed to provide
additional direct assistance, particularly in the areas of
shelter, sanitation and ensuring adequate supplies of
clean water. The mobilization of the international
community in the immediate aftermath of the quake
was heartening and unprecedented, but we must
continue to stand with Haiti in the critical months and
years to come.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Honduras.
Ms. Flores (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to praise the sensitivity shown by the
Council in addressing this issue. It is an honour for my
delegation to participate in this open debate of the
Security Council on Haiti, a nation that is close to us in
geographical terms, but even more is a sister nation in
sentiment because its people has been shaken by
countless afflictions that are all too familiar to us. We,
like them, have also experienced the upheaval of
political polarization, the pain of scarcity, the burden
of economic underdevelopment and the bitterness of
inequalities. We have endured persistence poverty and,
if that were not enough, we have also suffered the

11-29077

S/PV.6510 (Resumption 1)

tribulations of natural disasters. We therefore
understand the stoicism required to face their struggle
and draw strength from weakness, as well as the fibre
of the spirit that enables them to overcome adversity.
Today, we come together to reaffirm our moral
support and our commitment to accompanying that
noble people struggling to rebuild. They have shown
great commitment to picking up the pieces after the
destruction, rebuilding their nation economically,
institutionally, socially and politically, and striving at
the same time to heal their wounds and dry the tears of
grief in the wake of disaster.
The task is far from small and the journey has
hardly begun. What is most grievous about these
misfortunes is that, while the generosity of
compassionate hearts flows immediately after disaster,
as time passes and the initial shock lessens, the world’s
attention is captured by other equally stunning and
touching news.
We do not wish to imply that all that has
happened in Haiti has already been forgotten. We
simply acknowledge that the sense of urgency recedes
as each day goes by, but the mountain of needs does
not. The same enormous problems persist and the
agony of the Haitian people as they rebuild their lives
does not abate. The hope eclipsed by disaster must be
addressed and strengthened now, as it was at first, by
continuous acts of solidarity and commitment, such as
today’s Security Council meeting, which serves as an
ineluctable reminder of what happened there and of the
challenges that still lie ahead. We agree with the
assertion of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/183*) that the international community must
continue to provide support. We join the Council’s
appeal for a concerted effort of all international actors
to achieve these goals.
It is striking that, after having selected 14
projects for the reconstruction of Haiti, at a projected
cost of some $300 million, that country has still not
received and therefore cannot spend $224 million —
75 per cent of the estimated need — to carry out those
projects. The report clearly states that those projects
relate to education, jobs, agriculture and health care —
among the most important areas that need to be
addressed.
According to the figures of the Economic
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, at
the end of 2010 Haiti’s foreign debt was 12 per cent of

11-29077

its gross domestic product. A country battered as Haiti
was cannot bear such a heavy burden. The best way for
the international community to help is to forgive the
debt of a nation that today is going through the most
difficult time in its history.
It should not be forgotten that solidarity begins
with the idea that the suffering of a father, mother or
child has no nationality or borders. The cries of a baby
in a suburb of Port-au-Prince, in a barrio of
Tegucigalpa, in a favela of Rio de Janeiro, in the villas
miserias of Buenos Aires, in the callampas of
Santiago, in the ciudadela of La Paz or in the chabolas
of Madrid are heard in Berlin, New York, Beijing and
Moscow. There is no first, second or third world. The
differences end where solidarity begins, because we are
all inhabitants of the same Planet Earth.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Acting Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Serrano (spoke in Spanish): Allow me first
to thank the Colombian presidency for having
organized this open debate of the Security Council.
With President Santo and you, Madame, presiding over
this meeting, the very impressive participation of
senior ministers and other dignitaries, and the
important messages that we have heard today underline
the importance of maintaining sustained and solid
support for the Government and the people of Haiti
with a view to helping them overcome the major
challenges before them. Consequently, I would like to
reiterate to President Préval of Haiti, who is with us
here today and whom I welcome, the commitment of
the European Union to these objectives.
I shall read out an abridged version of the
statement of the European Union. The official version
is being distributed as I speak.
The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Iceland and
Montenegro; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate countries
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia; as well
as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia align
themselves with this statement.
The year 2010 was a very difficult and tragic one
for Haiti and its population. It was also a year in which
the international community, including the European
Union, demonstrated its solidarity and stood beside this

15

S/PV.6510 (Resumption 1)

Caribbean country. Our presence today is also a
demonstration of our firm commitment to restoring the
political and social stability of Haiti. In this context, I
would like to focus my statement on three main
themes.
I will first discuss political stability. The ideas of
political stability, peaceful transition, reconstruction
and growth are tightly interlinked. The second round of
elections that took place three weeks ago and the
preliminary results announced on Monday are decisive
steps towards the objective of achieving the longawaited political stability in Haiti.
The European Union urges the national
authorities and political stakeholders to step up their
efforts so that the electoral process can rapidly reach a
successful conclusion. The establishment of a new and
legitimate political leadership capable of responding to
the aspirations of the Haitian people is a crucial
element in the reconstruction and development of the
country.
The second aspect I would like to stress is
security. As the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/183*) points out, despite the fact that the
statistics can sometimes be somewhat unreliable, the
country has been shaken by a large number of violent
episodes, including crime related to drug trafficking.
The most vulnerable populations, including women and
children, have been the hardest hit and the main
victims of the climate of insecurity.
In this context, the European Union supports the
crucial role played by the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti. We welcome the extraordinary work
of its personnel, beginning with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Edmond
Mulet. In the same way, we firmly support efforts to
strengthen the capacity of the Haitian National Police
in order to guarantee law and order and the rule of law
throughout the national territory.
The European Union awaits the next report of the
Secretary-General, which will look very closely at the
challenges that remain.
Lastly, I would like to refer to development
assistance. In March 2010, the European Union, in a
joint effort with its member States, pledged more than
$1.6 billion in aid to Haiti, along with $350 million
that it had already contributed in humanitarian
assistance. The European Union’s cooperation

16

contributed significantly to renewing the basic
activities of State administration and to ensuring the
coverage of priority needs, in particular through direct
budget aid to the social sectors.
We are ready to do more. The European Union
and its member States are currently working on a joint
programming exercise on a strategic approach to
cooperation with the Europe in Haiti until 2013. We
continue to focus on direct budget support for
decentralization, infrastructure development, rural
development and the health and education sectors.
We also acknowledge that, in terms of
coordinating international assistance, despite the
progress that has been made, we can do more and we
can do better. Although the establishment of the
Interim Haiti Recovery Commission was a step in the
right direction and ensured progress in terms of
coordination, we must not forget that the main
objective is to strengthen the capacities of the Haitian
Administration so that Haitians themselves can assume
full responsibility for reconstruction efforts as soon as
possible. Without national leadership in those efforts,
there will be no sustainable development in Haiti. The
European Union is ready to step up its assistance along
those lines.
Let me conclude by reaffirming the urgent need
for a national consensus among the political actors in
Haiti that clearly identifies reconstruction and
development priorities. It remains up to the Haitians
themselves to lead the way beyond this difficult period.
The European Union looks forward to working closely
with the newly elected national authorities, as it has
done with the current administration. At the same time,
we will continue to support the Haitian people in their
efforts to build a stable and prosperous future.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. McNee (Canada) (spoke in French): I would
like to start by thanking you, Madame, and the
Colombian delegation for having organized this debate
on Haiti. I would first like to thank President Préval for
his statement and for his work and contribution to
strengthening Haitian democracy. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General and the United Nations
Special Envoy for Haiti, President Clinton. I would
also like to acknowledge the contribution made today
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General

11-29077

S/PV.6510 (Resumption 1)

for Haiti, Mr. Mulet, and to thank him for his
dedication to Haiti over the past few years.
This debate is taking place at an opportune time,
a few days before the announcement of the final results
of the presidential and legislative elections. Canada
would like to congratulate the citizens of Haiti, who
exercised their democratic right to choose those who
will govern their country. I also wish to highlight the
work of the authorities and President Préval and the
collaboration among various actors to ensure the
smooth conduct of the elections. We would also like to
thank the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) for its contribution to peacekeeping and
security.
Over one year after the January 2010 earthquake,
Haiti still needs international support, both in the short
term to meet humanitarian needs, and over the long
term to help the country rebuild its infrastructure and
institutions. After a catastrophe of such magnitude, a
country like Haiti obviously cannot recover overnight.
In the meantime, Haitians continue to be
perplexed by ongoing problems related to debris
removal, housing, employment and access to quality
education and health care, to mention but a few issues.
Their frustration appears to be justified. Despite the
international community’s unprecedented commitment
and a desire to do more and better for Haiti, the fact is
that the progress made to date does not meet
expectations. Much remains to be done to help the
country reach its full potential.
Looking back on our efforts over the years, we
must face some hard realities. Despite eight United
Nations interventions of various types and billions of
dollars spent over more than 25 years, Haiti is still
suffering from serious problems that were exacerbated
by the earthquake. Those problems include a
Government that struggles to provide essential services
to its people, fragile public institutions and a
chronically unstable, often volatile political dynamic
that is oblivious to the public interest.
We cannot overlook some of the advances that
have been made, however. We recognize the leadership
of Haiti’s Ministry of Public Health and Population in
the fight against cholera. Thanks to the evolution of its
mandates since its creation pursuant to resolution 1542
(2004), MINUSTAH has carried out remarkable work
in strengthening security institutions, which has helped
to guarantee a more stable and secure environment in

11-29077

Haiti. For its part, the Security Council was able to
adapt MINUSTAH’s mandate and allocate the
necessary resources to ensure that it continues to
exercise its primary role in terms of security and to
provide effective assistance to reconstruction and
humanitarian efforts.
Canada notes with great interest that the United
Nations is planning to attach increasing importance to
strengthening governance and the rule of law in Haiti.
That is a determining factor of any long-term success.
We must reconsider the international community’s
approach and redouble our efforts to support good
governance and respect for the rule of law in Haiti.
Beyond the democratic process and the strengthening
of key institutions, good governance also represents the
capacity and, above all, the willingness of political
leaders to accept their governmental responsibilities
and thereby ensure the security and protection of and
justice for their citizens.
Reconstruction and development in Haiti depend
first and foremost on the people of Haiti, including the
Government, citizens, civil society and economic
stakeholders. The international community can only
provide support, the effectiveness of which depends on
a number of factors. Political stability can be achieved
only through an effective, honest and responsible
Government that has been democratically elected by
Haitians. That Government must have the public
interest at heart and be able to pave the way for
recovery and reconstruction. To avoid repeating
mistakes of the past, Haiti must profoundly transform
its governmental institutions and structures and its
political culture.
(spoke in English)
Canada is pleased to see that the SecretaryGeneral shares that opinion, as indicated in his recent
report on Haiti (S/2011/183*). In that report, the
Secretary-General refers to the fact that MINUSTAH
has started the process of realigning its priorities and
resources to promote a compact on the rule of law.
Canada recognizes the validity of that proposal. The
implementation of such a project by the Haitian
Government, with the support of the international
community, would help to guide the reform of key
systems and institutions and could help to re-energize
the commitment of the new Haitian leaders and the
people of Haiti. However, if such an initiative is to be

17

S/PV.6510 (Resumption 1)

implemented, there must be real ownership and
leadership on the part of the Haitian authorities.
Canada thinks that this initiative is timely. In fact,
the arrival of new leadership is an opportunity for Haiti
to make a fresh start. Canada is determined to continue
to help Haiti in meeting that new challenge.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Bahamas.
Ms. Bethel (Bahamas): It is an honour to address
the Council during today’s debate on the question
concerning Haiti. We naturally align ourselves with the
statement delivered by The Honourable P.J. Patterson,
Special Representative of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM) on Haiti and former Prime Minister of
Jamaica. On behalf of the member States of the
CARICOM region, allow me to extend a special thanks
to your Government, Madame President, for convening
this very important debate.
For CARICOM member States, the rebuilding of
Haiti into a democratic, stable and economically viable
society is a matter of the utmost priority. We thank all
States members of the international community for
their continued support and assistance to our sister
country, Haiti.
CARICOM continues to commend the critical
role of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) in its efforts to maintain peace and
security in Haiti and to lay the foundation for longterm recovery and stability. The activities undertaken
by MINUSTAH, which span the entire spectrum —
from security to development, from support for State
institutions and the rehabilitation and training of the
Haitian National Police to child protection, HIV/AIDS
and gender issues — have laid the foundation for
Haiti’s long-term post-earthquake recovery. The men
and women of MINUSTAH deserve not only our
gratitude but also our support and commitment to
ensuring that we too meet our obligations to the
Haitian people.
More than a year after the earthquake, Haiti
continues to face daunting challenges. A significant
number of those displaced by the earthquake continue
to live in camps; the situation of women and girls and
other vulnerable groups within those camps continues
to be very precarious; and crime and criminality are on
the rise. The survival of the people of Haiti demands
our long-term engagement.

18

The recent successful conclusion of the second
round of voting, which was overseen by a joint
monitoring team of the Organization of American
States and CARICOM, will in the long term,
reinvigorate Haiti’s political process, and place the
Haitian people firmly in charge of their own destiny.
As we work collectively towards a viable future
for Haiti, CARICOM has undertaken a number of key
initiatives to provide a viable economic future for the
Haitian people. CARICOM, through its Council of
Trade and Economic Development, has granted a threeyear, one-way, duty-free concession to goods entering
the CARICOM Single Market from Haiti. The Council
is also examining an expansion of the list of goods
covered. It is our firm belief that Haiti’s long-term
economic recovery and its full integration within the
CARICOM Single Market and Economy will redound
to the benefit of the entire Caribbean.
Furthermore, CARICOM Governments have
encouraged the regional private sector to collaborate
and take advantage of the opportunities offered by
Haiti, in order to strengthen its position in regional and
external markets in the long run. Additionally,
CARICOM Governments have supported the
establishment of a CARICOM special fund for privatesector investment in Haiti to facilitate Caribbean
private-sector investment in development activities in
the country. Outreach will continue to be undertaken,
including to members of the Caribbean diaspora, to
contribute to the fund.
CARICOM Governments have also committed to
providing support to augment Haiti’s institutional
capacity and to make available professional and
technical expertise in the short to medium term.
CARICOM remains steadfast in its goal that Haiti will
not be left behind. Ultimately, we will judge our
success by Haiti’s success. I am pleased to report that
the Bahamas and Trinidad and Tobago are both
members of the Economic and Social Council Ad Hoc
Advisory Group on Haiti, which I think is indicative of
CARICOM member States’ readiness and willingness
to assist and support, in all ways possible, the creation
of the conditions necessary for stability and for social,
political and economic development in our sister
country. We reaffirm our commitment to work with
other Member States in whatever context necessary and
appropriate.

11-29077

S/PV.6510 (Resumption 1)

However, those efforts must be complemented by
activities being undertaken by the wider international
community. In that regard, we must reiterate some of
the concerns raised by CARICOM heads of State and
Government at their meeting held in February.
CARICOM leaders are concerned that the seeming
shift away from the planning and implementation of
projects under the Haiti Recovery Fund, to a bilateral
approach, does not bode well for addressing the longterm priorities laid out by the Haitian Government in
its Haiti action plan. CARICOM leaders also called for
a review of the working methods of the Interim Haiti
Recovery Commission, in order to ensure that the
priorities of the Haitian Government are met with the
urgency that its mandate requires.
CARICOM leaders also continued to call for
greater financial contributions to the Haitian Recovery
Fund by the international donor community and for
synchronization of their bilateral activities with the
priorities of the Government, while maintaining the
integrity of the process. The international community
must also make good on the long-overdue pledges of
billions of dollars that were made in the wake of the
catastrophic earthquake in Haiti last year. It is
unconscionable that promises made would become
promises not be kept, particularly when one takes into
account the dire and basic needs of Haiti and its
people.
Over the short to medium term, Haiti will require
substantial support, both political and economic, for
the new Government that is expected to be sworn into
office in mid-May.
As the Atlantic hurricane season draws ever
closer, the role of MINUSTAH will continue to be
essential, and greater focus must be given to providing
sustainable shelter to those remaining in camps for
internally displaced persons and other makeshift
communities across the country. Greater attention must
also be paid to disaster-mitigation measures, including
a public education and outreach programme for the
Haitian people.
Those goals cannot be achieved by MINUSTAH
acting without the support and cooperation of the
remainder of the United Nations system. Coordinated
action within the system by regional actors and the
international donor community, based on the priorities
identified by the Haitian Government, is the only
means of achieving tangible success on the ground.

11-29077

Our commitment to building Haiti back better can
only be realized through a coordinated effort by the
entire international community. Neither the people of
Haiti nor the wider international community will
accept our failure.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): I would like to
convey Australia’s gratitude to Colombia for convening
this debate on a very important subject.
Over a year has passed since the catastrophic
earthquake that struck Haiti, killing 220,000 of its
citizens and setting back years of nation-building and
development. The earthquake devastated a fragile
economy and destroyed vital infrastructure. At a time
when we are counting fresh losses to the United
Nations family, we can also never forget that the quake
also decimated the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), which is tasked with
stabilization and post-conflict recovery.
Australia would like to reiterate its condolences
to the people of Haiti, not only for the losses they
suffered in January 2010 but also for its aftermath and
continued crises: 2.3 million people displaced, floods,
a near brush with Hurricane Tomas, the outbreak of
cholera and the various challenges posed by an election
in very difficult circumstances.
Despite our geographic distance from those
events, Australia was one of the first to respond, with a
$24 million package of relief efforts, divided between
emergency
relief
and
early
recovery
and
reconstruction, through the Caribbean Disaster
Emergency Management Agency and the Caribbean
Community. In a broader region-wide development
assistance package, Australia is working with key
partners in the Caribbean and Latin America to address
the challenge of climate change, reduce the risk posed
by disasters, build economic resilience and enhance the
capacity of key institutions.
Twelve months on, I am personally proud to
report that Australia has fully funded our promised
commitments. In addition to the Government’s
assistance package — and this statistic is even more
telling, in my view — the Australian public also
donated over $26 million as they watched, half a world
away, Haitians bravely rebuilding their lives and
livelihoods.

19

S/PV.6510 (Resumption 1)

Australia is a country that does what it says. We
likewise call on all donors to honour their pledges and
disburse their funds where they are still badly needed.
The United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs recently warned that Haiti’s
recovery was far from assured and that, while much
has been accomplished, more than 800,000 people
continue to live in tented camps, more than 1 million
people need emergency access to water and more than
1 million children rely on donor-provided food rations.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his mid-term report on Haiti (S/2011/183*), which
underlines the serious challenges ahead. We endorse
his view that strengthening the rule of law in Haiti will
help to achieve sustainable peace and long-term
development. Australia firmly supports the SecretaryGeneral’s call for the prosecution of all those involved
in crimes against their own people, to show the Haitian
people there can be no impunity. An independent
judiciary and transparent and truly representative
Parliament are necessary elements of good governance,
which will allow the Haitian people to enjoy some of
the same economic, human, social, civil and political
rights as their Caribbean neighbours.
As we are all aware, MINUSTAH’s mission is far
from complete. While the relative success of last
month’s presidential and legislative elections was a
significant step forward for a country steeped in a
history of political and civil instability, United Nations
troops were needed to restore order in some areas. An
orderly transition to democracy is essential to launch a
new chapter in Haiti’s history.
I would also like to welcome the concept paper
submitted by the delegation Colombia as President of
the Security Council on a way forward for Haiti
(S/2011/218, annex). It should catalyse debate on
better coordination of the international community’s
efforts, as well as lessons learned, MINUSTAH’s
unique mandate and the challenges of rebuilding a
peaceful, sovereign State without perpetuating
dependence on foreign capacities and resources.
One great lesson learned pertains to the
coordination of relief efforts by non-governmental
organizations, regional organizations and donor
countries. In that regard, the United Nations Special
Representative for Haiti has worked tirelessly to
coordinate all actors on the ground. I would also like to
pay tribute to the United Nations Special Envoy for

20

Haiti, President Bill Clinton, who has coordinated all
the various organizations to elicit funds and to ensure
the notion of building back better, and that that remains
a Haitian-led process.
In our view, Colombia rightly raises questions
about how the international community can ensure that
Haiti does not become reliant on foreign intervention.
In all recovery and capacity-building efforts, the
Interim Haiti Recovery Commission and the Haiti
Reconstruction Fund must remain central to decisionmaking. We need to encourage and reinforce Haiti’s
ownership of its own reconstruction. The Haitian
Government and people are best suited to charting the
future of their own country.
Haiti does not face unique challenges, but
coupling those challenges with disaster recovery on
such scale is unique. While MINUSTAH was originally
deployed to prevent a civil war, its mandate is now
focused on recovery, rebuilding and unifying a country
that has been rent by social and economic instability. In
that regard, Australia supports Colombia’s call for the
maintenance and reinforcement of the special character
that the Security Council has wisely given that
mandate.
Australia welcomes the United Nations continued
work to build the mechanisms to support the rule of
law in Haiti and the Security Council’s mission to
reinforce Haiti’s peaceful and sustainable recovery.
In conclusion, as the Ambassador of the Bahamas
said just before me, Haiti’s success will be our success,
too.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Mr. Wetland (Norway): Let me start by
congratulating Haiti on the recent elections and
President Préval for overseeing an orderly transition,
which is unprecedented in the country.
While the process was far from perfect, we hope
that the new President, Parliament and Government
will aim to transform the country by providing
stability, development and justice for all. The main
responsibility for that rests with Haiti’s own political
and economic elites. They must be willing, as well as
able, to invest both trust and money in order to make
national institutions stronger and more accountable to
the people. Only if that fundamental willingness exists

11-29077

S/PV.6510 (Resumption 1)

will the assistance of the international community,
including the United Nations, be effective.
Much has been achieved since the devastating
earthquake, at least in humanitarian terms. Lives have
been saved and new disasters avoided, even in the face
of cholera and Hurricane Tomas. But much more could
and should have been done, in particular with regard to
the Haitian Government’s own capacities. The absence
of a social contract, especially between the rich and the
poor, and the corresponding weakness of State
institutions, unable to fulfil basic political, judicial,
economic, social and cultural functions, is are the core
of Haiti’s problems. That fundamental observation
should inform our deliberations, including here in the
Security Council.
The United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) has played an important role in
providing security and stability in Haiti. In that regard,
let me pay special tribute to Special Representative
Edmond Mulet for his integrity and outstanding efforts
as leader of the operations since the earthquake.
The time has now come for MINUSTAH to adapt
to new realities. MINUSTAH’s heavy military presence
no longer seems proportionate to Haiti’s security
challenges. In fact, the heavy military presence may
undermine the country’s efforts to normalize and to
attract investment, so crucial to sustainable
development.
While the military component should be visibly
scaled down, other stabilizing capacities should be
strengthened. In particular, MINUSTAH could play a
more central role in law and order reforms, including
police reform. The fight against organized crime, drug
trafficking and gender-based violence is but an
example of issues that require increased attention.
Fewer soldiers in combat gear, fewer armed vehicles
and more police in the streets and in the internally
displaced persons camps will certainly bring the

11-29077

Mission closer to the people, enhance legitimacy and,
ultimately, make it more effective in addressing Haiti’s
real security and stability challenges. MINUSTAH
should complement the rest of the United Nations
system, in cooperation and without duplication. The
integrated strategic framework should help the United
Nations act as one in support of Haiti’s own
Government.
Norway has pledged substantial and long-term
support for Haiti’s development. Our assistance is
based on the priorities of the Haitian Government, as
expressed in its national action plan. We are committed
to staying the course, in close cooperation and
coordination with other actors, including the United
Nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
I would like to thank President Préval for his
participation and his briefing, as well as for having
remained with us throughout the debate. I would also
like to thank the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the
Latin American countries who were with us today,
which demonstrates both the importance that Haiti
holds for the region and our commitment towards it.
I think this was a very enriching debate, which
has
strengthened
the
presidential
statement
(S/PRST/2011/7), demonstrated to us all the work that
lies ahead in Haiti and illustrated our commitment to
work in coordination with that country. President
Préval and the entire Haitian people can count on a
region and a world that stand alongside him so as to
ensure that Haitian citizens enjoy a better quality of
life.
The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.

21
