Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

10. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
continue to consider, in consultation with the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, appropriate measures for the co-ordination of the policies
and activities of the specialized agencies in implementing the relevant General Assembly resolutions;

11. Invites the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue to assist the specialized agencies
and international institutions concerned in working out
appropriate measures for implementing the present
resolution and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session;
( b) To obtain and transmit to the Special Committee for its consideration information on the action
taken by the specialized agencies and intemational
institutions concerned in accordance with the provisions
of the present resolution;

12. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine the question and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session.

I 831 st plenary meeting,
12 December 1969.
2556 (XXIV). Offers by Memher States of study
and training facilities for inhahitants of
Non-Self-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2423 (XXIII) of 18 December 1968,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
on offers by Member States of study and training
facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories16 under General Assembly resolution 845 (IX)
of 22 November 1954,
l. Takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral;

2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member
States which have made scholarships available to
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
3. Reaffirms its resolution 2423 (XXIII) with
respect to the granting of scholarships to inhabitants of
Non-Self-Governing Territories;

4. Invites the administering Powers concerned to
provide all the necessary facilities to enable students
to avail themselves of offers by Member States of study
and training facilities;

5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session on the implementation of the present resolution;

6. Draws the attention of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples to the present
resolution.
1831st plenary meeting,
12 December 1969.
111 /bid., Twenty-fourth Session, Annexes, agenda items 63,
70 and 71, document A/7744.

71

2557 (XXIV). United Nations Educational and
Training Programme for Southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2349 (XXII) of 19 December 1967 by which the special educational and training
programmes for South West Africa, the special training
programme for Territories under Portuguese administration and the educational and training programme for South Africans were consolidated and
integrated, and its resolution 2431 (XXIII) of 18
December 1968 by which, ínter alía, the General
Assembly requested the Secretary-General to cstablish
an advisory committee of Member States to assist him,
among other things, in strengthening and expanding
the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southem Africa,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral, 10
Recalling paragraph 14 of its resolution 2507
(XXIV) of 21 November 1969 concerning the question
of Territories under Portuguese administration, in which
it invited the Secretary-General to develop and expand
training programmes for the inhabitants of those
Territories, and the relevant section of the report of
the United Nations Council for Namibia, 17
Noting that, although the financia! situation has improved during 1969, available funds are still far from
adequate to meet the objectives of the Programme,
W elcoming the establishment of the Advisory Committee on the United Nations Educational and Training
Programme for Southern Africa 18 in accordance with
paragraph 2 of resolution 2431 (XXIII),
Strongly convinced that the provision of assistance
for the education and training of persons from the
Territories concerned is essential and that it is therefore
desirable further to strengthen and expand the Programme,
l. Expresses its appreciation to all those who have
contributed to the United Nations Educational and
Training Programme for Southem Africa;
2. Appeals anew to all States, organizations and
individuals to make generous contributions to the
Programme;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Advisory Committee on the United Nations
Educational and Training Programme for Southern
Africa within the terms of paragraph 2 of General
Assembly resolution 2431 (XXIII), to take ali possible
measures for the promotion of adequate contributions
to the Programme;
4. Decides that, as a further transitional measure,
provision shall be made, under section 12 of the regular
budget for the financia! year 1970, for an amount of
$100,000 to ensure the continuity of the Programme
pending the receipt of adequate voluntary contributions;
16 /bid., document A/7735.
17 !bid., Twenty-fourtlz Ses.fion,

Supplement No. 24 (Al
7624/Rev.l ), paras. 49-56.
18 The Ad:>isory Committee is composed of representatives
of the followmg Member Sta~es: Ca!1ada, Dem~cratic Republíc
of the Congo, Denmark, India, Umted Repubhc of Tanzania,
Venezuela and Zambia (see Official Records of thP General
Assembly, Twenty-fourth Session, Annexes, agenda itcms 63.
70 and 71, document A/7496).

General A1111embly-Twenty-fourth Session

72

5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session on the
progress of the Programme.
1831st plenary meeting,
12 December 1969.

2558 (XXIV). lnformation from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963, in which it requested the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples to study the information transmitted to the Secretary-General in
accordance with Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations and to take such information fully
into account in examining the situation with regard
to the implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling also its resolution 2422 (XXIII) of 18
December 1968 by which the General Assembly,
inter alía, requested the Special Committee to continue
to discharge the functions entrusted to it under resolution 1970 (XVIII) in accordance with the ptocedures
approved by the Assembly in its resolution 2109
(XX) of 21 December 1965,
Recalling further the provisions of paragraph 5 of
its resolution 2422 (XXIII), in which it once again
urged the administering Powers concemed to transmit,
or continue to transmit, to the Secretary-General the
information prescribed in Article 73 e of the Charter,
as well as the fullest possible information on political
and constitutional developments in the Territories concemed,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee dealing with the transmittal of information under Article 73 e of the Charter and the
action taken by it in respect of that information, 19
Having also examined the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the ítem, 2º
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter
of the United Nations;
2. Regrets that, despite the repeated recommendations of the General Assembly and the Special Committee, sorne Member States having responsibilities for
the administration of Non-Self-Goveming Territories
still have not seen fit to transmit information under
Article 73 e of the Charter, have transmitted insufficient information or have transmitted information too
late;
3. Condemns the Govemment of Portugal far its
continued refusal to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter with regard to the colonial
Territories under its domination, despite the numerous
resolutions adopted by the General Assembly conceming those Territories;
111 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentv-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/7623/Rev.l), chapter xxxm.
20 ]bid., Twenty-fourth Session, Annexes, agenda items 63,
70 and 71, document A/7753.

4. Deeply deplores the persistent refusal of the
Govemment of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northem Ireland to transmit such information
on Antigua, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts-NevisAnguilla and St. Lucia;
5. Considers, having regard to the statement made
by the representative of the administering Power relating to the Territory of St. Vincent, 21 that, in the
absence of a decision by the General Assembly itself
that St. Vincent has attained a full measure of selfgovemment in terms of Chapter XI of the Charter,
the Govemment of the United Kingdom should continue to transmit information under Article 73 e of the
Charter with respect to that Territory;
6. Once again urges the administering Powers concerned to transmit, or continue to transmit, to the
Secretary-General the information prescribed in Article 73 e of the Charter, as well as the fullest possible
information on political and constitutional developments in the Territories concerned;
7. Reiterates its request that the administering
Powers concemed tra,1smit such information as early
as possible and at the latest within a maximum period
of six months following the expiration of the administrative year in the Non-Self-Governing Territories
concemed;
8. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
discharge the functions entrusted to it under General
Assembly resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance with
established procedures.
1831 st plenary meeting,
12 December 1969.

2559 (XXIV). Question of Ornan
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Ornan.
Having heard the statement of the petitioner,22
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 and all other relevant resolutions,
Concerned about the situation in the Territory of
Ornan,
Deploring the refusal of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northem Ireland to implement the
relevant General Assembly resolutions conceming the
Territory,
l. Reaffirms its resolutions 2238 (XXI) of 20 December 1966, 2302 (XXII) of 12 December 1967 and
2424 (XXIII) of 18 December 1968;
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Ornan to self-determination and to the natural resources of their Territory, as well as their right to
dispose of those resources in their best interests;
3. Urges the Government of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northem Ireland to implement fully
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and other
relevant resolutions;
4. Recommends that the specialized agencies and
intemational institutions concerned should study, within
the scope of their activities and in co-operation with the
regional organization concemed and through it, the
possibilities of extending assistance to meet the educational, technical and health requirements of the people
of the Territory;
2 1 Jbid., Twenty-fourth Session, Fourth Committee, 1853rd
meeting, para. 62.
22 fbid., 1861st meeting.
