UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR

2216”

MEETING:

UY LBkARY

16 APRIL 1980

NEW YORK

CGNTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (SIAgenda12216) .*......*............................

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*......................

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 10 April 1980 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13885);
Special report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (S/13888 and Corr. 1 and Add. 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SIPV.2216

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters corn-.
bined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Oficial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2216th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 16 April 1980, at 10.30 a.m.
President:

Mr. Porfirio MUfiOZ

LED0

(Mexico).

lands), Mr. Clark (Nigeria) and Mr. Mansouri (Syrian
Arab Republic) and Mr. Terzi (Palestine. Liberation
Organization) took the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber.

Presenr: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S1138881Add.1, containing
an addendum to the special report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL). I should also like to draw the
attention of the members of the Council to document
S/13895, which contains the text of a letter dated
15 April from the representative of Israel addressed
to the President of the Council.

agenda (S/Agenda/2216)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 10 April 1980 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/13885);
Special report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(S/l3888 and Corr. 1 and Add. 1)
The meeting

was called to order
Adoption

3. Mr. NEIL (Jamaica): I should like to begin by
expressing my delegation’s appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his special report to the Council
and for the oral reports he presented to the Council
in the course of this debate. Those reports reveal
the grave and intolerable situation created by the
events of the past week in which the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Lebanon were once again grossly.
violated and UNIFIL was subjected to heavy armed
attack and violent harassment. My delegation strongly
deplores these acts perpetrated by those parties which
continue to flout the resolutions of the Council and
violate the Charter.

at 11.50 a.m.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation ln the Middle East:
Letter dafed 10 April 1980 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council

(Sf 1388%

Special report of the Secretary-General
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
Cot-r.1 and Add.1)

4. When UNIFIL was established in 1978, the
Council was of the belief that it would not only ensure
the withdrawal of the invading Israel Defence Forces
but also help to bring stability to the area to the
advantage of all the parties involved. The events of
last week showed that UNIFIL is treated as an enemy
by Haddad and his rebel forces and that the Israeli
Defence Forces continue to feel free to violate the territorial integrity of a Member State by conducting
military operations in southern Lebanon. It is clear that
both the Israel Defence Forces and Haddad’s rebel
forces, the one supportive of the other, have undertaken their defiant actions secure in the knowledge
that UNIFIL’s mandate as a peace-keeping force
ensures that its response will be limited.

on the United
(S/13888 and

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
In accordance with the decisions taken at previous
meetings [2212th to 2215th meetings], I invite the
representative of Lebanon to take a place at the
Council table and I invite the representatives of
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jordan, the Netherlands, Nigeria,
the Syrian Arab Republic and the representative of
the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) to take
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

5. This pattern of activity threatens the maintenance
of stability in the area and imperils the lives of UNIFIL
personnel. The last period of violence has left a
Fijian soldier dead and others seriously wounded.
Considerable damage to UNIFIL’s buildings, vehicles
and equipment has resulted from bombardment by

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Tuhni (Lebanon) took a place at the Council table and Mr. Mulloy
(Ireland), Mr. Blum (Israel), Mr. La Rocca (Ztaly),
Mr. Nuseibeh (Jordan), Mr. van Buuren (Nether1

Haddad’s forces, which effectively cut the lines of
communication between UNIFIL’s headquarters at
Naqoura and its sectors. The illegal forces extended
their attacks even to the Norwegian medical compound, having already endangered the Irish battalion
in attempting to capture At-Tiri. Haddad’s ‘gangs
capped their reign of terror with the kidnapping of
nine Irish soldiers, whom they threatened to kill
unless UNIFIL withdrew from At-TX.

tience, discipline and restraint in the face of persistent
and severe intimidation. Our profound sympathies go
to the Government of Fiji and the bereaved family
on the death of a Fdian soldier during the past week
and we also extend condolences to those soldiers of
UNIFIL who sustained injuries. We were very
saddened to learn this morning of the death of an
Irish soldier who had been injured. Our condolences
are extended to the members of his family on their
loss and to the Government of Ireland.

6. Those facts are known to the members of the
Council, since they are contained in the reports of the
Secretary-General. None the less they bear repetition,
since they demonstrate so clearly the need for action
by the Council to ensure the security of the UNIFIL
troops and to prevent the recurrence of such outrageous acts against the Force.

10. In closing, let me reiterate the concern of my
Government over-the recent developments which have
led to the current debate. We believe that those events
underline the urgent need for a comprehensive settlement as a basis for ajust and lasting peace in the Middle
East. Lebanon has become the victim of the failure of
the international community to find such a solution.
We believe that it is the duty of the Council to do its
utmost to ensure that the agony of Lebanon is not
prolonged.

7. The Council cannot tolerate a repetition of such
acts of violence against UNIFIL. While we continue
to regard the presence of the Force as vital to the
prevention of all-out war in the area, the Council
cannot endure the continued abuse and harassment of
its peace-keeping troops. We owe a duty to the troop-!
contributing countries to establish conditions in which
their men can operate in safety and we owe a duty to
the long-suffering people of Lebanon to bring to an end
the nightmare of violence which has persisted for so
long in south Lebanon. In the light of the events which
have led to the current debate, this Council must show
its determination to prevent further outbreaks of
violence against UNIFIL and further incursions by
Israel into Lebanese territory. Such flagrant violations
of the Charter should not be allowed to continue
with impunity. Jamaica once again strongly condemns
such violations and will not accept any effort to justify
them.

11. Sir Anthony PARSONS (United Kingdom): My
Government shares the deep concern expressed by
the Secretary-General and those many others, particularly the troop contributors, who have spoken
about the escalation of violence in recent days in
southern Lebanon. We condemn the murderous
attacks on the personnel of UNIFIL and on their
headquarters by Major Haddad’s forces. Our sympathy
goes to the Fijian and Irish Governments and peoples
for the death of the Fijian soldier who was killed last
Saturday and of the Irish soldier who has since died
of his wounds. Our admiration goes out to the Force
as a whole for their bravery and. restraint under the
most diicult conditions and in the face of intolerable
provocation.
12. While we condemn the attack on Kibbutz Misgav
Am, a bloody and senseless act which can only
complicate the search for peace, my Government
cannot regard it as justification for the subsequent
Israeli incursion into Lebanon. That too we condemn.
We note the reported withdrawal of Israeli forces and
trust that this wlU be permanent. It is, however, also
the case that the Israeli-supported forces of Major
Haddad have constantly frustrated the efforts of
UNIFIL to fulfil its mandate in southern Lebanon by
preventing the deployment of UNIFIL forces in the
border area. As the Secretary-General has informed
us, the capacity of UNIFIL to carry out its duties has
been further restricted by the damage inflicted in the
recent attacks; the international observers were not
even in a position to confirm the withdrawal of the
Israeli forces. It is clear from the addendum to the
report of the Secretary-General just distributed that
there has been only a slight improvement in the situation and that, apart from their incessant and increasing
harassment of UNIFIL, Haddad’s militia have also
shelled the towns of Sidon and Tyre.

8. My delegation has noted that the Government of
Israel has informed the Secretary-General that Israeli
troops have been withdrawn from Lebanon and we
have also noted the Secretary-General’s assessment,
that the situation in the UNIFIL area has improved
to some extent. We hope that those are positive
developments on which more than a temporary halt to
hostilities can be built. In this regard a heavy responsibility lies with the Government of Israel. It should
be made to understand that it cannot continue to defy
the United Nations and to violate the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of neighbouring Lebanon. We
call once more upon Israel to extend its full cooperation to UNIFIL and to allow the force to fulfil
its mandate under resolution 425 (1978), to end Israeli
collusion with the illegal Haddad forces and to enable
international efforts to restore calm in southern
Lebanon.
9. Jamaica wishes to place on record its high commendation of General Erskine and the troops of
UNIFIL for their conduct over the past weeks and
their unfailing determination to act in accordance
with the Council’s mandate. They have shown pa-

13. There can be no doubt that UNIFIL would be
better able to prevent infiltration if it could occupy
2
--

check-point one kilometre from UNIFIL headquarters has been removed. Roads in the enclave are
still closed to UNIFIL. In consequence, the relief
and resupply of United Nations observation posts
in the enclave has remained impossible. Intensive
efforts are being made to secure the permanent
lifting of check-points and the opening of the roads
for urgent resupply of the observation posts in the
enclave.” [S/f3888/Add.I,
paras. 2 and 3.1

the area denied to it and if so much of its time was
not taken up with dealing with harassment by the
Haddad forces,
14. My Government joins the Secretary-General in
urging all concerned to extend to UNIFIL the cooperation it needs to fulfil the responsibilities entrusted
to it by the Council. Attacks on and provocation of
UNIFIL must cease. The Israeli Government. must
respect the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Lebanon. All concerned must avoid any action which
obstructs the full implementation of resolution 425
(1978). Our principal objective remains the restoration
of the full authority of the Government of Lebanon
throughout its territory. Thereafter, strict respect
for the territorial integrity, sovereignty and political
independence of Lebanon within its internationally
recognized boundaries would provide the best
guarantee for the restoration of peace and of peaceful
conditions in the south.

20. Given the volatile and tense situation in Lebanon,’
my delegation believes it essential that UNIFIL maintain its presence in that strife-tom area to prevent
destabiiization and the resumption of armed confrontation, with its fearful consequences for international
peace and security. In this regard, my delegation
would welcome constructive efforts designed to
assert and strengthen the hand of UNIFIL in the
fulfilment of its mandate, leading to the reactivation
of the General Armistice Agreement of 1949.
21. Thirdly, the Philippines deplores the widespread
destruction and damage to UNIFIL’s headquarters
buildings, facilities and equipment at Naqoura, and ail
acts of violence in the region. The continuing harassment, abuse and humiliation of UNIFIL troops and
personnel are intolerable and undermine the credibility
of UNIFIL’s primary objective of peace-keeping. The
United Nations can ill afford to tolerate these wanton
violations of UNIFIL’s role as a peace-keeping force.
It must put an end to them once and for all; otherwise,
the prestige and authority of the Organization will be
seriously and perhaps irreparably eroded. We join in
the call for the complete cessation of the harassment
of and acts of violence against UNIFIL by ail the forces
concerned.

15. Mr. YANG0 (Philippines): My delegation takes
this opportunity to express our deep appreciation to
the Secretary-General for the comprehensiveness of
his oral reports, as well as of his special report.
16. My delegation shares the deep concern expressed
by the Secretary-General regarding the grave and
serious. developments in southern Lebanon. I wish
briefly to state the position of the Philippines on
the situation in southern Lebanon,
17. First, we firmly support the peace-keeping efforts
of UNIFIL under the relevant Council resolutions, in
particular resolutions 425 (1978), 426 (1978) and 459
(1979), and to that end we have contributed to its
upkeep and maintenance.

22. Fourthly, the Philippines condemns the impairment, infringement and violation of the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and independence of the Republic
of Lebanon. The United Nations is in duty bound to
help to restore sovereignty over all its territory up to
the internationally recognized boundaries to the
Government of Lebanon. Resolution 425 (1978)
specifically called for “strict respect for the territorial
integrity, sovereignty and political independence
of Lebanon within its internationally-recognized
boundaries”. It also called upon Israel “immediately
to cease its military action against Lebanese territorial integrity and withdraw forthwith its forces from
all Lebanese territory”. Ail forces .in the region,
without exception, must respect the territorial
integrity of Lebanon.

18. Secondly, we believe that UNIFIL should be
allowed to discharge its mandate without let or hindrance. For that reason, we fully support the SecretaryGeneral’s plea that UNIFIL should have complete
and unrestricted freedom of movement in its entire
area of operation. The integrity and authority of
UNIFIL must be upheld in order to ensure that it can
fuEl its mandate. Any form of curtailment or obstruction of its authority would most assuredly erode its
effectiveness and usefulness.
19. In referring to the tense situation in UNIFIL’s
area of operation, my delegation notes with deep
distress the addendum to the Secretary-General’s
special report, in which he-states:
“Although tiring in the area has been greatly
reduced, the situation remains tense. Threats and
acts of harassment by the de facto forces against
UNIFIL and UNTSO (United Nations Truce Supervision Organization] observers in the observation
posts have continued.

23. Fithiy, we take note of and welcome the
announcement of the withdrawal of Israeli forces
from the region, but we await the earliest confirmation
by UNIFIL of such withdrawal.
24. Sixthiy, the Philippines believes that no one has
the right, for any reason or on any pretext whatsoever, to violate the principles enshrined in the

“As- of the time of reporting, the de facto forces
have reopened the coastal road, while another
3

.

Charter, specifically the principles of sovereignty,
territorial integrity and independence and noninterference in the domestic affairs of Member States.
The norms of international law and of comity demand
scrupulous respect for these principles.

31. In this regard, Niger believes that UNIFIL is
performing a very praiseworthy mission in southern
Lebanon, and it is only proper for me to pay a solemn
tribute today to the devotion and self-sacrifice of
that Force ,which so well exemplifies the spirit of
peace of the United Nations. I trust it can count on
our firm support in any efforts aimed at ensuring its
increased efficiency and freedom of movement in its
area of operation and a wider margin of manoeuvrability in self-defence.

25. In conclusion, allow me to express, on behalf
of my Government, our deep appreciation for the
devotion to duty of the officers and men of UNIFIL,
under the leadership of General Erskine. We extend
our sincere gratitude to those countries that have
contributed armed forces and personnel for the peacekeeping operations. UNIFIL has been discharging
its responsibilities under adverse and extremely
difficult conditions. It deserves our continued support.

32. We wish also to associate ourselves with the
condolences extended to the people and Government
of Fiji on the loss of one of their soldiers in the
unwarranted clashes of 12 April. We extend similar
condolences to the Irish and their Government for the
death of one of their soldiers as a result of the same
clashes.

26. My delegation wishes also to pay a tribute to the
gallant and valiant men of UNTSO and of UNIFIL
who have lost their lives under the United Nations
flag, and I should like to offer my delegation’s condolences to the Permanent Mission of Fiji on the death
of a member of the Fijian contingent, and also to the
Permanent Mission of Ireland after the latest information on the death of a member of the Irish contingent.

33. Mr. FUTSCHER PEREIRA (Portugal): The
taking of defenceless hostages, for whatever purpose,
is an act that, in our view, can never be justified.
In addition, it damages, in the most negative way, the
cause of those who engage in such action-the more
so when, as was the case in the recent attack on the
Misgav Am Kibbutz, those seized were innocent
children. We condemn that act, as we condemn all
violence.

27. Mr. OUMAROU (Niger) (inrerpreration from
French): My delegation would not wish this debate
to end without our having associated Niger with all
those delegations which have deplored andcondemned
the intervention of the Israeli forces in Lebanon. I say
that because we consider that intervention as
another serious infringement of the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of a Member State and as an inadmissible infraction of the Charter.

34. But however unwarranted that wretched act may
be, it cannot justify the events that have recently
occurred in southern Lebanon. The bombing of the
headquarters and other positions of the UNIFIL and
the harassment of its personne1 by the de fucro forces
supported by a Member State cannot be justified.
The attack on the Misgav Am Kibbutz cannot excuse
the Israeli incursion into Lebanese territory. A desperate act cannot serve as justification for a sovereign
and responsible State to defy the most elementary
rules of international behaviour and the provisions of
the Charter of the Organization of which it is a Member, and to violate the territorial integrity and sovereignty of another Member State.

28. But no less serious is the other action, taken by
the so-called de facto forces, which was launched
en masse against UNIFIL in southern Lebanon itself,
to which it was UNIFIL’s mission to restore peace.
We deplore the violation of the status of that intemational Force, when neither the presence nor the military
capability of that Force constituted any sort of threat
to any of the protagonists in the region.
29. The combination of those two actions can hardly
be viewed as fortuitous, given the open collusion
between the dissident Haddad forces and the Israeli
forces, which had, furthermore, encouraged, trained
and armed the Haddad forces. That is why Niger
reproves and condemns those forces in like fashion.

35. I should like, on this occasion, to express once
more our deepest sympathy for the suffering of the
Lebanese people, before which the international
community cannot remain indifferent. All efforts must
be exerted towards the full re-establishment of the
sovereignty of the Lebanese Government over all its
territory.

30. Niger believes, indeed, that the efforts of the
international community, the Security Council in
particular, should not be stymied by the ill-considered
wish simply to see a multiplication of spectacular
acts, or by the desire to take the law into one’s own
hands. In this case, UNIFIL and its soldiers who
have been humiliated and attacked are nothing but
additional innocent victims of a problem the solution
of which, everyone would now agree, can only be
found through a persistent, active and enthusiastic
search for a negotiated and balanced settlement.

36. We cannot but deplore in the strongest terms
all the acts that have led-to the eruption ofa new tide
of violence and unrest in southern Lebanon and
express our great.concem over the rapid deterioration
of the situation, which seriously affects the stability
of the region and could lead to a dangerous escalation.
37. We find it unacceptable that UMFIL, in the
fulfilment of its mandate, will have to continue to
face so many difficulties and obstructions raised
4

42. The immediate task calls for the withdrawal of
the Israeli aggressors against the territorial integrity
of Lebanon, and the restoration to UNIFIL of full
and effective control in its area of operation, including
freedom of movement for its forces. The hard core of
the problem in southern Lebanon remains. Israel’s
aggressive policy and its refusal to co-operate,with the
United Nations. Not only has such co-operation been
lacking, despite painstaking efforts by all concerned,
including successive Presidents of the Council, the
Secretary-General and those who sympathize with
Israel; on the contrary, opposition, resistance and
persistent harassment of UNIFIL has been deliberately incited and escalated in a consistent manner.
Proof positive of Israel’s flagrant disregard of ah
norms of international law and of the dictates of the
Council are the latest invasion of Lebanese territory
and the incursions into UNIFIL’s area of operation.

preciseIy by those who can only gain from the maintenance of a stable situation in the area. They have
to understand that violence will only sow the seeds of
further violence and that stability alone can create a
climate conducive to a negotiated settlement of their
disputes.
38. UNIFIL is committed to serving the noblest aim
of our Organization, namely, the pursuit of international peace and security. UNIFIL thus deserves our
respect and should deserve the respect of all people in
the area. The countries that provide troops for the
peace-keeping operations are contributing in a most
decisive and genuine way towards the achievement of
peace, and it is essential that full co-operation be
extended to the Force in order that it may be enabled
to accomplish its mandate. UNIFIL must be allowed
to occupy all its area of deployment, and its personnel
must be enabled to move freely in its area of operation. The present situation is to us intolerable, and
once again I should like to express the support of my
delegation for any measures aimed at enhancing
UNIFIL’s capacity fully to implement its mandate in
conformity with the relevant resolutions of the Council, namely, resolutions 425 (1978) and 459 (1979).

43. There can be no doubt either that behind the
disruptive activities of the illegal forces controlled by
the outlawed Major Haddad lies the directing arm
of Israel. The limited and restricted ability of UNIFIL
to respond has encouraged the illegal militia to aggravate the situation to a dangerous pitch of confrontation. Through intense and vioIent harassment, they
have sought to prevent the remanning of longestablished United Nations observation posts along
the Armistice Demarcation Line, have infiltrated and
sought a permanent presence in UNIFIL’s zone of
operation and have inflicted death and casualties
upon innocent civilians and UNIFIL troops alike.

39. Before I conclude, I should like, on behalf of
my country, to present condolences to the Governments and families of the Fijian and Irish soldiers
who gave their lives in the cause of peace and to
express our sympathy to the Governments and families
of the members of UNIFIL who have been injured in
the line of duty. We pay a tribute to all the officers
and men serving with UNIFIL for the brave way in
which they have been discharging the diicult and
dangerous task assigned to them. Finally, let me also
thank the Secretary-General and his staff for their
ceaseless efforts to overcome the present difficulties
UNIFIL is facing.

44. In these circumstances, the role and mandate of
UNIFIL have become severely circumscribed, if not
compromised. When maximum restraint is seen as an
encouragement to violence and humiliation, this
Council must re-examine the nature of the role of
UNIFIL and its capacity to respond effectively to
the challenge it faces in Lebanon.

40. Mr. AHSAN (Bangladesh): In the last few days,
we have witnessed an escalation of events in southern
Lebanon that can be characterized as nothing short of
outrageous. The representative of Lebanon, in his
letter to the President of the Council and in his
statement here [2213fh meeting] has graphically spelt
out the objective facts of the case. The SecretaryGeneral’s special report of and his supplementary
verbal report to the Council on Sunday [2212th
sneering] generally support the evidence and highlight the extreme gravity of the matter and the urgency
with which this Council is called on to act.

45. The task of the Council in arresting this deterioration of the situation is now imperative. The Council must condemn Israel for its aggression and demand
that it forthwith withdraw all its troops from southern
Lebanon, that it scrupulously respect the territorial
integrity, unity and political independence of Lebanon,
and that it cease, in particular, the assistance it
continues to lend to the illegal armed groups in
Lebanon.
46. Pressure must be applied, particularly by those
countries best placed for that purpose, to make Israel
fulfil its obligations and comply with its commitment
to co-operate with UNIFIL. An immediate requirement is the re-establishment and manning by United
Nations personnel of the observation posts along the
Armistice Demarcation Line. This Council must also
underscore its reaffirmation of the validity of the
General Armistice Agreement between Israel and
Lebanon and call on all parties to take the necessary
steps to reactivate the Mixed Armistice Commission

41. Of paramount importance to the Council is the
continuing erosion of the credibility of UNIFIL in
fulfilling its mandate to augment its military control
in the zone, to promote a return to normal and to
restore the effective authority and sovereignty of
Lebanon in the area. The situation now obtaining is
a blatant challenge to the credibility of the Council
itselfin exercising the cardinal responsibilities imposed
upon it under the Charter.
5

and to ensure full respect for the safety and freedom
of action of the United Nations observers along the
Armistice Demarcation Line.

before we have a clear and unequivocal answer to that
. question-and I wish to stress that we are putting
this question in the strongest possible terms andin the
strongest possible terms we are urging the Council
to show all the unanimity that has been displayed in
the statements in calling on all concerned to enable
UNIFIL and UNTSO not only to report and perform
their duties but also at least to restore the normal and
natural conditions that obtained before this whole mini* invasion started.

47. I take this opportunity to express our deepest
sympathy to the Governments and families of the
Fijian and Irish soldiers who have made the supreme
sacrifice in the cause of peace. We are indeed grateful
to the Secretary-General and his representatives for
their consistent and devoted efforts to contain -the
situation, to General Erskine, the Commander of
UNIFIL, and the officers and men in the field under
his command who have performed with exemplary
heroism under difficult and often humiliating circumstances.

55. Wd are therefore awaiting a reply from the
Secretary-General before we determine what our future
conduct in this debate will be.
56. ‘I& PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
The representative of Israel has asked to be allowed
to speak in exercise of the right of reply. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

48. Finally, we believe that it is our solemn duty to
assist and support Lebanon in every possible way
until the full and effective restoration of its sovereignty in that area.
49. The PRESIDENT (interpreturbn from Spa&h):
The next speaker is the representative of Lebanon,
on whom I now call.

57. Mr. BLUM (Israel): The representative of
Lebanon has just raised a question which I thought
I had disposed af in my statement of 14 April. So as
to avoid any misunderstandings on this score, let me
therefore briefly quote the following ffom what I said
in that statement:

50. Mr. TUI?NI (Lebanon): First, havingjust learned
of the death of an Irish soldier, I should like to
associate myself and my Government with the condolences expressed round this table to the Government
of Ireland, UNIFIL and its Commander on a second
loss of life after that of the Fijian soldier whose death
we have all regretted. That only highlights the really
very adverse-to say the least-conditions under
which the Force is operating in southern Lebanon.

“In the wake of the atrocity at Misgav Am,
and in the light of information that the terrorist
PLO was planning further outrages of this kind, the
Israel Defence Forces took certain limited measures, the purpose of which was to foil these plans.
The steps taken have been completed, and all Israel
soldiers have . . . completely withdrawn behind the
border with Lebanon.” [2213th meeting, para. 73. ]

51. We have just received an addendum to the
Secretary-General’s special report, and I am sure that
all the delegations round this tabIe have read it very
carefully. We note from it that there is a very slight
improvement; yet we cannot faii to say that we are
greatly disturbed by the continued harassment and,
particularly, by the very difficult conditions in which
even UNTSO finds itself and which exist also in
Naqoura.

I believe that fully answers the query of the representative of Lebanon.
58. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
The representative of Lebanon has asked to be
allowed to speak in exercise of the right of reply.
I call on him.

52. My Government has a request to make of the
Secretary-General and his representatives and a
question to address to the Council.
53. Has Israel withdrawn completely from Lebanon
-yes or no? I think that the future of our debate
and the nature of the draft resolution that we ‘shall
ask our friends in the Council to submit will depend
on the answer.
54. We know that the conditions in the UNIFIL area
of operation have so far prevented the SecretaryGeneral from replying to that question. But my
Government believes that we are not in a position to
ask the Council to act in one or another direction
fitho

in United

Nations.

New

York

00300

59. Mr. TUfiNI (Lebanon): I have the highest
respect for the rhetorical ability of the iepresentative
of Israel to dispose of questions round this table
while the real situation on the ground does not necessarily fully concord with what he says. We are tiot
prepared to be trapped again as we were on 13 June
1978. I have the highest respect for what he has said
here, bur my Government will only be prepared to
settle for a responsible answer from UNIFIL and
from the observers. Our information, I regret to say,
does not enable us to be sure that the Israelis have
fully withdrawn from my country in accordance with
resolutions of the Council.
The meeting

rose at 12.40 p.m.
83-61462--Avast

19862,425
j’
k. 3
