S/2004/807

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 October 2004
Original: English

Letter dated 8 October 2004 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated 6 October
2004, which I received from the High Representative for the Implementation of the
Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina (see annex).
I should be grateful if this letter could be brought to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

04-54532 (E) 041104

*0454532*

S/2004/807

Annex
Letter dated 6 October 2004 from the High Representative for
the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina addressed to the Secretary-General
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1031 (1995) of 15 December 1995, in
which the Council requested the Secretary-General to submit to the Council reports
from the High Representative in accordance with annex 10 of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Conclusions of
the London Peace Implementation Conference of 8 and 9 December 1995, I
herewith present to you the twenty-sixth report. I would ask you kindly to distribute
this report to the Security Council members for their consideration.
(Signed) Paddy Ashdown

2

S/2004/807

Enclosure
Twenty-sixth report of the High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina to the Secretary-General
1 January-30 June 2004
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1031 (1995) of 15 December 1995, in
which the Council requested the Secretary-General to submit to the Council reports
from the High Representative in accordance with annex 10 of the Peace Agreement
and the Conclusions of the London Peace Implementation Conference of 8 and
9 December 1995, I herewith present the twenty-sixth report.
Summary
1.
Almost nine years after Dayton, Bosnia and Herzegovina is now within reach
of the NATO Partnership for Peace and the launch of negotiations with the European
Union (EU) for the conclusion of a stabilization and association agreement. More
than two years after taking on my mandate as High Representative on 27 May 2002,
I remain committed to my overarching objective of ensuring that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is a peaceful, viable State on course to European integration.
2.
In the period since its last report, the Office of the High Representative has
continued to make substantive progress in several key areas. My priorities over the
past six months focused on improving the operation and effectiveness of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s crucial governing institutions.
3.
The European Commission Feasibility Study identified 16 general conditions
for opening negotiations on a stabilization and association agreement with Bosnia
and Herzegovina by December 2004. The Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities made
significant progress towards fulfilling the legislative requirements in the first six
months of this year. Furthermore, important structural changes in the fields of crime
prevention, the judiciary, customs and taxation, the development of a single
economic space, and the energy market have been initiated. Office of the High
Representative staff worked closely with the entity- and State-level governments
and parliaments, assisting them in drafting, promoting and enacting the necessary
laws.
4.
At its summit in Istanbul on 28 and 29 June 2004, NATO announced that the
Stabilization Force would be terminated. On 9 July the Security Council welcomed
the intention of EU to mount a military mission from December 2004. On 12 July
2004, the European Council issued its decision to replace the NATO mission with an
EU-led peacekeeping force by the beginning of next year. The EU force will work in
unison with me, the European Union Police Mission, the European Union
Monitoring Mission and the European Commission’s assistance programmes to
support the stabilization and association process and the Office of the High
Representative’s own mission implementation plan.
5.
Despite remarkable progress on the defence reform front, placing the armed
forces under State control and fulfilling almost all the NATO reform benchmarks,
Bosnia and Herzegovina failed to meet the benchmarks required for entry into the
Partnership for Peace at the Istanbul summit. The alliance expressed concern that

3

S/2004/807

Bosnia and Herzegovina and, in particular, a small number of obstructionist
elements in Republika Srpska had prevented the Republika Srpska from fulfilling its
obligations to cooperate fully with the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. Republika Srpska authorities have failed over nine years to
arrest and transfer to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal a single indictee for war
crimes, which is a fundamental requirement for the country as a whole to join the
Partnership for Peace. NATO did not, however, say “no”; they said “not yet”, with
the summit acknowledging Bosnia and Herzegovina’s progress in defence reform —
also a precondition for Partnership for Peace membership — and urging that it
maintain recent momentum towards creating a single military structure. The alliance
reiterated that Bosnia and Herzegovina would be welcome in the Partnership for
Peace once it had met the established NATO benchmarks.
6.
As a consequence of the NATO decisions at Istanbul, it was necessary to take
extraordinary measures to identify and penalize individuals and organizations
reliably reported to be supporting indicted war criminals. As a result, 59 individuals
were removed either permanently or conditionally from their public and party posts,
and financial penalties were imposed on the Serbian Democratic Party (SDS). An
earlier audit having identified serious abuses, I ordered reform of SDS funding in
future, and that public funding of SDS should be reallocated to State institutions
working on the apprehension of war criminals and regulating party financing. I also
ordered a full-scale audit into Srpsko Sume — a State firm suspected of assisting
indicted war criminals.
7.
My office continued to work on building the capacities of the State Court in
the first half of 2004. The Office of the High Representative’s rule of law team
supervised the recruitment of international judges and prosecutors for the special
panel on organized and financial crimes within the State Court.
8.
Also in the rule of law sphere, the Independent Judicial Commission
completed its work and its mandate was terminated on 31 March. The functions of
the Commission were folded into the single, State-level High Judicial and
Prosecutorial Council, which came into being on 1 May. Based on a law developed
by my office, the multi-ethnic Council has taken over responsibility for appointing
and disciplining judges and prosecutors. It will serve as the guarantor of a new
Bosnia and Herzegovina judiciary that meets the highest European standards.
9.
The Office of the High Representative continued to oversee the establishment
of the State Investigation and Protection Agency. The requisite legislation providing
for this kernel of a genuine, State-level police force was enacted in the first half of
the year, and the Agency moved into new premises during the summer.
10. Considerable progress was made in completing the economic reforms outlined
in the agenda the Office of the High Representative presented to the Peace
Implementation Council in December 2003. The Bulldozer Initiative entered its
third phase, effectively removing or amending laws that acted as barriers to entering
or conducting honest business under purely local auspices. The cumulative impact
of the continuing Bulldozer process has been to make Bosnia and Herzegovina more
business- and investment-friendly. Laws regulating the energy and other basic
sectors were also adopted in the period. Bosnia and Herzegovina joined up to
European grid on 10 October, reconnecting the three electricity companies to the
Western Balkan grid in line with the European Commission plan for central and
southern Europe. As important in the longer term, the Indirect Taxation Authority

4

S/2004/807

began operation, combining customs administrations with its countrywide
headquarters in Banja Luka. The Authority will administer the unified customs
service and supervise the introduction next year of value added tax through a single
account at State level. This fundamental fiscal reform should not only put an end to
much tax evasion and create a level economic playing field across Bosnia and
Herzegovina, but it will also redress the imbalance in fiscal competency between the
State and the entities. By the middle of 2005, we expect to see registration begin for
implementation of VAT, with a target date of 1 January 2006 for full operative
implementation.
11. Following up on the achievements of the Defence Reform Commission in
2003, the first half of the year saw the appointment of the first post-war defence
minister, Nikola Radovanović, key appointments of general officers to the new
Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the passage of the defence budgets
necessary to make the continuation of reform (and the attainment of Partnership for
Peace benchmarks) possible. Downsizing of the entity armies has proceeded and the
necessary enabling legislation has been adopted and rulebooks for the Ministry of
Defence have been approved. Staffing of the Ministry has proceeded slowly,
however, and it still lacks adequate premises to accommodate the staff it ought to
have.
12. The keystone in Bosnia and Herzegovina’s future intelligence and security
system, the Intelligence and Security Agency, commenced operations on 1 June
2004. The principal appointments had been made; the Book of Rules on Internal
Organization was approved by the Council of Ministers on 24 June; and
parliamentary oversight by a commission of MPs has been assured. My office
continues to assist the members of staff of the former entity agencies to cooperate in
preparing the way for their complete fusion by 31 December 2004.
13. Responding to Prime Minister Adnan Terzić’s initiative, a Police Restructuring
Commission was established on 2 July with a mandate to propose “a single structure
of policing for Bosnia and Herzegovina, under the overall political oversight of a
ministry or ministries in the Council of Ministers”. The Commission started its work
on 22 July and is due to report by the end of the year.
14. I imposed a permanent statute for the city of Mostar on 28 January 2004,
drawing for the most part on agreements reached between the parties in the two
Mostar Commissions, which had met to consider the city’s future during 2003/04.
This has initiated a process that will put an end to the parallel structures and
segregation that have prevailed in that city since the war. The new statute provides
guarantees against untrammelled majority rule and ensures that the vital national
interests of the three constituent peoples and the “others” are safeguarded. By
March, we were able to proceed with the abolition of the six pre-existing “citymunicipalities” and their unification in a single city government. We have continued
to make progress — symbolized by the inauguration in July of the rebuilt “Old
Bridge” — but the process will not be complete until elections for a new city
assembly are held in October and an administration is formed.
15. In 2003 the Bosnia and Herzegovina Human Rights Chamber ordered
Republika Srpska to conduct an in-depth investigation into the fates of those persons
still counted as missing following the massacres in and around Srebrenica in July
1995. The Srebrenica Commission finally began work in January 2004 and
eventually produced a report, adopted by the Republika Srpska Government, which,

5

S/2004/807

for the first time, acknowledged the magnitude and nature of the atrocities
committed following the fall of the Srebrenica “safe area” and provided new details
on mass grave sites.
16. During the reporting period, the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities
successfully assumed responsibility for annex VII implementation. The Office of the
High Representative has maintained a small team to monitor developments, but
which will close down at the end of November 2004. The property repossession rate
rose to 93 per cent, the State Law on Refugees and Displaced Persons (amended in
September 2003) is gradually being implemented, and the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Ministry for Human Rights and Refugees established regional centres in Sarajevo,
Mostar, Banja Luka and Tuzla.
17. Significant progress has been achieved in all of the core tasks of the Office of
the High Representative: rule of law, reforming the economy, strengthening the
capacity of Bosnia and Herzegovina institutions, and defence reform. In June 2004,
the Office presented an update of its mission implementation plan to the Peace
Implementation Council Steering Board. In September it received approval for a
budget for next year which will close down the rule of law pillar (its work having
been successfully completed) and cut its budget by 20 per cent and its manpower by
25 per cent. The updated mission implementation plan document can be found on
the web site of the Office, www.ohr.int.

I.

Introduction
18. This is my fourth report to the Secretary-General since taking over as High
Representative on 27 May 2002. I will endeavour in this report to assess the
progress made towards attaining the goals outlined in my previous report, as well as
reviewing developments during the reporting period.

II.

Political update and core reforms
19. The political scene in Bosnia and Herzegovina was dominated in this reporting
period by the consequences of two events in late 2003: the publication in November
of the European Commission’s Feasibility Study on the readiness of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to begin negotiations on a stabilization and association agreement and
the issuance in December by NATO of benchmarks that the country must meet if it
is to join the Partnership for Peace programme. Following publication of these
documents, all parties represented in the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliament signed
a common platform pledging to take the measures necessary for further EuroAtlantic integration, the first commitment of its kind in post-war Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In practice, the authorities have succeeded in fulfilling some of the
key conditions set by the European Commission and NATO, notably by adopting a
good deal of the requisite legislation and establishing several new State-level
institutions. However, the failure of the authorities in Republika Srpska to cooperate
fully with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the
sluggish pace at all levels of government in actually implementing the reforms
adopted has limited the country’s progress over the last six months.
20. The European Commission Feasibility Study set 16 general conditions for
opening negotiations on a stabilization and association agreement. Many of these

6

S/2004/807

conditions entail the adoption and implementation of significant structural reforms,
including the transfer of key competencies from the entities to the State.
21. One of the principal Partnership for Peace benchmarks, the establishment of a
State-level Ministry of Defence with command and control functions exercised on
behalf of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency rather than the entities, has made
substantial progress over the period under review.
22. Yet this success has been undermined by the Republika Srpska authorities’
persistent failure to cooperate adequately with the Tribunal, particularly in arresting
persons indicted for war crimes. It was this deficiency that caused NATO to deny
Bosnia and Herzegovina entry into the Partnership for Peace at the alliance’s June
summit in Istanbul. As a result, I was forced on 30 June to take extraordinary
measures to penalize individuals and organizations identified as supporting
suspected war criminals, removing — either permanently or conditionally — 59
individuals from party and other public positions, including the Republika Srpska
Interior Minister and the President of the Serbian Democratic Party. Having
previously initiated an audit of SDS finances that revealed serious and widespread
abuses, I ordered that the party should create a single account and forfeit its public
funding until Bosnia and Herzegovina was cooperating fully with the Tribunal.
Public monies which would otherwise flow to SDS will in the meantime be diverted
to State institutions working to apprehend or try indicted war criminals and to
regulate party financing.
23. As in the past six months, the priorities of the Office of the High
Representative will continue to reflect the key targets set for the country by NATO
and the European Commission over the next year or more, and the need for effective
institutions at the State level: we will work to ensure that the State Court, the State
Investigation and Protection Agency (SIPA) and police forces in general, the
Indirect Taxation Authority, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Ministry of Defence and
the Joint General Staff/Operational Command, the Intelligence and Security Agency,
and the Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers are fully operational and selfsustainable.

III.

The European Commission Feasibility Study requirements
24. The Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities made notable progress in the first half
of 2004 in fulfilling the legislative requirements of the European Commission’s
Feasibility Study. Eighteen laws were enacted, many of which introduce significant
structural changes in the fields of crime prevention (SIPA package), the judiciary
(High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council), customs and taxation (Indirect Taxation
Authority law), development of a single economic space (Business Registration
Law, Insurance Law and the laws establishing Institutes for Standardization,
Meteorology and Intellectual Property), and the functioning of the energy market
(ISO, TRANSCO).
25. An additional 21 laws adopted by the Council of Ministers awaited enactment
by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly at the end of June. These
relate to public broadcasting; phytosanitary matters; market standards (General
Food Safety Law, Market Surveillance Law, General Product Safety Law, and
Technical Requirements and Conformity Assessment Law); the judiciary
(Amendments to the Law on State Court and State Prosecutor’s Office); the

7

S/2004/807

introduction of VAT (Law on Payments into the Single Account and Allocation of
Revenues, Law on Customs Policy, VAT Law); budget control (State Finance Law);
and police reform (Law on Border Protection of Bosnia and Herzegovina and State
Border Service). These laws are expected to win parliamentary endorsement in the
course of the autumn.
26. In the rule of law sphere, the State-level High Judicial and Prosecutorial
Council was established on 1 June. The Council, including its secretariat and Office
of the Disciplinary Counsel, is now operational and will continue the work of
judicial and prosecutorial reform initiated by the Independent Judicial Commission,
which closed down on 1 April. The Council is expected to complete the
reappointment of judges in the early autumn. It will, however, be necessary in the
near future to address the unacceptably high level of judicial salaries, which are now
handling the delivery of effective justice within current budgetary restraints.
27. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly completed passage of
the main laws establishing the State Investigation and Protection Agency in July.
The Agency moved into temporary premises and started recruiting the range of
personnel necessary for it to grow rapidly into a robust State police force capable of
fighting organized crime, illegal immigration and international terrorism, as well as
apprehending indicted war criminals.
28. Together with the EU Customs and Fiscal Assistance Office, the Office of the
High Representative has provided continuous support over the past six months to
the nascent Indirect Taxation Authority. Although not yet fully operational or
appropriately housed, the Authority acquired a budget of its own, elaborated a
regional structure and revenue allocation mechanism, and submitted draft VAT
legislation to the State parliament. The introduction of VAT is essential if Bosnia
and Herzegovina is both to finance its growing State apparatus and progress towards
EU candidacy.
29. A single State-wide business registration system was created in the period. The
register will simplify the process of company registration and enhance the business
environment for domestic and foreign investors.
30. My office facilitated the establishment of an EU-compatible phytosanitary
office (Administration for Plant Health Protection) at the State level. Sets of
phytosanitary and market standards’ laws await parliamentary approval.
31. The Office of the High Representative and the European Commission continue
to oversee the adoption of a State-level law on public procurement that would
introduce an effective and transparent public procurement regime in line with EU
standards.
32. The passage of energy sector reforms created a unified energy system
throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina. The reforms foster compliance by Bosnia and
Herzegovina with its international obligations and facilitate further the country’s
integration in the south-east European regional electricity market.
33. We have made great strides as well in establishing a domestic War Crimes
Registry. The registry should manage and administer war crimes trials in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the aim being to take on cases from The Hague in January 2005. A
package of enabling legislation developed by my office is proceeding through the
Parliamentary Assembly and should be enacted early in the autumn.

8

S/2004/807

34. The Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities will likely have completed the
majority of the legislative steps required by the Feasibility Study by the end of
October 2004. The Office of the High Representative, together with the European
Commission, remains heavily engaged in helping to draft and in lobbying on behalf
of these laws, as well as in working to strengthen the capacity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina institutions to implement them.

IV.

Inculcating the rule of law
35. Building on earlier work, we continued to make progress during the reporting
period. Significant steps towards firmly establishing the rule of law in Bosnia and
Herzegovina included the following:
36. The special panel for organized and financial crimes within the State Court of
Bosnia and Herzegovina was created by amendments to the Law on Courts early in
2003. Similar amendments to the Law on the Prosecutor’s Office created a
comparable special department for prosecutors. Recruitment of international judges
and prosecutors to serve in these departments presented a challenge but, by the
middle of 2003, international judges and prosecutors had arrived and begun working
with their domestic colleagues. Participation by these international members quickly
demonstrated the merits of the scheme when the special department launched
prosecutions of high-profile instances of organized criminal activity that had not
previously been effectively attacked. The participation of international judges in the
panels hearing these cases soon also proved its value. However, the recruitment of
sufficient numbers of foreign judges and prosecutors remains a challenge for my
office, while the advent of a special war crimes panel will make that challenge even
more critical. Unless this can be remedied by increasing the number of international
judges and prosecutors, progress on establishing the rule of law in Bosnia and
Herzegovina could be held up. On the other hand, the establishment this year of a
common registry for the special panels should result in more effective use of these
limited resources.
37. The initial meetings with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia to discuss the creation of a domestic capacity to try war crimes cases
transferred from The Hague were held late in 2002. Discussions continued in 2003,
resulting in an agreement between the Tribunal and the Office of the High
Representative regarding the resources required and the approximate numbers and
types of cases that could be tried by the State Court. That agreement was presented
to and endorsed by the Security Council. This was followed by a donors’ conference
that sought to elicit support from interested States to pay the international costs of
the project. The financial help pledged during the conference enabled the project to
proceed. In May 2004, the United States provided a project manager for the
undertaking. The plan calls for an international agreement between the High
Representative and the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina to create a special
chamber within the State Court to try such cases, as well as for the formation of a
registrar’s office within the court. The registry will provide the logistical and
administrative support for both the special panel for war crimes and the existing
panel for organized and financial crimes. This support is to include recruitment of
judges and prosecutors, management of international donations, case assignments to
the special panels, administration of witness protection programmes, security issues,
resolution of issues relating to confinement facilities, and numerous other

9

S/2004/807

administrative matters. The international agreement should be signed during
September 2004 and the domestic enabling legislation necessary to carry it out
should follow in October. When that happens, all responsibility for this project will
fall to the Registrar’s Office.
38. The effort to develop a sound anti-money-laundering programme has
progressed well. A new law that complies with international standards was enacted
in June 2004, as part of the package of laws expanding the role of the State
Investigation and Protection Agency. The law was the fruit of an extensive
collaborative process that included input from various international organizations
and all relevant domestic agencies. This law makes SIPA, through its Financial
Intelligence Department, primarily responsible for compiling and analysing
information from financial transactions in order to initiate appropriate criminal
investigations. Even though these are now primarily the job of SIPA, the Office of
the High Representative will maintain its involvement in the project through the end
of 2004 as it works with the Government of Spain to provide specialized hardware,
software and training to assist SIPA in its work.
39. The effort to develop the means to seize assets acquired through or used in
criminal activities resulted in the drafting of a law to be enacted at State level to
make such a sanction available to the State prosecutor. This law, produced after
extensive consultations with both international organizations and local judges,
prosecutors and law enforcement agencies, was submitted to the Council of
Ministers for its consideration and adoption, and should be on the statute book by
the end of 2004.
40. The Anti-Crime and Corruption Unit has had to adapt to the development of
the State Court and the State Prosecutor’s Office as the arrival of international
judges and prosecutors meant that prime responsibility for investigating, prosecuting
and trying most major cases of organized crime and corruption shifted to these new
bodies. In addition, the adoption of the new criminal procedure codes at State and
entity levels meant that prosecutors, rather than judges or police officers, were
leading investigations. The Unit reorganized itself during the latter part of 2003 into
prosecutorial teams consisting of local and international prosecutors and
investigators. Each of these teams has been assigned to specific cases and placed at
the disposal of international prosecutors within the State Prosecutor’s Office in
order to support their investigations and preparation of cases for trial. Although
prosecutors and investigators continue to perform other tasks — such as
participating in the vetting of nominees for public office and reacting to newly
discovered cases of official corruption — they now concentrate on providing
essential support to international prosecutors.
41. A valuable dividend realized by this reorganization is the development of local
capacity resulting from collaboration between domestic and foreign lawyers and
investigators. The creation of a small but effective cadre of local lawyers and
investigators should provide valuable assets for agencies such as SIPA and the State
Prosecutor’s Office.
42. The Anti-Crime and Corruption Unit also sought to facilitate the international
agreements necessary to forge cooperation between and among the enforcement
agencies, prosecutors and courts in Bosnia and Herzegovina and their counterparts
in other countries. Most major crimes committed in Bosnia and Herzegovina have
an international dimension, since most major crime organizations also operate in

10

S/2004/807

neighbouring States. The Unit has therefore worked to ensure Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s adoption of the international instruments necessary to foster crossborder cooperation and coordination in indicting, investigating and prosecuting
crimes. In addition, the Unit took the lead in developing a prototype bilateral
agreement for such cooperation and coordination with neighbouring States.
Although a draft of this prototype has been completed and submitted to the
government, the Office of the High Representative will need to monitor the eventual
negotiation and execution of such agreements in order to ensure that the project is
completed.
43. The special projects team of the rule of law pillar worked closely with other
international organizations, including the European Union Police Mission, the
European Commission and the International Criminal Investigative Training
Assistance Programme, on establishing SIPA as a full-fledged, State-level police
agency with the resources and authority aggressively to combat organized and
international crime, corruption and terrorism. The team organized, managed and
directed the efforts that led to the drafting and enactment of the package of laws that
granted SIPA its necessary legal authority. This package also included a Law on
Police Officials, which established standards for the employment of police officers,
as well as their promotion, demotion, powers, responsibilities and the like.
Moreover, the package contained laws providing SIPA with responsibilities in the
fields of money-laundering and witness protection.
44. Bosnia and Herzegovina lacks modern criminal intelligence capabilities. This
deficiency has seriously impaired its ability to deal effectively with organized crime
and corruption. The Criminal Intelligence Unit in the Office of the High
Representative has begun to work with SIPA and its advisers from the European
Union Police Mission to develop this capacity within the Criminal Investigations
Department (CID) and to transfer Criminal Intelligence Unit technology to it as it
matures.
45. The process of reappointing all judges and prosecutors at all levels in Bosnia
and Herzegovina required a massive effort. Almost 1,000 vacancies were advertised.
Over 1,700 applications were received and reviewed. Candidates were vetted in a
procedure including thorough background investigations. More than 900 candidates
were interviewed. The result was the appointment (or reappointment) of 877 judges
and prosecutors. Only those positions for which the number and calibre of
candidates were inadequate remain to be filled.
46. Establishing adequate budgets for courts was hindered by the need to pay
substantial compensation to those judges who were not reappointed. Unresolved
problems relating to judicial salaries and fees for attorneys representing criminal
defendants further complicated the task. The Independent Judicial Commission and
the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council did, however, succeed in developing
reliable data on court needs, judicial compensation requirements and the financial
resources available. Although a good deal remains to be done on these issues by the
new High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council, a solid basis for its work has been
laid.
47. The Disciplinary Prosecutor received cases against 142 judges and
prosecutors. A number of disciplinary hearings were held, though some judges and
prosecutors opted to resign before the cases against them could be heard. Sanctions
were imposed in 14 cases of established judicial misconduct.

11

S/2004/807

48. The State, entity and Brčko District governments agreed early in 2004 to form
a single High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council to serve them all. The legislation to
give effect to this agreement was duly enacted, and the new Council came into being
as a State-level institution on 1 May 2004. The mandate of the Independent Judicial
Commission was consequently terminated, but with many members of staff
transferring to the Council secretariat. The High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council
will continue to employ a few international staff and the secretariat will include
some foreign advisers. Although the new Council has no formal relationship with
the Office of the High Representative, it will continue to work closely with the Rule
of Law and Legal Departments on issues of common interest. Specifically, the
Office of the High Representative will need to provide support to the Council as it
attempts to deal with the unresolved issues of judicial, prosecutorial and defence
counsel compensation, court budgets and minor offence courts. It is likely that the
Office of the High Representative’s continuing assistance will also be necessary to
avoid the re-establishment of some courts closed in the course of restructuring, since
certain legislators continue to agitate for their reopening.

V.

Reforming the economy
49. Notable progress has been made in completing the items on the economic
reform agenda presented to the Peace Implementation Council in December 2003.
The economy of Bosnia and Herzegovina, however, has yet to register many
concrete benefits from these legal, fiscal and structural reforms. More positively,
this period has seen the domestic authorities assert greater ownership over some
important economic issues, particularly in regard to fiscal and customs reforms.
50. Indeed, advances recorded in the spheres of indirect taxation and customs
during the reporting period have been among the most important for the country’s
long-term sustainability. The Indirect Taxation Authority, which commenced
operation in January 2004, will soon be exercising its responsibilities through an
integrated and indirect tax-collection service, as well as through a State-level
customs service. These new bodies will be implementing a single set of rules,
applicable throughout the country. This significant progress means that it should
prove possible to launch collection of VAT by the end of 2005, with much of the
work introduced into the business community and tax administration during the
summer of 2005.
51. The Office of the High Representative has been instrumental in efforts to find
a solution to the longstanding problem of the entities’ internal indebtedness. Once
this is resolved, a major obstacle to investment and job creation in the country will
have been removed. An enabling law was passed in the Republika Srpska, but
enactment of similar legislation in the Federation is proving contentious on both
popular political and fiscal grounds.
52. More advances have been made in longstanding efforts to reform and
restructure the public utilities sector and to create a business-friendly environment
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Law on Civil Aviation, adopted by the
Parliamentary Assembly in December 2003, has been successfully implemented this
year. Drafting of the Railway Law, which had previously been blocked by entity
obstructionism, was revived during the period; the law and an accompanying interentity agreement should be adopted by the end of the year. If so, they will create the

12

S/2004/807

preconditions for liberalizing and restructuring of the country’s railways in the
interests of greater efficiency and better customer service.
53. The laws establishing the Electricity Transmission Company and the
Independent System Operator were passed during the present reporting period. Once
implemented, these laws will help ensure both the proper functioning of the
electricity transmission system and Bosnia and Herzegovina’s further integration in
the EU internal electricity market. Furthermore the laws will enable Bosnia and
Herzegovina to be ready to take part in the reconnection of the European electricity
grid, which will be effected on 10 October.
54. Given the ongoing need to improve the business environment and standards of
corporate governance in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Office of the High
Representative supported the drafting of several relevant pieces of legislation: the
Law on Public Enterprises, the Law on Investment of Public Funds and the Law on
Public Procurement. These laws are expected to institutionalize the concept of
corporate management accountability and to introduce internationally accepted
accounting standards.
55. During its second phase, the Bulldozer Initiative coordinated by the Office of
the High Representative met with some notable successes in its continuing effort to
cut bureaucracy and to get rid of rules and regulations inimical to investment.
Intensive negotiations are now under way in order to transfer ownership of this
process to domestic partners. Meanwhile, the Bulldozer Initiative embarked on its
third phase in July. New proposals for reform have been coming in from all parts of
the country.
56. The Framework Law on Business Registration having been adopted, the
authorities are proceeding to create a single business registration system that will
reduce the time and cost of registering a business in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
57. The Office of the High Representative continued during the reporting period to
seek to centralize the process of privatizing enterprises across Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Although progress has been limited, a single information point for
privatization opportunities was established in March, with a web site
(www.privatizacija.ba) offering useful, multilingual information for potential
investors. My office was also successful in assisting the State Veterinary Institute to
become operational and so fulfil its international reporting requirements. These
actions have already begun to generate greater confidence among local and
international investors and have improved opportunities for Bosnia and Herzegovina
producers to export their agricultural products.
58. Release of international audits of the three public telecommunications
companies revealed alarming patterns of mismanagement and incompetence, which
have cost both consumers and tax payers dear. In response, the entity governments
committed themselves to implementing reforms aimed at improving management
practices and eliminating endemic corruption in the sector.
59. Over the last few months, my office has been ensuring proper execution of the
State and entity budgets for the 2004 fiscal year. The process of drafting the 2005
budgets has now begun, and the Office will be working with domestic colleagues to
meet the challenges represented by the continuing transfer of new competencies,
resources and costs from the entities to the State.

13

S/2004/807

VI.

Strengthening the State Government
60. In the spring of 2004, the Office of the High Representative developed a State
Government Strengthening Plan with the aim of assisting the Chairman of the
Council of Ministers to make the State ministries and Council of Ministers services
fully operational. The State Government Strengthening Plan focuses on two areas:
staffing and premises. Staffing levels in most ministries have remained low, due
mainly to the fact that there is inadequate office space available for State
institutions. Unless and until its component parts — the ministries — are properly
established, the Council of Ministers does not have the ability to implement the full
range of reforms it has taken on. As the European Commission Feasibility Study
makes clear, however, a functional State government is a sine qua non if Bosnia and
Herzegovina is to progress along the stabilization and association process. It is also
crucial if the High Representative’s executive powers are to be phased out and the
transition to full domestic ownership completed.
61. It was the problem of staffing the State ministries that prompted the Office of
the High Representative to commission a review of the application of the State Civil
Service Law by the State Civil Service Agency. The March 2004 report proposed a
number of managerial and legal changes, which the agency has since turned into an
action plan. The agency has initiated changes in its personnel structure and is
currently drafting by-laws and amendments to the Civil Service Law as proposed by
the report. The Office of the High Representative Legal Department is working in
close cooperation with the agency on these amendments, which should be adopted
by the end of the year.
62. The Office is working with Prime Minister Terzić on an action plan to move
three ministries into adequate premises before the end of the year. In the absence of
a law on State property that prescribes who owns what, the process of allocating
accommodation to State institutions also requires close cooperation with the entity
governments.

VII.

Public administration and civil service reform
63. Public administration reform is ongoing. At this stage, the European
Commission-funded reviews of key elements of the public sector are at the heart of
the process. Teams composed of both national and international experts carry out the
reviews. In July 2004, one of the reviews, a report on the country’s police forces,
was published. It concluded that the police forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina are
both hidebound and unprepared for the future. Most disturbingly, it demonstrated
that the existence of several separate layers of policing, without effective
mechanisms for cooperation, significantly impairs the fight against crime, drains
public coffers and restricts economic development. As such, the report served as a
basis for the establishment, in cooperation with the High Representative, of a Police
Restructuring Commission by Prime Minister Terzić, which has been tasked, inter
alia, with proposing a policing model that is “structured in an efficient and effective
manner” and is “cost-effective and financially sustainable”. By the end of the year,
the public sector reviews will produce more reports. These, in turn, should lead to
the formulation of the concrete actions necessary to improve Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s bloated and inefficient public administration. The office of the public

14

S/2004/807

administration reform coordinator will soon be moved to the Prime Minister’s office
to underline the fact that he is in charge of the overall reform process.
64. Throughout the reporting period, my office continued to support the
establishment of the Federation Civil Service Agency and the recruitment of its first
director. The agency should be operational by the end of the year, so allowing the
Federation Civil Service Law to become applicable from 2005. Proper supervision
of recruiting procedures by this agency is essential if the ruling parties are to be
deterred from using the hiring of civil servants as a means of dispensing party
patronage. Implementation of the legislation at the entity, cantonal and municipal
levels will be closely coordinated with UNDP to ensure the application of
international standards and selection criteria. UNDP has pledged additional financial
and technical support. But more funds are required to make certain that pubic
officials are recruited and engaged solely on merit.

VIII.

Police reform
65. In cooperation with Prime Minister Terzić, I formally established the Police
Restructuring Commission on 2 July, with a mandate to restructure Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s police forces and to propose “a single structure of policing for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, under the overall political oversight of a ministry or ministries in
the Council of Ministers”. Wilfried Martens, a former Prime Minister of Belgium, is
chairing the commission and David Blakey, a former United Kingdom Inspector of
Police, is serving as his deputy.
66. Under the current system, the police forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina work
according to an obsolescent policing philosophy with a discredited management
style. They have no clear strategies for modernization strategies; their equipment
and systems are outdated; and they have too many under-trained police officers.
Effective crime fighting is significantly hampered by the many uncoordinated levels
of policing and the absence of cooperation mechanisms. This fragmented and
inefficient structure, reflecting the national-territorial divisions within the country,
impairs the State’s ability to provide security for its citizens, devours public funds
and impedes economic development. The current system is ill-equipped to address
the increasingly sophisticated challenges posed by organized crime, terrorism, drug
trafficking and money-laundering. Furthermore, the current system cannot cope
adequately with “social crimes” such as juvenile delinquency and domestic
violence. Nor can it offer support to victims.

IX.

Defence reform
67. Defence reform continues to forge ahead. Bosnia and Herzegovina now has a
State-level Ministry of Defence headed by an energetic minister; the Parliamentary
Assembly is taking its oversight role seriously; and the downsizing of the entity
armies is progressing steadily. The crucial laws are in place and the key
appointments have been made. With the confirmation of the last of the general
officers by the Presidency on 21 July (chief of joint staff, deputy chief for
operations and commander of the operational command), the top military posts have
been filled. The Council of Ministers had approved the Book of Rules on Internal
Organization for the Ministry of Defence, the Joint Staff and the Operational

15

S/2004/807

Command on 20 May. The Book of Rules foresees a total of 172 positions in the
Bosnia and Herzegovina defence institutions: 100 in the Ministry of Defence, 44 in
the Joint Staff and 28 in the Operational Command. At the time of writing, however,
there are only 48 persons in post, including senior officials, deputies and advisers.
The NATO Partnership for Peace benchmarks specify that 65 per cent of the
authorized staff positions (or 112 persons) should now be in place.
68. Both entity armies have downsized by at least 25 per cent. Both defence
ministries have also adopted new organizational structures. The civilian complement
of the Federation Ministry of Defence is to be cut by 27 per cent — to around 945
positions. The Republika Srpska Ministry of Defence has reduced its number of
posts by 42 per cent — from 828 to 479. The Presidency’s decision in March on the
size and structure of the Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina envisages a
much-reduced total of 12,000 full-time military professionals. The reserves,
meantime, are to be reduced to 60,000, while both the intake of conscripts and the
duration of military service are being cut. The Presidency’s decision also provided
for the restructuring and downsizing of both the Republika Srpska Army General
Staff (from 118 to 80) and the Federation Army Joint Command (from 278 to 150).
69. The defence budgets for 2004 were adopted in line with the NATO-endorsed
benchmarks: the State and Republika Srpska defence budgets at the end of 2003 and
the Federation budget late in March 2004. Preliminary estimates for the defence
budgets for the period 2005/07 are being prepared. A comprehensive defence
budgeting system has been proposed, though its implementation depends upon both
formal approval and additional staffing. A common defence resource management
system — which would incorporate the budgeting system — is also still pending.
70. Despite this progress, enthusiasm among the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities for defence reform implementation has understandably waned since the
NATO Istanbul summit. But the legal and institutional foundation now exists on
which we can continue to build. The main task in the second half of 2004 and in
2005 will be to develop the State’s ability to exercise its right to command and
control the Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina through the chain of
command’s operational and administrative branches. Thus the principal focus of my
office will remain centred on institutional development. This means that the plans to
enhance the State’s capacity to organize the staffing, financing, training, equipping
and logistical support of several permanent, State-level units will need to be
elaborated, adopted and implemented.

X.

Intelligence reform
71. The Intelligence and Security Agency became operational on 1 June 2004. The
director general, deputy director general and inspector general assumed their
positions as planned. Progress has been made in preparing the necessary rulebooks,
the most important of which, the Book of Rules on Internal Organization, was
approved by the Council of Ministers on 24 June. The organizational structure
prescribed by this rulebook is meant to be in place by no later than 31 December
2004. Preparation of the other 20 sub-regulative frameworks (or rulebooks) for the
Agency is proceeding at an acceptable speed and they should soon be complete.
72. Parliamentary oversight is ensured by a commission of MPs, which has held
several sessions. Its counterpart in the Council of Ministers, the Executive

16

S/2004/807

Intelligence Committee, has been slower to take shape, principally because the
Committee has not yet fully staffed its secretariat, the Intelligence-Security
Advisory Service. As a result, some delay in completing the review process (i.e.,
reappointment) of staff inherited from the former Republika Srpska and Federation
agencies is inevitable. This review of staff should, nonetheless, be complete by midNovember 2004, giving the Intelligence and Security Agency a staff complement
that is both operationally efficient and affordable.
73. In general, the transformation of the intelligence and security sector is
proceeding according to plan, despite some managerial difficulties. Although a
politically and nationally sensitive project, working groups staffed by members of
the former intelligence agencies have cooperated to draft new by-laws and are
preparing for their final integration in one fully operational agency by 31 December
2004. Obviously, these formal preparations are only a part of the challenge. Mutual
suspicions will be overcome only gradually; there will be practical difficulties to
sort out; and conflicts will undoubtedly surface. Thus while ultimate responsibility
for ensuring that the Intelligence and Security Agency actually functions as
envisaged will continue to lie with the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities — and,
in particular, with the premier and Council of Ministers — I consider it necessary to
maintain our policy of assisting, monitoring and guiding the process. I have
therefore established the post of “supervisor for intelligence reform” to which I have
appointed Ambassador Kalman Kocsis. He will work with the Intelligence and
Security Agency management to ensure that the Agency develops as it should.

XI.

SFOR handover to EUFOR
74. At its summit in Istanbul on 28 and 29 June 2004, NATO announced that the
Stabilization Force (SFOR) would be terminated. On 9 July the Security Council
welcomed the European Union’s intention to launch a military mission from
December 2004 and, on 12 July 2004, the European Council issued its decision to
replace the NATO mission with an EU-led force (EUFOR). Concurrently, NATO
will establish a headquarters in Sarajevo, which will assist the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities in continuing defence reforms.
75. The launch of EUFOR in Bosnia and Herzegovina marks the beginning of a
new phase in the country’s recovery: its transition from the era of Dayton to the era
of Brussels. The EU force will work in unison with the EU Special
Representative/High Representative, the European Union Police Mission, the
European Union Monitoring Mission and the European Commission’s assistance
programmes to support the stabilization and association process and the Office of
the High Representative’s mission implementation plan. EUFOR is meant to
buttress the comprehensive EU approach towards Bosnia and Herzegovina, enabling
the country to progress towards EU integration by its own efforts.
76. Bosnia and Herzegovina still requires assistance to continue defence and wider
security-sector reforms in preparation for its eventual integration into Euro-Atlantic
structures, in the first instance the Partnership for Peace. Building upon the
implementation of the Defence Law and the establishment of State defence
institutions in 2004, the task commencing in 2005 will be to develop the State’s
capacity to exercise its right to command and control the armed forces through the

17

S/2004/807

chain of command’s operational and administrative branches. Thus, the main focus
will be on developing Bosnia and Herzegovina defence institutions.
77. The long-term NATO political commitment to the country will remain; and the
establishment of a NATO headquarters will underline that fact. The NATO Sarajevo
headquarters will have as its principal task the maintenance of the momentum on
defence reform, through the leadership of international efforts to support the Bosnia
and Herzegovina authorities in defence reform. This will be done by
co-chairmanship by NATO of the Defence Reform Commission. The office will also
undertake certain operational and support tasks.
78. Since the formal decision, planning has continued apace, and joint visits by
EU and NATO leaders have reinforced the unity of purpose of the two
organizations.

XII.

Mostar
79. The opening of the rebuilt Old Bridge in Mostar on 23 July 2004 was both a
symbolic and substantive achievement for the city and its citizens. It took place in a
festive and peaceful atmosphere and attracted the attention of the world. It showed
that Mostar was returning to normality, that wartime and post-war tensions had
eased considerably over the past few years, and that the city’s unification was
indeed under way.
80. As I wrote in my last report, the Office of the High Representative was heavily
engaged in efforts at the end of last year to unify the city of Mostar. Our aim was to
produce a permanent statute for the city, based on compromises that would eliminate
the ethnic and political divisions sustained by the continuing existence of the six socalled “city-municipalities” and “central zone”. In addition to dealing with the “citymunicipalities”, we needed to elaborate an electoral system that would ensure a
measure of power-sharing among the city’s national communities. Although
virtually everything else in the future statute had been agreed by the parties
represented on the commission chaired by Norbert Winterstein, it was obvious that
it was necessary to implement a lasting peace in Mostar by providing solutions to
the still-contentious issues. A statute “key stone” was thus imposed on 28 January
2004. This was effectively the last possible date if the accompanying
implementation plan were to be effected before the Bosnia and Herzegovina
municipal elections scheduled for 2 October 2004.
81. In order to preclude the perpetuation of parallel ethnic structures, it was
necessary to abolish the “city-municipalities” and to transform them into “city
areas” which are, in effect, merely branch offices of the unified city administration,
as well as electoral districts. The new statute also guarantees power-sharing by
means of both national quotas and a range of safeguards for vital national interests
in the composition and rules of the city council. These will prevent domination by
any single nationality, so protecting minority rights, while ensuring a broad national
balance in the city government and administration to be formed after the elections of
2 October.
82. Along with the statute, a decision was issued on the steps and timetable by
which the city would be unified. Thanks to help from Germany, Spain, the United
Kingdom and OSCE, we were quickly able to establish a Mostar Implementation

18

S/2004/807

Unit, charged with assisting the mayor and deputy mayor in carrying out the
necessary reform measures. A Committee on Confidence-Building Measures was
formed, composed of local dignitaries, in order to win popular support for the
unification process.
83. From the beginning, implementation has proceeded well, despite initial
opposition — and for opposite reasons — by the two main political parties in the
city. But they did not seek to obstruct the plan and have latterly offered it at least
tacit support. The abolition of the “city-municipalities” passed off without incident
in March. Since then, rules of procedure for the new council have been adopted, a
joint budget enacted, and a systematization scheme for the city administration has
been put into effect. European financial standards have been introduced to limit
fraud and corruption, municipal and cultural institutions are being reunited, and
work is under way on forming a professional and streamlined city administration. A
positive side-effect of the financial reforms already put in place has been a
significant increase in the revenues available for capital projects, enabling the city
to launch a range of high-profile infrastructure projects for the benefit of the
population as a whole.
84. In summary, 10 years after the war, the reorganization and unification of
Mostar is mostly on track and on time.

XIII.

The Srebrenica Commission
85. A suit brought by a group of relatives of those still classified as missing
following the fall of the Srebrenica “safe area” in July 1995 led, in 2003, to a
judgement by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Human Rights Chamber requiring
Republika Srpska, inter alia, to conduct an in-depth investigation to discover the
fates of these missing persons and to issue a report on its efforts and findings.
86. Although the Human Rights Chamber’s judgement did not task the Office of
the High Representative with any particular action, it was clear that international
monitoring and stimulus to this process was necessary if it was to have the outcome
sought by the Human Rights Chamber. I therefore requested the Senior Deputy High
Representative, Bernard Fassier, to monitor the activity of the Republika Srpska
Commission. Following the Commission’s belated establishment in January 2004, it
became apparent that the role of the Senior Deputy High Representative would need
to involve more than mere monitoring if the Commission were to produce a
meaningful report that disclosed hitherto unknown facts relevant to the chamber’s
judgement. Bernard Fassier and his staff thus became engaged in issues relating to
the composition of the Commission, its methods of work and the removal of
obstacles to its investigation.
87. The eventual result of these efforts was a report in June that, for the first time,
constituted recognition by the Republika Srpska of the origins, nature and extent of
the atrocities committed in and around Srebrenica. The report also disclosed the
location of previously unknown primary and secondary mass graves, documents and
other evidence that may serve as bases for further prosecutions of war crimes.
88. The report established that, between 10 and 19 July 1995, some 8,000
Bosniaks were liquidated in a manner that constituted a severe violation of the

19

S/2004/807

international laws of war and that the perpetrators and others took elaborate
measures to conceal these crimes by relocating the bodies.
89.

Moreover, the report:
– Identified 32 locations of mass graves, 11 of which were not previously
known;
– Elaborated upon the participation of particular Republika Srpska military and
police units;
– Alluded to participation by army and police units from “Republika Srpska
Krajina” and Serbia in the action and aftermath.

90. The report cites documents making clear that “Operation Krivaja” had three
planned phases: the attack on Srebrenica, the separation of women and children, and
the execution of males.
91. The Srebrenica Commission promised to produce a consolidated list of all the
persons still unaccounted for after the July 1995 events in and around Srebrenica,
but stressed that it would have achieved better results if it had had access to other
relevant documentation of the competent Republika Srpska institutions, as well as to
records of the Federation.
92. On 11 June 2004 I sent letters to the EU High Representative for Common
Foreign and Security Policy, Javier Solana, as well as to the NATO SecretaryGeneral, Jaap de Hoop Scheffer, enclosing copies of the report and my assessment
of it. My letter stressed that the information provided would need further
examination and that nothing that had been revealed by the commission altered in
any way the continuing necessity for full cooperation with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia if Bosnia and Herzegovina were to
move forward towards integration in Euro-Atlantic institutions.

XIV.

Bosnia and Herzegovina and the region
93. Bosnia and Herzegovina’s successful presidency of the South-East European
Cooperation Process, including the first meeting of defence ministers from the
region, demonstrated the country’s capacity to play a valuable political role on the
regional level, as well as the utility of the Process as an inter-State forum.
94. The first International Investment Conference organized by the Government of
Bosnia and Herzegovina was held in Mostar on 26 and 27 February. Although
overshadowed by the tragic deaths of the President of the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Boris Trajkovski, and his delegation when their aircraft crashed
while approaching Mostar, the Conference facilitated the establishment of
potentially significant business contacts and investment opportunities. Apart from
the positive political and economic signals that the conference sent out to the
international business community, 12 concrete investment projects were presented
to would-be investors.
95. The wave of intercommunal violence that roiled Kosovo in mid-March did not
spill over into Bosnia and Herzegovina. Political leaders adopted a mature and
statesmanlike approach, the country remained calm, and SFOR units were
despatched to Kosovo to reinforce KFOR.

20

S/2004/807

96. Bosnia and Herzegovina relations with Serbia and Montenegro have continued
to improve, assisted latterly by the election of Boris Tadić as President of Serbia.
Bilateral forums function on a regular basis, including efforts to delimit the exact
border on the lower Drina near Zvornik. Emphasis is placed, however, on economic
cooperation. For example, a Business Council was launched at the Mostar
Investment Conference to exchange information and develop common strategies for
entering third markets.
97. Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia are farther ahead in normalizing their
relations. Formal meetings at presidential level between Croatia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina are held twice annually, and President Stipe Mesić is a regular visitor.
Prime Minister Ivo Sanader has also taken a constructive approach to Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the position of Croats in the country. Border issues between
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia have been almost entirely resolved, with the
notable exception of Croatia’s continuing failure to ratify the treaty granting Bosnia
and Herzegovina free-port rights at Ploče.
98. The European Union’s acceptance of Croatia as a candidate for membership
has had a positive impact in the region, demonstrating that the other western Balkan
States can realistically entertain similar ambitions. Croatia, for its part, has
expressed its readiness to assist its neighbours to the south-east in following its lead.

XV.

Returns by refugees and displaced persons
99. The Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities successfully assumed responsibility
for annex VII implementation during the reporting period. The Office of the High
Representative has maintained a small team — the Annex VII Verification Unit —
to monitor the return process until the end of November 2004. The expected setback
to this process predicted by many did not take place.
100. On the contrary, the rate of property-law implementation climbed to 93 per
cent during the period, with 95 out of 130 municipalities having been deemed to
have substantially completed the process.
101. According to UNHCR statistics, actual returns this year have decreased
significantly in comparison to 2003. It remains too early to say with any certainty,
however, what the main factors behind this fall may be, or whether it represents a
permanent trend.
102. The State Law on Refugees and Displaced Persons, as amended in September
of last year, is being implemented gradually. The Ministry for Human Rights and
Refugees established its regional centres in Sarajevo, Mostar, Banja Luka and Tuzla.
They became operational during the reporting period.
103. The Bosnia and Herzegovina State Commission for Refugees and Displaced
Persons, on which the Office of the High Representative sits as an observer, has
been appointed and is now acting as the main coordinating body between the State,
the entities and Brčko District. The director of the Return Fund has also been
appointed. It can therefore be expected that this institution, referred to in the
European Commission Feasibility Study, will soon assume its vital role of
controlling financially return projects approved by the State Commission.

21

S/2004/807

104. The Republika Srpska has obstructed the harmonization of entity legislation
with the State Law on refugees and displaced persons. The Office of the High
Representative remains active in seeking to ensure that bureaucratic and political
barriers are removed, so allowing for completion of the harmonization process.
105. The transfer of responsibilities from the Commission for Real Property Claims
to the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities was mostly completed during the
reporting period. We expect that a body charged with reconsidering Commission
decisions will be established and are awaiting the appointment of its commissioners.

XVI.

The European Union Police Mission
106. Following the sudden and tragic death of European Union Police Mission
Commissioner Sven Frederiksen in January 2004, the Council of the European
Union appointed Kevin Carty of Ireland as his successor. Commissioner Carty
assumed his command on 1 March 2004.
107. The EU Police Mission continued during the reporting period to implement its
seven programmes, registering notable progress in several areas.
108. The development of a standardized national intelligence model for application
throughout the country has assisted in the fight against major and organized crime.
Likewise, the standardization of the CID system in the entities and Brčko District is
paving the way for the State-level agencies (SIPA, State Border Service and
Interpol) working under the umbrella of the Ministry of Security to collaborate more
effectively with lower-level agencies.
109. Supported by international stakeholders, the EU Police Mission set up a free
telephone hotline called Krimo-lovci (Crime Hunters) in March 2004. Citizens can
now report anonymously any criminal activity they see or learn about to the local
police, who are monitored by the Mission. Krimo-lovci has received an average of
19 calls per day since its inception.
110. Progress in the fight against major and organized crime, including human
trafficking, received international recognition: the Fourth Annual Trafficking in
Persons Report, issued by the United States Department of State in 2004,
acknowledged this progress by upgrading Bosnia and Herzegovina from tier 3 to
tier 2.
111. SIPA is now an established police force with executive powers. The EU Police
Mission, the Office of the High Representative and other stakeholders developed a
package of laws, adopted by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly
during the period, which will make SIPA the key force in the fight against serious
organized crime. SIPA moved into a temporary headquarters building in Sarajevo in
May. SIPA has also established two regional headquarters in Banja Luka and
Mostar. Altogether, the three offices currently employ a total of 131 local members
of staff. The EU Police Mission’s role is strictly limited to mentoring, monitoring
and inspections within SIPA. More recruitment will take place in the second half of
the year.
112. The State Border Service (SBS) has continued to enforce its mandate. It has
intensified cooperation with SFOR and the entity-based police forces, increasing the
number of joint border operations. A new law that would equip SBS with an

22

S/2004/807

enhanced legal standing is currently under discussion. Finally, it should be noted
that persons indicted for war crimes were, during this reporting period, for the first
time arrested by SBS while attempting to cross the Bosnia and Herzegovina frontier.
These arrests represent an important step in the development of SBS as a modern
and effective border police.

XVII.

Police certification
113. In my last report, I brought to your attention numerous problems related to the
certification process conducted by the International Police Task Force (IPTF) during
its time in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Immediately following the completion of the
UNMIBH mandate at the end of 2002, numerous police officers that had been
denied certification by IPTF challenged the legality of their dismissals in the courts.
Some have been reinstated as a result of rulings in their favour by the domestic
courts.
114. On 25 June 2004, the President of the Security Council made a statement on
behalf of the Council that called upon the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
ensure that all IPTF decisions were fully and effectively implemented. Meanwhile,
discussions have been taking place between my office and the United Nations on
how best to handle frequent allegations of injustices by former police officers, some
supported by the representative of another United Nations agency in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. To that end, staff of the Office of the High Representative have met
with United Nations officials in New York to seek a remedy for these problems.

XVIII.

Media development
115. My office continued during the period under review to work closely with the
Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities to help them meet the requirements of the
Feasibility Study in the field of public broadcasting. This is part of the long-term
process of transferring responsibility for these issues to the relevant domestic
institutions. The Council of Ministers endorsed the draft legislation on public
broadcasting at the end of April 2004 and forwarded it to the Parliamentary
Assembly for enactment. This legislation is largely compliant with both European
standards and the Dayton Peace Agreement. Further clarity is needed, however, in
regard to one of its most important aspects: the common resource corporation. My
office and the European Commission are now lobbying the Bosnia and Herzegovina
parliament to address outstanding issues and to ensure the sustainability of public
broadcasting in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The State-wide television service that is
intended to become the central institution in Bosnia and Herzegovina’s reformed
public broadcasting system was launched in August 2004 to coincide with the
Olympic Games.

XIX.

Mission implementation plan
116. The Office of the High Representative presented an update of its mission
implementation plan to the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board in June
2004. The update covered the first six months of the year, and showed that

23

S/2004/807

considerable progress has been made. The updated version of the document can be
found on the Office’s web site (www.ohr.int).
117. There have been notable advances in all four of the Office’s core tasks: rule of
law, reforming the economy, strengthening the capacity of Bosnia and Herzegovina
institutions and defence reform.
118. Some of the major accomplishments include:
• The Independent Judicial Commission completed its operations with the
establishment of a single Bosnia and Herzegovina High Judicial and
Prosecutorial Council on 1 June. This was a significant milestone for Bosnia
and Herzegovina and achievement for the international community. (rule of
law)
• The SIPA package of laws was enacted during May of this year, representing a
critical step towards re-shaping the country’s criminal enforcement landscape.
(rule of law)
• Progress has been made in adopting several key economy-related laws,
including the ISO and TRANSCO laws, Bosnia and Herzegovina State-level
insurance laws (electricity sector), a Law on Business Registration, a Law on
Accounting and Auditing, and the Law on Registered Pledges. (economic
reform)
• The Intelligence Law was adopted on time in March this year, and the
Intelligence Agency was established. (strengthening the capacity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina institutions)
• The appointment of a defence minister in March marked a fundamental step
forward for the country. This appointment was followed by others to key Statelevel military posts and the establishment of the requisite defence institutions.
(defence reform)
• The identity-card management programme has made great strides in endowing
the State with the means to manage — and to vouch for the integrity of —
identity documents, despite politically motivated attempts to undermine it.
(strengthening the capacity of Bosnia and Herzegovina institutions)
119. However, many of the same problems we flagged in the previous report remain
issues for us today. Even with the increasingly real lure of EU and NATO
membership, the reform process is taking longer than we had anticipated or hoped.
We have already seen these delays manifested in at least three ways:
• Drafting of key legislation often takes longer than expected, especially as we
rely more on the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities and other agencies to
craft essential laws.
• Draft laws are usually held up during the adoption process and frequently
require multiple amendments.
• Lengthy delays in actually implementing reforms persist (e.g., in allocating
permanent premises for SIPA).
120. In addition to pursuing its mission implementation plan agenda, the Office of
the High Representative has devoted both time and resources to addressing other
issues of importance to both Bosnia and Herzegovina and the international

24

S/2004/807

community. Notable examples are the Srebrenica Commission and education
reform, otherwise led by OSCE.

XX.

Reporting schedule
121. In keeping with my proposal to submit regular reports for onward transmission
to the Security Council, as required by resolution 1031 (1995) of 15 December
1995, I plan to send my next report in January 2005. This report will cover the
period from 1 July to 31 December 2004. My aim is that subsequent reports should
also cover six-month periods. Should you or any Council member require
information at any other time, I should be only too pleased to provide a written
update.

25
