A /69/PV.86

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-ninth session

86th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 5 May 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Uganda)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 123 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
Draft resolution (A/69/L.60)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly held its debate on agenda item 123 and its
sub-items (a) to (y) at its 48th plenary meeting, on
11 November 2014.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/69/L.60 entitled “Political declaration on
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/69/L.60?
Draft resolution A/69/L.60 was adopted (resolution
69/277).
The President: I welcome the adoption today of
the political declaration on strengthening cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations (resolution 69/277). I thank

Member States for their constructive engagement and
contribution during the negotiations on it.
This declaration is an important step in advancing
and strengthening the strategic cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations. It underscores the important role that
regional and subregional organizations play in the areas
of peace and security, development, and human rights. It
also underscores that strengthening those partnerships
is strategic for promoting the principles of comparative
advantage and complementarity.
The declaration is timely given our ongoing work
in the drafting of the post-2015 development agenda.
It reaffirms our commitment to the strengthening
of international cooperation to address persistent
challenges related to sustainable development. I am
pleased by the unanimous support for the declaration,
as the issue is one of my top priorities for this session
of the General Assembly.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 123.
The meeting rose at 10.10 a.m.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-12971 (E)

*1512971*
