88

General Assembly-Twenty-sixth Session

the question of the danger of a revival of the concepts
of nazism and racial intolerance;
9. Appeals to regional intergovernmental organizations to consider this question at the regional level;
10. Calls upon Governments, particularly those
which control mass information media of world or continental scope, the United Nations and its various
bodies, specialized agencies and international and national organizations to increase public awareness of the
danger of a reviva} of nazism and racial intolerance,
especially among young people, by education, by the
preparatlon and dissemination of information on this
subject and by recalling the history of nazism and its
crimes and of racial intolerance;
11. Calls upon all States to take legislative and administrative measures to prevent activities of any kind
in favour of nazism and the concept of racial superiority;
12. Decides to place the question of measures to be
taken against ideologies and practices based on terror
or on incitement to racial discrimination or any other
form of group hatred on its agenda and under continuing review, and urges other competent organs of
the United Nations to do likewise, so that appropriate
measures can be taken promptly as required;
13. Confirms the principles of international law with
regard to the eradication of nazism, and appeals to all
States to act in conformity with those principies.

2025th plenary meeting,
18 December 1971.
2840 (XXVI). Question of the punishment of
war criminals and of penom who have com•
mftted crimes against humanity

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3 (1) of 13 February 1946
and 170 (11) of 31 October 1947 on the extradition
and punishment of war criminals and its resolution 95
(1) of 11 December 1946 affirming the principles of
international law recognized by the Charter of the
Intemational Military Tribunal, Nuremberg, and the
judgement of that Tribunal,
Recalling further its resolution 2712 (XXV) of
15 December 1970 in which it condemned the war
crimes and crimes against humanity at present being
committed as a result of aggressive wars and the policies of racism, apartheid and colonialism,
Again noting with regret that the numerous decisions
adopted by the United Nations on the question of the
punishment of war criminals and of persons who have
committed crimes against humanity are still not being
fully complied with,
Recalling the Convention on the Non-Applicability
of Statutory Limitations to War Crimes and Crimes
against Humanity,
Convinced that the effective punishment of war crimes
and crimes against humanity is an important element in
putting an end to and preventing such crimes, in the
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
in the strengthening of confidence and in promoting cooperation between peoples as well as peace and international security,
Expressing its deep concern at the fact that many
war criminals and persons who have committed crimes

against humanity are continuing to take refuge in the
territories of certain States and are enjoying their
protection,
Affirming that war crimes and crimes against humanity are among the most dangerous crimes under international law,
Firmly convinced of the need for intemational cooperation in the thorough investigation of war crimes
and crimes against humanity, as defined in article I
of the Convention on the Non-Applicability of Statutory Limitations to War Crimes and Crimes against
Humanity, and in bringing about the detection, arrest,
extradition and punishment of all war criminals and
persons guilty of crimes against humanity who have
not yet been brought to trial or punished,
l. Urges all States to implement the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and to take measures
in accordance with intemational law to put an end
to and prevent war crimes and crimes against humanity
and to ensure the punishment of all persons guilty of
such crimes, including their extradition to those countries where they have committed such crimes;
2. Further urges a11 States to co-operate in particular in the collection and exchange of information
which will contribute to the detection, arrest, extradition, trial and punishment of persons guilty of war
crimes and crimes against humanity;
3. Again calls upon a11 States which have not yet
done so to become as soon as possible parties to the
Convention on the Non-Applicability of Statutory Limitations to War Crimes and Crimes against Humanity;
4. Affirms that refusal by $tates to co-operate in
the arrest, extradition, trial and punishment of persons
guilty of war crimes and crimes against humanity is
contrary to the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and to generally recognized norms
of intemational law;
5. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
consider the principies of intemational co-operation in
the detection, arrest, extradition and punishment of
persons guilty of war crimes and crimes against human1ty and to submit a report on this question to the General Assembly at its twenty-seventh session.

2025th plenary meeting,
18 December 1971.
2841 (XXVI). Creation of the post of United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2062 {XX) of 16 December 1965, 2333 (XXII) of 18 December 1967, 2437
(XXIII) of 19 December 1968 and 2595 (XXIV) of
16 December 1969 concerning the creation of the post
of United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1237 (XLII) of 6 June 1967 on the creation of
an Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, and of Council resolution 1238 (XLII)
of 6 June 1967 concerning the implementation of human
rights through a United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights or sorne other appropriate intemational machinery,
Taking further note of the views expressed in the
general debate on this question and of the draft reso-

89

Resolutions adopted on the report11 of the Third Committee

lution submitted to the Third Committee for consideration during the current session,24
Considering that there was not sufficient time during
its twenty-sixth session to conclude the study of this
item,
l. Decides to give consideration to this item at its
twenty-eighth session;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session the
documentation pertaining to the study of this question.
2025th plenary meeting,
18 December 1971.
2842 (XXVI). Question of the elderly and the
aged

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2599 (XXIV) of 16 December 1969 and its decision of 15 December 1970
recommending that a high priority be given to the
question of the elderly and the aged,
Taking note with appreciation of the preliminary report of the Secretary-General,25 which reviews the majar
socio-economic problems of the elderly and the aged and
the impact of technological and scientific advances on
their well-being,
Bearing in mind the principies embodied in the
Charter of the United Nations and in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, with reference to respect
for the dignity and worth of the human person,
Recalling the Declaration on Social Progress and
Development, which emphasizes the protection of the
rights and the assuring of the welfare of the aged,
Bearing in mind that demographic projections and
anticipated social change indicate that the position of
the elderly and the aged in society is expected to deteriorate in many industrialized as well as in many
developing countries unless appropriate policies are
initiated to deal with their needs and to ensure opportunities for their participation in national life and their
contribution to the development of their communities,
Considering that the interaction of social, cultural,
economic and technological factors affecting the elderly
and the aged calls for integrated policies and appropriate programmes at the country level,
Noting that an exploratory cross-national survey is
being conducted by the Secretary-General, in cooperation with several countries, to analyse the changing socio-economic role and status of old people,
Bearing in mind the importance for the elderly and
the aged to be informed of the interest and concem of
the United Nations about their welfare and needs,
l. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the
study of the changing socio-economic and cultural role
and status of the aged in countries of different Ievels
of development and to prepare, within existing resources
and in co-operation with the Intemational Labour
Organisation, the World Health Organization and other
24 See

Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentysixth Session, Annexes, agenda ítem 61, document A/8594,
paras. 5 and 6.
26 A/8364.

interested specialized agencies, a report suggesting guidelines for national policies and international action
related to the needs and the role of the elderly and the
aged in society in the context of over-all development,
particularly in countries where the socio-economic
problems of the aged are marked;
2. Requests Governments to disseminate, in the best
way they deem appropriate, the information contained
in the present resolution for the benefit of the elderly
and the aged;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit
a report on this subject to the Economic and Social
Council in 1973, through the Commission for Social
Development, and to report to the General Assembly at
its twenty-eighth session on the action taken on the
present resolution.
2025th plenary meeting,
18 December 1971.
2843 (XXVI). Criminality and social change

The General Assembly,
Recalling the responsibility assumed by the United
N ations in the field of crime prevention and control
under General Assembly resolution 415 (V) of 1 Dece~ber 1950 and the leading role in this area assigned
to 1t by the Economic and Social Council in resolution 155 C (VII) of 13 August 1948, which the
Council reaffirmed in its resolutions 731 F (XXVIII)
of 30 July 1959, 830 D (XXXII) of 2 August 1961
and 1086 B (XXXIX) of 30 July 1965,
Taking account of the note by the Secretary-General
on criminality and social change, 26
Recognizing the importance of the Declaration unanimously adopted by the Fourth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders, held at Kyoto, Japan, from 17 to 26 August
1970,27 which underscored the seriousness of the crime
problem in many countries and called attention to the
~rgent ~eed to give 1:riority to the strengthening of
mternat10nal co-operat10n for crime prevention,
. Conscious of the serious threat that criminality in its
d1verse forms and new dimensions presents to economic
and social development and the quality of life,
. Aware. of the limited time available at its twentys1xth sess10n for the General Assembly to consider the
matter adequately,
1. W elcomes Economic and Social Council resoIution 1584 (L) of 21 May 1971 on criminality and
social change and the action taken to implement the
conclusions of the Fourth United Nations Congress on
the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders;
2. Decides to consider the question of crime prevention and control in depth at its twenty-seventh session.
2025th plenary meeting,
18 December 1971.
26 A/8372.
27 The text of

the Declaration is contained in the annex to
Economic and Social Council resolution 1584 (L). See also the
report entitled Fourth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders (United Nations
publication, Sales No.: E.71.IV.8).
