A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/48/108
28 February 1994

Forty-eighth session
Agenda item 111
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/48/629)]
48/108.

Implementation of the Nairobi Forward-looking
Strategies for the Advancement of Women

The General Assembly,
Recalling all its relevant resolutions, in particular resolution 44/77
of 8 December 1989, in which, inter alia, it endorsed and reaffirmed the
importance of the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement of
Women 1/ for the period up to the year 2000 and set out measures for their
immediate implementation and for the overall achievement of the interrelated
goals and objectives of the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality,
Development and Peace,
Recalling also its resolutions 46/98 of 16 December 1991 and 47/95 of 16
December 1992,
Taking into consideration the resolutions adopted by the Economic and
Social Council on issues relating to women since the adoption of its
resolution 1987/18 of 26 May 1987,
Reaffirming its determination to encourage the full participation of
women in economic, social, cultural, civil and political affairs and to
promote development, cooperation and international peace,

__________
1/
Report of the World Conference to Review and Appraise the
Achievements of the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development
and Peace, Nairobi, 15-26 July 1985 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.85.IV.10), chap. I, sect. A.
/...

A/RES/48/108
Page 2

Conscious of the important and constructive contribution to the
improvement of the status of women made by the Commission on the Status of
Women, the specialized agencies, the regional commissions and other
organizations and bodies of the United Nations system and non-governmental
organizations concerned,
Concerned that the resources available in the Secretariat to the
programme on the advancement of women are insufficient to ensure adequate
support to the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women
and effective implementation of other aspects of the programme, especially the
preparations for the Fourth World Conference on Women: Action for Equality,
Development and Peace, to be held in 1995,
Taking into account Commission on the Status of Women resolutions 36/8
of 20 March 1992 2/ and 37/7 of 25 March 1993 3/on the preparations for the
Fourth World Conference on Women,
Bearing in mind the important role non-governmental organizations play
in all activities for the advancement of women and the fact that some of them,
especially those from developing countries, do not enjoy consultative status
with the Economic and Social Council,
Noting with satisfaction that the preparations for the Fourth World
Conference on Women have entered a substantive stage, that the relevant United
Nations bodies, China, as the host country, and other countries all attach
great importance to the preparation of the Conference and that the various
preparatory activities are being conducted in an in-depth and comprehensive
manner,
Considering that 1994 will be a year of crucial importance to the
preparations for the Fourth World Conference on Women, that the Commission on
the Status of Women will convene an inter-sessional working group to
deliberate the content of the Platform for Action and that the five regional
commissions will convene their respective regional preparatory meetings for
the Conference,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 4/

2.
Reaffirms section I, paragraph 2, of the recommendations and
conclusions arising from the first review and appraisal of the implementation
of the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement of Women,
contained in the annex to Economic and Social Council resolution 1990/15 of 24
May 1990, which called for an improved pace in the implementation of the
Forward-looking Strategies in the crucial last decade of the twentieth
century, since the cost to societies of failing to implement the Forwardlooking Strategies would be high in terms of slowed economic and social
development, misuse of human resources and reduced progress for society as a
whole;
__________
2/
See Official Records ofthe Economic and Social Council, 1992,
Supplement No. 4 (E/1992/24), chap. I, sect. C.
3/

Ibid., 1993, Supplement No. 7 (E/1993/27), chap. I, sect. C.

4/

A/48/413.
/...

A/RES/48/108
Page 3

3.
Urges Governments, international organizations and
non-governmental organizations to implement the recommendations;
4.
Calls again upon Member States to give priority to policies and
programmes relating to the subtheme "Employment, health and education", in
particular to literacy, for self-reliance of women and the mobilization of
indigenous resources, as well as to issues relating to the role of women in
economic and political decision-making, population, the environment,
information and science and technology;
5.
Reaffirms the central role of the Commission on the Status of
Women in matters related to the advancement of women, and calls upon it to
continue promoting the implementation of the Forward-looking Strategies to the
year 2000, based on the goals of the United Nations Decade for Women:
Equality, Development and Peace and the subtheme "Employment, health and
education", and urges all relevant bodies of the United Nations system to
cooperate effectively with the Commission in this task;
6.
Requests the Commission, when considering the priority theme
relating to development during its thirty-eighth and subsequent sessions, to
ensure its early contribution to the preparatory work for forthcoming major
international conferences such as the International Conference on Population
and Development, to be held in 1994, the Fourth World Conference on Women:
Action for Equality, Development and Peace, to be held in 1995, and the World
Summit for Social Development, to be held in 1995, and to address the impact
of technologies on women;
7.
Also requests the Commission to give special attention to women in
developing countries, particularly in Africa and the least developed
countries, who suffer disproportionately from the effects of the global
economic crisis and the heavy external debt burden, and to recommend further
measures for the equalization of opportunity and for the integration of the
roles and perspective of women, as well as their needs, concerns and
aspirations, into the entire development process when considering the priority
theme of development;
8.
Emphasizes, in the framework of the Forward-looking Strategies,
the importance of the total integration of women of all ages in the
development process, bearing in mind the specific and urgent needs of the
developing countries, and calls upon Member States to establish specific
targets at each level in order to increase the participation of women in
professional, management and decision-making positions in their countries;
9.
Emphasizes once again the need to give urgent attention to
redressing socio-economic inequities at the national and international levels
as a necessary step towards the full realization of the goals and objectives
of the Forward-looking Strategies through meeting the practical and strategic
needs of women;
10.
Strongly urges that particular attention be given by the competent
United Nations organizations and Governments to the special needs of women
with disabilities, elderly women and also women in vulnerable situations such
as migrant and refugee women and children;
11.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the
improvement of the situation of women in rural areas 5/ and urges the
/...

A/RES/48/108
Page 4

international community and the competent United Nations bodies and organs to
place more emphasis on the sharp increase in the incidence of poverty among
rural women;
12.
Welcomes the recommendations adopted at the United Nations
Conference on Environment and Development on women, environment and
development in all programme areas, in particular those set out in chapter 24
of Agenda 21, 6/ entitled "Global action for women towards sustainable and
equitable development";
13.
Urges organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations to
ensure active participation of women in the planning and implementation of
programmes for sustainable development, and requests Governments, in the
context of General Assembly resolution 47/191 of 22 December 1992, to consider
nominating women as representatives to the Commission on Sustainable
Development;
14.
Requests the Secretary-General, in formulating the system-wide
medium-term plan for the advancement of women for the period 1996-2001 and in
integrating the Forward-looking Strategies into activities mandated by the
General Assembly, to pay particular attention to specific sectoral themes that
cut across the three objectives, equality, development and peace, and include,
in particular, literacy, education, health, population, the impact of
technology on the environment and its effect on women and the full
participation of women in decision-making, and to continue to assist
Governments in strengthening their national machineries for the advancement of
women;
15.
Also requests the Secretary-General to continue updating the World
Survey on the Role of Women in Development, 7/ bearing in mind its importance,
placing particular emphasis on the adverse impact of the difficult economic
situation affecting the majority of developing countries, particularly on the
condition of women, giving special attention to worsening conditions for the
incorporation of women into the labour force, as well as the impact of reduced
expenditures for social services on opportunities available to women for
education, health and child care, and to submit a final version of the
preliminary version 8/ of the updated World Survey on the Role of Women in
Development to the Economic and Social Council, through the Commission on the
Status of Women, in 1994;
_____________
5/

A/48/187-E/1993/76.

6/
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June 1992 (A/CONF.151/26/Rev.1 (Vol. I, Vol.
I/Corr.1, Vol. II, Vol. III and Vol. III/Corr.1)) (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), vol. I: Resolutions adopted by the
Conference, resolution 1, annex II.
7/

United Nations publication, Sales No. E.89.IV.2.

8/

A/48/70-E/1993/16.

16.
Requests Governments, when presenting candidatures for vacancies
in the Secretariat, in particular at the decision-making level, to give
priority to candidatures of women, and requests the Secretary-General in
/...

A/RES/48/108
Page 5

reviewing those candidatures to give special consideration to female
candidates from underrepresented and unrepresented developing countries;
17.
Requests the Secretary-General to invite Governments,
organizations of the United Nations system, including the regional commissions
and the specialized agencies, and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to report periodically to the Economic and Social Council,
through the Commission, on activities undertaken at all levels to implement
the Forward-looking Strategies;
18.
Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide for the
existing weekly radio programmes on women in the regular budget of the United
Nations, making adequate provisions for broadcasts in different languages, and
to develop the focal point for issues relating to women in the Department of
Public Information of the Secretariat, which, in concert with the Department
for Policy Coordination and Sustainable Development, should provide a more
effective public information programme relating to the advancement of women;
19.
Further requests the Secretary-General to include in his report on
the implementation of the Forward-looking Strategies, to be submitted to the
General Assembly at its forty-ninth session, an assessment of recent
developments that are relevant to the priority themes to be considered at the
subsequent session of the Commission and to transmit to the Commission a
summary of relevant views expressed by delegations during the debate in the
Assembly;
20.
Requests the Commission to examine the implications of the World
Conference on Human Rights and the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action
adopted by the Conference 9/ for its central role in matters related to the
rights of women within the United Nations system and to report to the Economic
and Social Council at its substantive session of 1994;
21.
Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a report for the
Commission, for consideration at its thirty-eighth session, on steps to be
taken by the Division for the Advancement of Women, in cooperation with other
United Nations bodies, specifically the Centre for Human Rights of the
Secretariat, to ensure that relevant human rights mechanisms of the United
Nations, such as treaty-monitoring bodies, rapporteurs and working groups,
regularly address violations of the rights of women, including gender-specific
abuses;
22.
Recognizes that the Declaration on the Elimination of
Violence against Women, proclaimed in General Assembly resolution 48/104 of 20
December 1993, is essential to the attainment of full respect for the rights
of women and is an important contribution to efforts aimed at achieving the
objectives of the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement of
Women to the year 2000;
____________
9/

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

23.
Requests the Secretary-General to lend support to the convening of
the regional preparatory meetings so as to lay a good foundation for the
Fourth World Conference on Women;

/...

A/RES/48/108
Page 6

24.
Also requests the Secretary-General to give more support, from
within existing resources, to the Division for the Advancement of Women,
acting as secretariat of the Fourth World Conference on Women, by providing
sufficient financial and human resources and giving wide publicity to the
Conference and its preparatory activities;
25.
Appeals to countries to compile their national reports in earnest
and to forward them in time, both to their respective regional commissions and
to the secretariat of the Conference;
26.
Invites the Secretary-General to play a more active role in
appealing to countries to contribute to the Trust Fund for the Fourth World
Conference on Women, in order to finance additional activities of the
preparatory process and the Conference itself, in particular the participation
of least developed countries in the Conference and its preparatory meetings;
27.
Recommends the further development of methods of compilation and
data collection in areas of concern identified by the Commission on the Status
of Women and urges Member States to improve and broaden collection of genderdesegregated statistical information and make it available to the relevant
bodies of the United Nations system with a view to preparing, in all official
languages, as a background document for the Fourth World Conference on Women,
an updated edition of The World’s Women 1970-1990: Trends and Statistics; 10/
28.
Endorses the recommendation contained in Commission on the Status
of Women resolution 36/8 of 20 March 1992 that regional preparatory
conferences should include in their agendas the issue of women in public life,
as well as the request for the Secretary-General to include information on the
decision-making position of women in public life and in the fields of science
and technology in the preparation of the priority theme on peace: "Women in
international decision-making", for the Commission at its thirty-ninth
session, in 1995;
29.
Requests the Secretary-General to make available for the Fourth
World Conference on Women reports and decisions of the World Conference on
Human Rights, the International Conference on Population and Development and
the World Summit for Social Development;
30.
Decides, taking into account Commission on the Status of Women
resolution 37/7 of 25 March 1993, to adopt the modalities for the
participation in and contribution to the Fourth World Conference on Women and
its preparatory process by the non-governmental organizations, particularly
those from the developing countries, set out in the annex to the present
resolution;

__________
10/

United Nations publication, Sales No. E.90.XVII.3.

31.
Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a report for the Fourth
World Conference on Women, to be held in Beijing in 1995, on the extent to
which gender concerns have been included in the activities of the relevant
human rights mechanisms of the United Nations, such as treaty-monitoring
bodies, rapporteurs and working groups;
/...

A/RES/48/108
Page 7

32.
Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General
Assembly at its forty-ninth session on measures taken to implement the present
resolution.
85th plenary meeting,
20 December 1993

ANNEX
Participation of non-governmental organizations
in the Fourth World Conference on Women and its
preparatory body
Non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic
and Social Council that express the wish to attend the Conference and the
meetings of the Commission on the Status of Women, acting as its preparatory
body, will be accredited for participation. Others wishing to be accredited
may apply to the Conference secretariat for that purpose in accordance with
the following requirements:
(a)
The secretariat of the Fourth World Conference on Women will be
responsible for the receipt and preliminary evaluation, in accordance with the
provisions set out below, of requests from non-governmental organizations for
accreditation to the Conference and the Commission on the Status of Women
acting as preparatory body;
(b)
All such applications must be accompanied by information on the
competence of the organization and on its relevance to the work of the
preparatory body, indicating the particular areas of the preparations for the
Conference to which such competence and relevance pertain, and should include
the following:
(i)

The purposes of the organization;

(ii)

Information on its programmes and activities in areas
relevant to the Conference and on the country or countries
in which those programmes and activities are carried out;

(iii) Confirmation of its activities at the national and/or the
international level;
(iv)

Copies of its annual reports, with financial statements and
a list of members of the governing body and their country of
nationality;

(v)

A description of its membership, indicating the total number
of members of the governing body and their country of
nationality;

(c)
Non-governmental organizations seeking accreditation will be asked
to confirm their interest in the goals and objectives of the Conference;
(d)
In cases where the Conference secretariat believes, on the basis
of the information provided in accordance with the present document, that an
/...

A/RES/48/108
Page 8

organization has established its competence and relevance to the work of the
Commission on the Status of Women acting as preparatory body, it will
recommend to the Commission that the organization be accredited. In cases
where the Conference secretariat does not recommend the granting of
accreditation, it will make such information available to members of the
Commission at least one week prior to the start of each session;
(e)
The Commission on the Status of Women will decide on all proposals
for accreditation within twenty-four hours of the recommendations of the
Conference secretariat having been taken up by the Commission in plenary
session. Should a decision not be taken within that period, interim
accreditation will be accorded until such time as a decision is taken;
A non-governmental organization that has been granted
(f)
accreditation to attend one session of the Commission on the Status of Women
acting as preparatory body may attend all future sessions and the Conference;
(g)
In recognition of the intergovernmental nature of the Fourth World
Conference on Women, non-governmental organizations will have no negotiating
role in the work of the Conference and its preparatory process;
(h)
Relevant non-governmental organizations in consultative status
with the Economic and Social Council may be given the opportunity briefly to
address the Commission on the Status of Women acting as preparatory body in
plenary meeting and its subsidiary bodies. Other relevant non-governmental
organizations may also ask to speak briefly at such meetings. If the number
of requests is too large, the Commission will request that non-governmental
organizations form themselves into constituencies, with each constituency
speaking through one spokesperson. Any oral intervention by a
non-governmental organization should, in accordance with usual United Nations
practice, be made at the discretion of the Chairman and with the consent of
the Commission;
(i)
Relevant non-governmental organizations may, at their own expense,
make written presentations in the official languages of the United Nations
during the preparatory process, as they deem appropriate. Those written
presentations will not be issued as official documents unless they are in
accordance with the rules of procedure of the Conference.
