A /70/PV.83

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventieth session

83

rd plenary meeting
Friday, 22 January 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lykketoft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Denmark)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Alyemany
(Yemen), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 138 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/70/722)
The Acting President: In keeping with established
practice, I should like to draw the attention of the
General Assembly to document A/70/722, in which the
Secretary-General informs the President of the General
Assembly that 15 Member States are in arrears in the
payment of their financial contributions to the United
Nations within the terms of Article 19 of the Charter.
I would like to remind delegations that, under
Article 19 of the Charter,
“A Member of the United Nations which is in
arrears in the payment of its financial contributions
to the Organization shall have no vote in the General
Assembly if the amount of its arrears equals or
exceeds the amount of the contributions due from it
for the preceding two full years”.
May I therefore take it that the General Assembly
takes note of the information contained in document
A/70/722?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 33
The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict
Note verbale dated 2 December 2015
from the Permanent Mission of Angola
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting the report
of the Kimberley Process Certification
Scheme (A/70/596)
Draft resolution (A/70/L.40)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Angola to introduce draft resolution
A/70/L.40.
Mr. Campos (Angola) (spoke in Portuguese;
English text provided by the delegation): At the outset,
I would like to express Angola’s gratitude to you, Sir,
for convening this plenary meeting to consider agenda
item 33, “The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict”.
It is indeed a great honour for me to address the
General Assembly today and to reaffirm my country’s
commitment to the Kimberley Process Certification
Scheme.
In 2003 in Kimberley, South Africa, the
international community took action to curb the
trade in conflict diamonds by establishing a unique
international scheme bringing together Governments,
the diamond industry and civil society. Those actions
culminated in the establishment of the Kimberley
Process, which Angola has supported since its creation.
The Kimberley Process is a unique multi-stakeholder
approach in which Governments, the diamond industry

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-01581 (E)

*1601581*

A/70/PV.83

and civil society work together to monitor and control
the rough diamond trade, and which is now a model
for other efforts to combat natural-resource-based
conflict. The Kimberley Process demonstrates that,
when Governments work together with the private
sector and civil-society organizations, they can ensure
that the legitimate trade in diamonds helps countries
reduce poverty, promote transparency and economic
development, combat smuggling and money laundering,
and meet the Sustainable Development Goals.
The date of 31 December 2015 marks the end of
Angola’s term as Chair of the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme. We are pleased to hand over the
chairmanship of the Kimberley Process Certification
Scheme to the United Arab Emirates. Angola
also welcomes the Commonwealth of Australia as
Vice-Chair for 2016.
Pursuant to resolution 69/136, I wish to present to
the General Assembly the report on the implementation
of the Kimberley Process (A/70/596, annex) and, in
my capacity as Chair for 2015, to also introduce draft
resolution A/70/L.40, entitled “The role of diamonds in
fuelling conflict: breaking the link between the illicit
transaction of rough diamonds and armed conflict as a
contribution to prevention and settlement of conflicts”.
The report and the draft resolution to be adopted
today reflect the substantial progress and momentum
this important Process achieved during 2015. The draft
resolution addresses the need to break the link between
the illicit trade in rough diamonds and armed conflict
as a contribution to the prevention and settlement of
conflicts. The contribution of the Kimberley Process is
fundamental in that regard and is therefore deserving
of the full support of the General Assembly. Angola
is pleased to report that the Kimberley Process is
effectively responding to the mandate it was given by
the General Assembly to combat the role of diamonds
in fuelling armed conflict.
The draft resolution reflects the work done to date,
and I am very grateful for the support it has received.
The sponsors of the draft resolution are Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Croatia,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
2/7

22/01/2016

We hope that the General Assembly will adopt the draft
resolution by acclamation today, as it has in previous
years.
The draft resolution contained in document
A/70/L.40 is based on the previous resolution 69/136
and on the final communiqué adopted by all members
by consensus at the plenary meeting of the Kimberley
Process, which took place in Luanda, Angola, on
20 November 2015. The draft resolution before
us represents the outcome of the negotiations and
compromise reached during informal consultations.
The relevant points of the draft resolution are as follows.
It welcomes the proposals for an international
certification scheme for rough diamonds developed
in the Kimberley Process, which provide a good basis
for the international diamond-control mechanism
that we all envision. It recognizes that the proposed
international certification scheme could help ensure
the effective implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions containing sanctions on the trade
in conflict diamonds. It increases the transparency
and accuracy of statistics. It promotes prerequisites for
cross-border Internet sales. It promotes inclusiveness by
broadening the level of involvement by Governments,
regional organizations, the diamond industry and
civil society in the Kimberley Process. It expresses
appreciation to Swaziland, the European Union, the
United Arab Emirates, Mexico, Armenia and the
Republic of the Congo for having received review visits
in 2015. Furthermore, it welcomes the commitment
of those countries to continuously opening their
certification system for reviews and improvements, and
calls upon all participants to invite and receive review
visits, in accordance with the peer review system of the
Kimberley Process.
It expresses appreciation for the fact that a review
visit was conducted in Côte d’Ivoire, as per Security
Council resolution 2153 (2014). It encourages the
Friends of the Mano River Union to continue providing
support to Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia, Guinea and Sierra
Leone for the implementation of the Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme, as well as for its
continued participation in regional cooperation and
law-enforcement activities. Lastly, it takes note of the
measures adopted by the Central African Republic’s
authorities and follow-up committee and the Kimberly
Process monitoring team, which are consistent with
the terms of reference of the team to implement the
administrative decision on the resumption of exports of
16-01581

22/01/2016

rough diamonds from the Central African Republic, as
approved through a written procedure on 17 July 2015.
In recent years, the Kimberley Process has made
significant strides in the fulfilment of its mandate.
However, it still faces several challenges. In that
regard, the ongoing efforts of Governments, the
diamond industry and civil society are necessary to
maintain and improve the internal control mechanisms
of all participating countries and strengthen the system
to eliminate the flow of illicit rough diamonds in the
international market.
As far as the election of the Chair and Vice-Chair
is concerned, the plenary meeting of the Kimberley
Process in Luanda has enabled us to continue to
improve the rules and procedures in order to reach a
consensual position on the matter. Having said that, the
plenary has elected the United Arab Emirates as Chair
and the Commonwealth of Australia as Vice-Chair of
the Kimberley Process for 2016.
Moreover, following the lifting of the embargo
by Security Council resolution 2153 (2014), a group
of the monitoring team, represented by several
member countries and led by the Republic of Angola,
conducted a review visit to the Republic of Côte
d’Ivoire. The results of the visit were positive, thus
enabling the country to resume the export of its rough
diamonds. Also, it is pertinent to emphasize that the
review mission that took place in the Central African
Republic, and that was conducted by the Kimberley
Process participants and observers and led by Angola,
has enabled the resumption of rough-diamond exports
from the compliance zones through an administrative
decision adopted in July 2015. The two steps just
mentioned represent tremendous progress and prove
the essence of the Kimberley Process, which is to allow
the marketing of diamonds exploited legally under
the auspices of legitimate Governments, and prevent
the introduction of diamonds mined by rebels into the
international market.
As representatives may be aware, the Kimberley
Process remains open, global and non-discriminatory
to all countries and regional economic integration
organizations willing and able to fulfil its requirements.
In that regard, countries continue to apply to and join the
Kimberley Process. During the past year, we received
requests from Mozambique, Gabon and Liechtenstein.
Furthermore, the Kimberley Process has made special
efforts to fully reintegrate the Bolivarian Republic of

A/70/PV.83

Venezuela, which will receive a review mission in the
first quarter of 2016. It is the desire of the Kimberley
Process to see the widest possible participation. To that
end, it continues to engage and encourage countries to
join and be integrated in the Process.
Finally, I wish to thank all representatives again
for contributing to the discussions and supporting
the draft resolution, and I ask the Assembly to take
note of the annual report on the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme, as well as to adopt the proposed
draft resolution. I also wish to express my sincere
gratitude to all participants, in particular the Chairs of
the working groups and committees of the Kimberly
Process, for the support they have given to Angola
during its chairmanship of the Process. I trust that the
incoming Chair and Vice-Chair will enjoy the same
support.
Angola looks forward to working with the 2016
Chair, as well as with all Kimberley Process participants
and observers, in promoting greater cooperation within
the Organization.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
observer of the European Union.
Mr. Parenti (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
European Union and its member States, which act as a
single participant in the Kimberley Process Certification
Scheme, would like in the first place to commend the
Republic of Angola for its successful chairmanship
of the Kimberly Process, and to welcome the results
that have been achieved insofar as they illustrate the
important efforts deployed to continue strengthening
the Kimberley Process and to confront the challenges
of the future.
As Chair of the Kimberley Process Working
Group on Monitoring, the European Union has actively
contributed to strengthening the implementation of
the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme and
encourages participants to continue committing
themselves to enhanced scrutiny through Kimberley
Process peer review visits, as well as to substantive
annual reports. The EU would in particular like to
express appreciation to Swaziland, the United Arab
Emirates, Mexico, Armenia and the Republic of the
Congo for having hosted review visits in 2015 and
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Lesotho,
Sierra Leone, Norway, Togo, Cameroon, Panama and
Ghana, as well as Belarus and Brazil, the Lao People’s

16-015813/7

A/70/PV.83

Democratic Republic, Mauritius and Venezuela, for
having invited review visits in 2016, noting that the
administrative decision on peer review calls for all
Kimberley Process participants to host a review visit
every three years.
We firmly believe that the consistent use of those
implementation tools will strengthen the ability of the
Kimberley Process to tackle illicit trade in conflict
diamonds and call on all participants to step up efforts
in that respect. The EU welcomes the commitment of
the Process participants and observers to considering
relevant recommendations of the Financial Action Task
Force report related to risks in the diamond-supply chain
and engaging directly with the authors of the report in
the context of ongoing efforts to further strengthen the
implementation of the Certification Scheme.
The EU welcomes the efforts of the Central African
Republic to further implement its work plan and road
map for strengthening the internal control system. The
EU takes note of the steps taken by the Central African
Republic’s Follow-Up Committee and the Kimberley
Process Monitoring Team, consistent with the Team’s
terms of reference for implementing the administrative
decision on resumption of exports of rough diamonds
from the Central African Republic, as approved
through written procedure on 17 July 2015. The EU
also welcomes the Central African Republic’s Process
authorities’ commitment to continuing to implement
the administrative decision and share any relevant
information and data with the Kimberley Process
Monitoring Team, as well as to hosting a field mission
to diamond-producing areas as soon as possible in order
for the Process to verify the situation on the ground,
with a view to validating the country’s proposal for
determining compliant zones from which the export of
rough diamonds could resume.
Furthermore, the European Union welcomes the
recent steps taken by the Mano River Union (MRU)
countries — Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea, Liberia and Sierra
Leone — to create a new impetus for further regional
cooperation in compliance with the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme, an initiative highlighted by the
Security Council in resolution 2153 (2014), which lifted
the embargo on the export of rough diamonds from Côte
d’Ivoire. The European Union especially welcomes the
continuous support for the MRU countries provided by
the technical team of the Working Group on Monitoring
and for the Friends of the MRU group, in particular the
ongoing efforts undertaken to formalize the role of
4/7

22/01/2016

the MRU secretariat and involve other implementing
partners and technical assistance providers.
In 2015, the international community demonstrated
its determination to act collectively and constructively
through the Kimberley Process as a valuable instrument
for preventing diamonds from fuelling conflicts and
for ultimately contributing to economic and social
development, particularly in developing countries. In
that context, the EU welcomes the commitment of the
Process to implementing the Washington Declaration
on integrating development and artisanal and smallscale diamond mining in the Kimberley Process.
The EU welcomes the fact that in recent years
the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme has
successfully succeeded in assisting Governments in
responding to new situations of conflict and violence.
We strongly support the efforts of the Kimberley
Process to evolve and adapt in order to meet future
challenges in the global diamond-supply chain and
provide assurance to consumers that diamonds are not
tainted by violence.
Before I conclude, I would like to stress that one
of the unique features of the Kimberley Process is its
tripartite structure. Both industry and civil society
are essential elements of the Kimberley Process
and have contributed much to its establishment and
operations. In this respect, the European Union calls
on all participants and observers to recognize the full
diversity of opinions within the Kimberley Process
and continue working together to further enhance the
scheme’s credibility. In particular, we rely on a close
working relationship with all our partners in the civil
society coalition to ensure that the Kimberley Process
remains an effective tool for peacebuilding and conflict
prevention, to monitor the efficacy of the Kimberley
Process in diamond-mining communities across the
globe and to continue to challenge us to do more and
do better. We will continue to rely on that relationship
to ensure the Process remains an effective tool in the
future.
The European Union would like to again express its
gratitude to the Republic of Angola for its stewardship
of the Process this year. We now welcome the United
Arab Emirates as the incoming Kimberley Process
Chair and express gratitude for its vision as the 2016
Chair to further strengthen the implementation of the
Certification Scheme and to ensure that the trade in
rough diamonds is used for the benefit of all people.
16-01581

22/01/2016

We welcome and support the commitments that the
United Arab Emirates has made for its chairmanship,
and we would encourage the country to further engage
with the Civil Society Coalition in order to further
strengthen the Kimberley Process, including in the
areas of valuation and enforcement cooperation. The
European Union looks forward to working closely with
the United Arab Emirates to bring renewed impetus
and strength to the Kimberley Process.
Mr. Roet (Israel): Like others, I would like to thank
Angola for its able chairmanship in 2015 and wish the
United Arab Emirates great success in assuming the
chairmanship this year.
All too often, we meet here in this Hall to discuss
intractable challenges and missed opportunities. Today
I am very pleased to say that we have come together
as an international body to mark an extraordinary
accomplishment. For decades, the dark underworld
of the diamond industry operated in the shadows. In
fact, the glimmering light of diamonds, prized for their
clarity, blinded us from the truth that these diamonds
were being used as tools of warfare and served as
financial lifelines for ruthless warlords. Unbeknownst
to most of us, the very diamonds being used to mark the
beginning of lifelong relationships were often obtained
under the most horrific human conditions, marked by
the ending of countless lives.
From the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
Angola and from Liberia to Sierra Leone, these socalled blood diamonds allowed warlords to usurp
power from legitimate Governments and led to the
enslavement and death of untold numbers of innocent
men, women and children. Finally, 12 years ago, the
world declared in a unified, crystal-clear voice — one
could even say a diamond-clear voice — that enough
was enough.
The magnitude and cruelty of the atrocities stemming
from the illegal trade of diamonds led the international
community — an alliance of Governments, leaders of
industry and civil-society representatives — to establish
a unique international scheme that requires States to
regulate their diamond production and trade through
a stringent system of Government certification. By
doing so, the international community has been able to
exclude blood diamonds from entering into the stream
of international trade.
In the past few years, we have seen numerous
achievements. These include the strengthening of the

A/70/PV.83

implementation of the peer-review system, the enhanced
transparency and accuracy of statistical measurements,
and the increasing involvement by various stakeholders
in the Kimberly Process Certification Scheme. Thanks
to a concerted global commitment equally matched by
global action, 99 per cent of all diamonds sold today are
certified conflict-free, which guarantees that diamond
revenues are appropriately used for economic growth
and sustainable development. The Kimberly Process
is therefore directly contributing to the promotion
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(resolution 70/1), ensuring that the Sustainable
Development Goals are met for all people in all places
while leaving no one behind. As we embark on the
long road of implementation of the 2030 Agenda, the
accomplishment of the Kimberley Process has proved
yet again that, as a family of nations, if we put our
differences aside and unite, we can make a difference
and be a positive force in improving our world.
As the world’s leading exporter of diamonds and
the host to its third-largest trading centre for diamonds,
Israel was one of the first countries to raise awareness
about conflict diamonds, one of the first countries to
play a part in establishing the Kimberley Process, and
the first country to issue a certificate when the Process
went into effect in 2003. During its 2010 Kimberley
Process chairmanship, Israel initiated the establishment
of a sub-working group on trade facilitation and oversaw
the membership process for four new countries.
Israel strongly reaffirms the importance of the
tripartite nature of the Kimberley Process. Civil society
must be fully involved in the Process, particularly in
monitoring the implementation on the ground. The
Kimberley Process must also enhance collaboration
with diamond-industry associations, international
organizations and enforcement agencies. All of those
stakeholders benefit from the open exchange of
information and access to it.
Millions of people, from small-scale miners to
heavy equipment operators and from cutters to retailers,
all rely on the diamond trade for their livelihoods.
When managed and traded responsibly, legally
mined diamonds can serve as a catalyst in improving
and accelerating the standard of living of millions.
We therefore have a duty, a duty to the miners who
depend on diamonds for their livelihoods and a duty to
demonstrate to nations blessed with natural resources
that prosperity can replace poverty. We also have a

16-015815/7

A/70/PV.83

duty to future generations to ensure that cooperation
triumphs over conflict.
I will end by wishing us all mazel and bracha,
Hebrew for “good fortune” and “blessing”, as is
traditionally said in the diamond industry all around
the world to mark the successful close of a diamond
transaction.
Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for convening this annual briefing and for
giving my delegation the opportunity to contribute to
the debate on it. At the outset, I would like to express
my delegation’s appreciation and gratitude to the
Government of the Republic of Angola for its expert
leadership as Chair of the Kimberley Process for 2015.
We commend Angola for its leadership and engagement
throughout the year and for ensuring that the report of
the Process (A/70/596, annex) reached the Assembly.
My delegation attaches great importance to this
agenda item, not only because it seeks to protect
the legitimate trade in diamonds, but also because it
symbolizes the international community’s resolve to
individually and collectively do its part to ensure that
never again will resources such as diamonds bring
sorrow and suffering to humankind.
As one of the founding members of the Kimberley
Process and a country that is heavily dependent on
these precious stones, Botswana attaches enormous
importance to the ethical exploitation of and legitimate
trade in rough diamonds. The regulation of the diamond
trade through the Process has seen both success and
challenges over the years. The Process requires that its
members adhere to high standards in order to be able to
certify that shipments of diamonds entering and leaving
their territories are legitimate. Participating States
must meet minimum requirements, which include
establishing national legislation and institutions, as well
as export, import and internal controls, and committing
to transparency and the exchange of statistical data.
Complementing the efforts of the Kimberley Process
and its oversight of rough diamonds, today’s annual
draft resolution (A/70/L.40) and other United Nations
resolutions continue to prevent links, and break them,
between the illegal trade in rough diamonds and armed
conflict. They reaffirm the Process as the international
vehicle supporting that cause and welcome its continued
role in regulating the diamond trade. That is why my
delegation continues to support the Process’s principles
and objectives and its Certification Scheme, as it works
6/7

22/01/2016

to eliminate illicit rough diamonds from the legitimate
diamond market and prevent such illegal transactions
from promoting armed conflict and unlawful activities
that threaten international peace and security.
Informed by its long-term national interests and an
overall strategic vision aimed at using ethical means to
harness its natural capital, Botswana has believed since
diamonds were first discovered in the idea of using them
to do good to the benefit of its people, while promoting
socioeconomic development. For that reason, we are
committed to safeguarding and promoting the integrity
of the diamond industry and preserving its wealth
for posterity. As Botswana’s former President Festus
Mogae once said a decade ago,
“For our people in Botswana, every diamond
purchase represents food on the table, better living
conditions, better health care, potable and safe
drinking water, more roads to connect our remote
communities and much more”.
In short, for Botswana, diamonds are for
development, period. There is a direct correlation
between diamond revenues and food on the table, as
well as education for the young, since the diamond
industry accounts for more than 40 per cent of the
Government of Botswana’s revenue. Through it we
enhance our prospects for achieving our development
goals, including the recently adopted Sustainable
Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (resolution 70/1). With a proven track
record and a tradition of judicious management of our
natural capital, we continue to learn while sharing our
experiences and best practices with the Kimberley
Process family. Consistent with the ideals and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, including saving
succeeding generations from the scourge of war, we
would like to once again reiterate our strong support
for and faith in the Kimberley Process and to request
that the issue remain on the Assembly’s agenda in order
to ensure that we continue to curb and right the wrong
of those who still believe in using diamonds to harm
humankind.
Today the international community, and especially
the African continent, with its Agenda 2063, has
shifted its attention to entrenching a culture focused
on inclusivity, sustainable development and silencing
the guns. It is our wish and dream to see post-conflict
countries make a priority of investing in people-centred
development for sustainable livelihoods. My delegation
16-01581

22/01/2016

remains confident that through joint efforts such as
the Kimberley Process initiative, we will continue to
ensure that, more than ever, diamonds become a major
source of financing for economic development, not a
catalyst for civil wars.
In conclusion, Botswana welcomes the Kimberley
Process plenary’s endorsement in Angola of the United
Arab Emirates’ assumption of its Chair for 2016,
and the selection of the Commonwealth of Australia
as Vice-Chair. We wholeheartedly congratulate the
United Arab Emirates on its new role and pledge our
full support and cooperation to it in its discharge of its
mandate.
Mr. Almazrouei (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): My delegation would like to thank you,
Sir, for convening today’s meeting. We would also
like to express our thanks and gratitude to Angola,
the outgoing Chair of the Kimberley Process, for its
distinguished leadership, and with which as Vice-Chair
we had the opportunity to work. We would also like
to thank Angola for its hard work in facilitating and
coordinating the negotiations on the draft resolution we
will adopt today (A/70/L.40), which resulted in a text
that we were able to adopt by consensus.
The United Arab Emirates joined the consensus on
the draft resolution because we believe it is an important
step in the consensus among all the stakeholders in
the Kimberley Process, which will help to make the
Process more effective and successful. The draft
resolution reaffirms the resolve and commitment of all
stakeholders to strengthening and implementing the
Process in full. The United Arab Emirates is proud to
have been chosen as the Chair of the Process for 2016,
proof that our member countries believe in its abilities
and have confidence that it can contribute effectively to
implementing the Process at the international level. We
would also like to congratulate Australia on its election
as Vice-Chair and look forward happily to working
with the Australian delegation in the coming year.
Our election makes us the first Arab country to have
the honour of chairing the Kimberley Process. We began
implementing the Process in 2003, becoming thus the
first Arab country to adopt the Certification Scheme.
Since then we have taken measures and initiatives
that include enacting a federal law controlling imports
and exports of rough diamonds and have instituted
restrictions and regulations for the diamond trade, as a

A/70/PV.83

result of which the United Arab Emirates has become a
leading centre for the world trade in diamonds.
As Chair of the Kimberley Process, we look forward
to sharing our deep expertise with other members and
will spare no effort to cooperate with the relevant
Government bodies and civil-society organizations
in order to propose new ideas and initiatives aimed
at enriching the Process and enhancing collaboration
among all stakeholders. That should help us to protect
legitimate and legal trading and ensure that consumers
can buy clear and conflict-free diamonds. The United
Arab Emirates intends to host a large number of
meetings and conferences for Kimberley Process
members in Dubai in 2016, designed to enable us to
fully understand the upgraded infrastructure that our
country has instituted in this sector.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate the United Arab Emirates on its
assumption of the chairship of the Kimberley Process
for 2016.
(spoke in English)
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/70/L.40, entitled “The role of diamonds in
fuelling conflict: breaking the link between the illicit
transaction of rough diamonds and armed conflict as a
contribution to prevention and settlement of conflicts”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/70/L.40, and in addition to those delegations already
listed in the document, the following countries have
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Armenia,
Canada, Switzerland, the United States of America and
Viet Nam.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/70/L.40?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 70/252).

A/70/L.40

was

adopted

The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 33?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

16-015817/7
