UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTIETH

YEAR

1866th

MAY 2 h E&'r

~$l&
~Y-$z.~~Lr”rc%

MEETING: 16 DECEMBER

1975

NEW YORK

CONTENTS

Pt1gt
Provi$onal

1

agenda (S/Agenda/ 1866) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...*....

‘1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Letter dated 12 December 1975 from the representative of Iceland to the President of the Security Council (S/i 1907) ..*..............................

x

’
1

.

S/PV. 1866

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such’s symbol indicates a reference to a United
.
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly S~~pplemwts of the Oj~icitrl Rwords
oj’ the &$writy
Cwncil.
The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of,‘Rs.solvtion.s
mtl
Dcciskms
OJ the Secrrrity Council.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
* on that date.
!.
‘f

i

; I

1866th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 16 December 1975, at 3 p.m.
Mr. Ivor RICHARD
(United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

Prusidcnr:

Pwsent:
The representatives
of the following
States: Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China,
Costa Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, I Italy, Japan,
Mauritania, Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, ‘United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland,’
United
Republic
of Cameroon,
United
Republic of Tanzania and United States of America.

Provisional
1. Adoption
i.

of the agenda

.Letter dated 12 December 1975 from the representative of Iceland addressed to the F$sident of the
Security Council (S/l 1907)

of the sgenda”*‘‘,

4. As members of thk Council are aware, the Council is meeting this afternoon in response to a letter
from the Icelandic
representative
concerning
an
incident on 11 December which directly involved
Icelandic and British interests.
5. ,According to rule 20 of the provisional
of procedure of the Security Council,

agenda (S/Agenda/l?66)

Adoption

the second is the reply of the United Kingdom Government, circulated on 15 December as document
S/l 1914.

r

i .

Letter dated 12 December 1975 from the representative of Iceland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/ 11909)
1. The PRESIDENT:
I have received a letter dated
15 December 1975 from the representative of Iceland
requesting that he be invited to participate
in the
Council’s
discussion of the question before it in
accordance with the provisions of Article 31 of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure. In the absence of objection, therefore, I shall
invite the representative of Iceland to participate in
the discussion, without .the right to vote.

2. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council will now
begin its consideration
of the ‘item inscribed on its
agenda, arising out of the letter dated 12 December
1975 submitted by Iceland (S/l 1907)..
3. I shduld like to .draw attention‘ to two other
communications
relevant to this question. The first
is a letter dated 11 December from the representative of tceland, circulated as document $/I 1905, and

rules

“Whenever
the President of the Sectirity Council deems that for the proper fulfilment
of the
responsibilities
of the presidency he should not
preside over the Council during the consider&on
of a particular question with which the -member he
represents is directly connected, he shall indicate
his decision to the Council. The presidential chair
shall then devolve, for the purpose of the consideration of that question, on the representative
of. the member
next in English
alphabetical
order...“.
6. The Council will note that this provision places
the matter entirely
within the discretion
of the
President.
I have looked at the precedents which
might apply on this occasion. These show that Presidents of the Security Council have not made it a habit
to ‘vacate their seat because the Council was considering questions with which their Governments
were directly concerned. Indeed, the only precedent
for such action in the last 20 years or more of which
I am aware was the decision to vacate the presidency
taken by my predecessor Lord Car don in May 1968.
The Security Council was then me$ ting to consider
the question of Southern Rhodesia. On that occasion
Lord Caradon thought it proper to invite the succeeding President to take the chair for that item.
7. In spite of all the precedents to the contrary,
I believe, after fully considering the circumstances
of the present case, that it would be right for me to
follow Lord Xaradon’s
examble. I have decided,
therefore, that it would be appropriate
for me to
exercise tlie discretion given to the President under
rule 20 and to vacate the chair while this item is
being discussed. I trust ‘the Council will agree with
me that this is the fair and the proper way to proceed.

8. Consequently,
in accordance with rule 20, I
invite the representative of the United Republic of
Cameroon to take the presidential chair for the purpose of the consideration
of the question on our
agenda today.
Mr. Oyono (United
the Chair.

support of the States participating in the Conference,
and, whatever the final outcome of the Conference.
will be on other matters, these principles are firmly
established. A principle which has the overwhelming
support of the international
community
in itself
mirrors the practice of States and has all the elements
required for the rule of law..

R~~puhlic of Cmnerobn)~ took

13. I want to add that my Government
has participated in the work of the Conference from the
beginning, as well as in the preparations for it, and
will continue to do so. But the limited action which
we have taken could no longer be delayed because
of the vital interests at stake. Dangerous overfishing has taken place and drastic -reduction in the
fisheries is inevitable.

9. The PRESIDENT
(intemretaticm
from French):
The Council will now begin‘its consideration
of the
complaint submitted by Iceland. The first speaker is
the representative of Iceland, on whom I now call.
10. Mr. INGVARSSON
(Iceland): The reason why
my Government has requested this meeting is, on the
one hand, to call the attention of the Council to the
prevailing situation in Icelandic waters, where a serious
incident has already occurred involving the use of
force by British public vessels against an Icelandic
Coast Guard vessel within the territorial
waters of
Iceland-indeed,
within two miles from the baselines
-and, on the other, to call on the Government of the
United Kingdom
to refrain from the use of force
in Icelandic waters. The general background of the
matter is described in my two letters addressed on
11 and 12 December respectively to the President
of the Security Council. The texts of those letters
have been circulated
as documents
S/l 1905 and
S/l 1907.

14. My Government
has expressed its willingness
to make temporary agreements with other nations that
have been engaged in substantial
fishing in the
area, and we have already concluded such agreements with the Governments
of Belgium and the
Federal Republic of Germany, allowing them to fish
for limited
quantities.
The agreement
with the
Federal Republic of Germany was concluded for a
period of two years, whereas the agreement with
Belgium may be terminated by either party on six
months’ notice. Similar agreements with the Faroe
Islands and Norway are in preparation.
15. I would particularly
draw attention
to the
fact that in the agreements referred to we have
emphasized the necessity of limiting
the catch of
cod, which is the most important species and also,
unfortunately,,
the most endangered. In the agreement with the Federal Republic of Germany, the
cod catch is hmited to 5.000 tons annually, and in
the agreement. with Belgium to 1.500 tons. This is
extremely important in view of the fact.that the total
allowable catch of cod for 1976 has been established by Icelandic scientists at 230.000 tons. British
scientists have estimated the total allowable catch
of cod at 265.000 tons. During the last 10 years the
annual quantity of cod caught by Icelanders in Icelandic waters has varied between 200.000 and
300.000 tons. In other words, the Icelandic fishing
fleet has the capacity to take the entire allowable
catch of cod. .’

11. I want to thank YOU, Mr. -President, and the
members of this Council complying with our request
to call this meeting to discuss the matter further, and
I should like to take this opportunity
to summarize
the background
and then deal with the particular
incident to which I have referred.
12. The general background
is that for the last
quarter of a century the Government of Iceland has
been gradually implementing
our Law of 1948 concerning the scientific conservation of the continental
shelf fisheries. That gradual implementation
has
taken place in harmony with the progressive development of international
law. The latest and final step
was taken by regulations which entered into force
on 15 October 1975, providing for fishery limits of
200 nautical miles off Iceland. These regulations are
in conformity
with the consensus which emerged
at the Third United Nations Conference on the Law
of the Sea. At the conclusion of the third session
of the Conference in Geneva in May, the Chairmen
of the Committees
produced a single negotiating
text’ that expresses the principles
which, in the
opinion of the Chairmen, had the greatest support
at the Conference. Among those principles is the
provision that a coastal State has sovereign rights
over the natural resources within an exclusive
economic zone of up to 200 nautical miles, where
the coastal State itself determines
both the total
allowable catch and its own capacity to utilize that
catch. These principles
have the overwhelming

16. It is for .this very reason that negotiations with
the United Kingdom have broken down. The British
have made excessive claims which would amount
to their taking ,almost one half of the total allowable
catch, which, in view of the fact ‘that we have. the
capacity to take the entire allowable catch ourselves, would mean a similar reduction in our own
catch. This was, and is, completely
unacceptable
to us and is also incompatible
with the principles
supported by the international
community.
We were
ready-not
because there was any surplus available,
but in order to co-operate-to
agree on a quota of
65.000 tons annually for the next two years. The
2

20. It should.be kept in mind that the vessels referred
to in the above note are present in the Iceland
area as a contingent of a British naval force which
operates in the area, the sole purpose of which is to
prevent the Icelandic Coast Guard from enforcing
Icelandic laws. These vessels should not be in the
area at all.

British insisted on 110.000 tons. At the same time;
the United Kingdom Government is already claiming,
the non-living resources within a 200-mile zone off
its own coast, and has firmly supported the entire
concept of the exclusive economic
zone, at the
Conference,
including
the principles
to which I
referred earlier. Further negotiations between the two
countries on this matter would be entirely without
foundation
unless the British side were willing to
agree to a much greater condition
in their catch
than they have hitherto indicated.

21. It is a fact that the incident took place well
inside our territorial waters, which, for the time being,
are only four nautical miles across. This constitutes
a violation of our sovereignty, as well as an extremely
dangerous situation if such use of force were allowed
to prevail.

17. When negotiations broke down and agreement
could not be reached, the United Kingdom Government “decided to provide naval protection to enable
the British trawlers to continue fishing off Iceland
in the face of efforts by Icelandic Coast Guard
vessels to stop them”.

22. Consequently,
on behalf of my Government,
I protest to the Security Council against this use of
force within our territorial
waters, and call on the
Government of the United Kingdom to refrain from
the use of force in Icelandic waters.

18. I am not going to elaborate further on the
background and I wish now to turn to the incident
to which 1 referred at the beginning of my statement.
The facts are described in a note which was delivered
to the Ambassador
of the United
Kingdom
in
Reykjavik
on 12 December
1975. The text is as
follows:

23. Mr. RICHARD
(United
Kingdom):
Let me
start by saying that my.delegation
deplores incidents
of the sort to which the representative
of Iceland
has referred just as strongly as he does. But we regret
that the Icelandic delegation has felt it necessary to
bring the matter before the Security Council, because
we do not believe that the causes which underlie
such incidents can be removed by debate in this
chamber. However, I am obliged by the statement of
the representative
of Iceland to put on record an
authoritative
account of the incident of which the
Icelandic Government
has complained,
to explain to
the Council why and how such incidents arise, and to
express my Government’s
view of how they can
best be prevented in the future.

“The Government
of Iceland protests in the
strongest possible terms the serious incident which
took place on December
11, 1975, when the
Icelandic Coast Guard vessel Thor was, ‘repeatedly
rammed
by the British
Government-operated
tugboat Lloydsmrn,
and an attempt wab also made
by the British
Government-operated
platform
supply ship Stcrr Ayuorirrs to ram the. Thor. This
incident took place 1.9 nautical miles off the
east coast of Iceland, that is, in Icelandic territorial
waters. This resulted
in considerable
damage
being sustained by the Coast Guard vessel Thor.

24. During the night of 10 to I1 December, the
unarmed British civilian support vessels Sttu. Ayrrtrrirrs
and Stctr Poltrris entered Icelandic territorial waters
in the neighbourhood
of Seydisfjord
at their
captains’ discretion
to seek shelter from severe
weather, as they have the right to do under customary
international
law. At the time there was a severe
snowstorm in progress, with winds of force 8 gusting
to force 9, and very high seas. The civilian defence
vessel LloyIs~n~~n joined Star Ayrrtrrim during the
morning near the entrance to Seydisfjord.

“The Coast Guard vessel came upon three
British Government-operated
ships, one tugboat
and two platform supply ships at the mouth of the
fiord Seydisfjordur,
approximately
one nautical
mile from shore. The Coast Guard vessel ordered
the platform
supply ships, by light and sound
signals, to halt ‘in order to inquire’. about their
activities.
This order was disregarded
by the
British ships, whereupon the above incident took
place after a short pursuit. The Government
of
Iceland reserves its right to claim -reparation for
damages caused during the incident:+The
Government holds the United
Kingdom
authorities
responsible
for all future damages: as well as
injuries or loss of life, which may result from rammings and other illegal actions by vessels operated
by the United Kingdom in Icelandic waters.”

25. At about 1230 hours the Icelandic’ Coast Guard
vessel Thor came out of Seydisfjord flying the code
flag “Lima”,
which I understand means “Stop your
vessel instantly”,
and also flashing the’ code word
“Lima”
on her signal projector.
Using her radio,
Tltcw ordered both Strrr Aytrcrrilrs and Lloydstncr~l
to stop. She-also vrdered “Stop or I will fire” over
her megaphone. Both Stur Ayrrtrrirrs and L~O~~.SIMII
are unarmed, as I have already said. The Icelandic
vessel had on deck an inflatable boat, and what
appeared to be a boarding party dressed in combat
uniform and armed with revolvers. Thor then came
close alongside the starboard quarter ofSttrr Aqrurrirrs,

19. According to the latest information,
the platform supply ship referred to above, the Strrr Aywtrim,
not only attempted to ram the Thtrr but actually
:
did so.
3

striking her. Lkoydsman
then manoeuvred so as to
place herself between Star Ayuttrius and Thor. Thor
then overtook
Lloydsman
close on Uoydsmun’s
starboard side and tuned to port across her bows,
causing Lkoydsmcrn to collide with Thor’s port side
amidships. Lloydsmcrn was too close to be able to
avoid Thor. Thor scraped across Lloydsman’s
bow
and damage was done to Thor’s superstructure.
At
the time of the incident, Thor was aiming one of her
guns at Lloydsmcm’s
bridge.

British
people depend for their livelihood
and.
economic. well-being on this activity.
Because of
Iceland’s
special dependence on fish, the Court
held that Iceland can claim preferential rights, but
not exclusive rights, as against the United Kingdom.
A similar judgement
was given in a case brought
by the Federal Republic
of Germany.
Although
Iceland refused to recognize the ,jurisdiction
of the
Court, the Court determined by 14 votes to 1 that
it was competent to decide the case. May I take this
opportunity to remind the Council that decisions of the
International
Court of Justice are binding under the
United Nations Charter on the States concerned.

26. Thor then drew off .to starboard ,and fired her
forward gun at close range on Lloydsmrrn,
but, I am
happy to say, without hitting her. Thor then circled
the two British
ships, approached
Lloydsman’s
starboard side and attempted
to cut in front of
her, causing Lloydsmrtn
to strike Thor again, this
time on her port quarter. Thor then laid off Lloydsmun’s port side and fired two shots at her from the
after gun. Again, I am happy to say, neither one bit.

30. The International
Court ruled also that any
restrictions on catch should flow from negotiations
conducted in good faith between the two Govemments to secure an equitable solution reflecting the
rights of both sides. No further international
agreements have been reached on this matter since the
International
Court’s ruling of 2 February 1973’,
and it follows that the Icelandic unilateral extension
of its fishing limits to 200 miles is, like the previous
extension to 50 miles, unenforceable against British
fishermen, and that accordingly the harassment of
British trawlers is totally illegal.

27. It is clear from the foregoing account that the
central fact about this incident was that the Icelandic
gunboat opened fire on unarmed British vessels.
This followed an initial over-reaction by the gunboat
when it approached the British vessels with the
apparent intention of putting an armed boarding party
aboard and when it threatened to open fire unless
the ships stopped. The ramming incidents which the
representative of Iceland alleges took place were in
fact collisions caused by the manaeuvering of Thor,
which made it impossible for the British ‘ships to
avoid them.

31. The background to the present situation is as
follows. British fishing vessels have fished in the seas
adjacent to, Iceland for very many years. They are
heavily dependent on these traditional fishing grounds.
Though there are many varieties .of fish caught there
by Icelandic vessels and by vessels of other countries, the British ships that fish there are primarily
interested ‘fin cod. Since 1960 the average annual
catch of cod off Iceland by all countries has been
relatively stable at between 350.000 and 400.000 tons.
Of this total Iceland caught some 250.000 tons and
Britain some 125.000 tons on average. The current
need, recognized
by both British
and Icelandic
scientists, for some conservation measures has arisen
because of the increasing proportion of young fish
caught within, this total. This situation,
however,
has- arisen primarily
because of changes in ; the
composition of Iceland’s own fishing fleet.

28, As I have already said, the United Kingdom
Government
regrets that this’ incident should have
been brought before the Council at all. It will, I fear,
be impossible for this Council ever to decide exactly
what happened or who is to blame for it. But incidents
such as this occur because it is the deliberate policy
of the Icelandic Government
to use its coast guard
vessels to harass British fishing boats fishing in
waters in which as recently as July 1974 the International Court of Justice ru!ed that they had the right
to fish. In that ruling the International
Court held that
Iceland
was not entitled
unilaterally
to exclude
United
Kingdom
vessels from dishing between
Iceland’s 12-mile and 50-mile limits, or unilaterally
to impose restrictions on their activities in those areas.
The Court decided that Iceland’s 1972 regulations,
extending its fishing limits to 50 miles, unlawfully
disregarded
the established
rights of the United
Kingdom.
The regulations
also constituted
an
infringement
of the principle of reasonable regard
for the interests of other States, a principle which
is authoritatively
embodied in article 2 of the Convention on the High Seas*, adopted at Geneva on
29 April 1958.

32. During the 1960s Icelandic fishermen seriously
overfished
the herring stocks around its shores,
stocks which by 1967 had sunk to a critically low
level. In order, to prevent the herring from dying out
altogether,
fhe Icelandic
Government
banned all
herring fishing around its shores. The result was
that many purse-seine vessels, which had formerly
been used for herring fishing, were from 1970
onwards converted to trawlers for use in cod fishing,
with no thought for the effect that this would have
on future cod stocks;
33. In spite of the responsibility
of Iceland for the
damaging effect of this overfishing, the United Kingdom Government
has repeatedly affirmed its readiness to co-operate in measures to ‘prevent a further

29. The Court’s ruling was based on the considerations that British vessels have fished in the waters
around Iceland for centuries and that sections of the
4

decline in the cod stock and to settle its differences
with Iceland by negotiation.
Ever since July 1975,
when Iceland announced its intention to extend its
limits to 200 miles-in
advance of decisions by the
United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea-it
has been our objective to reach a negotiated agreement under which our fishermen would be able to
operate after the expiry, on 13 November,
of the
interim United Kingdom-Iceland
Fisheries Agreement
of 1973. In the negotiations which have so far taken
place, we have made it quite clear that we are ready
to reduce our catch considerably.
We recognize
the need to conserve cod stocks. We recognize that
Iceland, because of its dependence on the fishing
industry, has a prior claim to the fish off Iceland.
We have said that we are willing to show flexibility
on the -amount of fish caught and on a number of
other matters. We have repeatedly said that we will
match any scientifically
supported
conservation
measures, relating to the size of fish to be caught or the
minimum
size of net mesh to be used, .which are
imposed equally upon all fishermen. But. while both
British and Icelandic scientists agree that there is now
a need both to cut down the total tonnage caught
and to restrict the catch of immature fish, Iceland
has proposed a total allowable catch almost identical
to that which it claims its own fishing industry needs.
Iceland is therefore treating all the fish,as its own.
It is in effect calling on other fishermen Ep bear the
entire burden of conservation
measures and is
declining to bear any substantial part of ,that burden
itself.
,34. Despite our willingness to negotiate, Icelandic
gunboats have repeatedly harassed British trawlers
by cuttmg their fishing gear, a highly dangerous
procedure. Between 15 and 25 November alone the
Icelandic Coast Guard vessels, supported by their
aircraft, attacked a number of British trawlers in the
area, damaging the equipment of at least seven of them.
This harassment of our trawlers has made it neces-.
sary for us to provide protection,
protection which
we have attempted to limit to the minimum
compatible with ensuring the fishing vessels’ continued
ability to fish. First we introduced civilian defence
vessels. After the continued cutting of traw wires by
the Coast Guard vessels of Iceland, w>er reluctantly
brought in frigates of the Royal Navy on 25 November. Escalation of incidents, like the escalation of
the protective measures we were obliged to take,
has resulted from increasingly aggressive tactics by
the Icelandic Coast Guard vessels.
” :
i
35. In spite of the harassment of our: fishing fleet
and in spite of the demands of the Icelandic Govern-

ment, I take this. opportunity
to reaffirm the United
Kingdom
Government’s
readiness to settle its differences with Iceland by peaceful means. We believe
it is possible to find a compromise
settlement and
our only desire is to continue the negotiations
in
order to reach a speedy solution. It goes without
saying that we are willing to withdraw naval protection, provided that, on their side, the ships of the
Icelandic Coast Guard cease to molest our fishing
vessels.
36. Both the British peode and the Icelandic people are seafarers by their history. British and Icelandic fishermen
have for centuries made their
living side by side on the seas of Northern Europe.
This struggle has created a bond of comradeship
between Icelandic and British seamen over which the
present dispute casts an unwelcome shadow. My
Government
for its part wants to lift that shadow,
so that the British and the Icelanders can once again
harvest the seas to their mutual and long-term benefit,
in friendship and in co-operation. But for this to happen
there must be negotiation and there must be agreement between our two Governments on the issues at
present in dispute, not confrontation
on the sea nor
confrontation
in the Security Council. We say to the
Icelandic Government:
let the negotiations ‘recommence, for we are confident that, with goodwill,
the gap between us can be bridged and the common
interests of our two countries can be reflected in
renewed understanding
between our two Govemments. As my Foreign .and Commonwealth
Secretary, Mr. Callaghan,
told the Icelandic
Foreign
Minister as recently as last Thursday, the United
Kingdom
is prepared to talk at any time, at any
place, and at any level. I wish to repeat that under-,
taking today and to place it on the record of the
Security Council.
37. The .PRESIDENT
(interpretdon
from French):
As no other representative has asked to be allowed
to speak on the question before the Council, I shall
adjourn the debate on the item. The Security Council will remain seized of the question so that it may
resume consideration
of it at an appropriate date.

on the Law of the SM. vdi. IV (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.75.V.10). document A/CONF.6Z/WP.B.
2 United Nations, Trw?\’ Sr~rks, vol. 450 (1963). No. 6465.
’ Fi.uhm’e~
~?f’th~ Cotrrt.

Jurisdic&n
Judgmmr.

(U&cd
I.C.J.

Kingdm~
V. Iwlrnd).
Reports
1973. p. 3.

Jttrisdktion

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATlONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
auprb de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes. New York ou Geneve.
KAlti

IIOJIYYMTh

ti3Aa~~R

OpraHII3auHb

ZiSAAHWI

OPTAHLi

OfheJJWHeWHblS

3AIUiZI
HsuwR

OK~EW~HEHHFDIX
MOXKHO

Kpkirb

HAIWFI
a KHUXCHLIK

JHH~X w arearcraax
ao acex paRonax
reupe. HaBonme
cnpamH
rearnew! tcnr~xno~
Marsanne
nnn nntu~~e
no anpecy:
Oprankmaunn
Hawfi,
Ce~uux
no nponaxctte H3L(amfR. HIM-P~o~K
HJW >KeHesa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONBS

DE LAS NACIONES

Mat-a-

06 nsaawvix
06nenunennbrx

B

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirljase a: Naciones Unidas. Section de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in UnitcdNations,

New York

00150

82:61202-December

1983-2,200
