S/PV.9329

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9329th meeting

Thursday, 25 May 2023 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Amherd. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Switzerland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Ishikane
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2378 (2017) and considerations related to the
financing of African Union peace support operations mandated by the Security
Council (S/2023/303)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-14656 (E)
*2314656*

S/PV.9329

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Expression of sympathy in memory of fallen
peacekeepers
The President (spoke in French): Before the start
of today’s debate, I invite all members to join me in
paying tribute to the more than 4,000 peacekeepers
who have fallen in the line of duty.
Today we celebrate not only 75 years of
peacekeeping operations, but above all we pay tribute
to the men and women who have given their lives in the
service of peace. Let us assure their families that we will
not forget them and that their sacrifice was not in vain.
Let us also reiterate the importance of peace operations
mandated by the Security Council. Let us together find
ways to make them even more effective and to improve
the security of peacekeepers. As it is the Council that
mandates peace operations, it is appropriate that we
also commemorate — here and together — the losses
suffered. Let us therefore take a moment to honour
those who have paid the ultimate price.
I now invite all members to stand and observe a
minute of silence.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
The President (spoke in French): I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his presence at this
solemn moment.

The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

25/05/2023

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2023/303, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2378 (2017) and
considerations related to the financing of African
Union peace support operations mandated by the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: I am grateful for the opportunity to
brief the Security Council on United Nations support
for African Union (AU) peace operations, and I am very
pleased to speak to the Council on Africa Day alongside
Mr. Adeoye, Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace
and Security of the African Union Commission. Today
we mark the signing 60 years ago of the charter of the
Organization of African Unity, the precursor of the AU.
I salute the countries of Africa today for their growing
unity and solidarity.
Cooperation between the African Union and
the United Nations has grown significantly since the
signing of the 2017 Joint United Nations-AU Framework
for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security. We
have joined efforts and worked closely, including in the
Central African Republic, Somalia, South Sudan, and
the Sudan.

Report of the Secretary-General on
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2320 (2016) and 2378 (2017) and considerations
related to the financing of African Union
peace support operations mandated by the
Security Council (S/2023/303)

We have addressed a range of peace and security
issues — conflict-prevention and conflict-resolution
initiatives, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, the climate
emergency and women and peace and security, among
others. Recently, for example, the United Nations and
the AU supported efforts of the Economic Community
of West African States to restore constitutional order
in Mali, Burkina Faso and Guinea. Today the United
Nations, AU and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development are supporting efforts to bring peace and
a civilian-led order to the Sudan.

The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate in
this meeting: Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs;
Mr. Bankole Adeoye, African Union Commissioner for
Political Affairs, Peace and Security; and Ms. Bitania
Tadesse, Program Director, Amani Africa.

Over the last 20 years, the AU has shown its
readiness to speedily deploy peace-support operations
in response to armed conflicts on the continent. With
its missions in Burundi, the Central African Republic,
the Comoros, Mali, Somalia, and the Sudan, the AU
contributed to the maintenance of continental peace
and security, in line with Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa

2/19

23-14656

25/05/2023

Peace and security in Africa

Those missions demonstrated significant political
will and commitment, but they also faced some recurrent
problems. Challenges included funding shortfalls and
the absence of requisite operational and logistical
capabilities, as well as force enablers and multipliers.
While the support that the United Nations and other
partners have provided has been useful and appreciated,
it has also often been unpredictable.
Perhaps the most novel form of cooperation
between our two organizations has been United Nations
support to AU peace enforcement missions in Somalia.
In 2007, the Security Council approved the AU Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM). In 2009, the Council mandated
partial support from assessed contributions to ensure
that AMISOM had sustainable and predictable support
to carry out its mandate. AMISOM was instrumental
in supporting Somali forces in their efforts to stabilize
the country, and I would like to pay tribute to the fallen
soldiers in AMISOM and in the Somali security sector.
Last year, AMISOM became the AU Transition Mission
in Somalia, with the objective of handing over security
responsibilities to Somali security forces by the end of
December 2024.
As we look at different parts of the continent, it is
obvious that the need to put AU peace operations on a
solid footing is increasingly pressing. The AU and the
regional economic communities and mechanisms have
in recent years scrambled to respond to the challenging
nature of conflict in Africa — from the Sahel to Somalia
and from Mozambique to the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, among other situations.
Armed violence invariably and significantly
harms civilian populations and often spills over across
borders. In Africa and elsewhere, rising insecurity
is characterized by an increasing use of asymmetric
tactics, the sophistication of armed extremist
groups and the expanding influence of transnational
organized crime. Those connected phenomena require
commensurate global approaches and responses. The
Sahel is particularly affected. That is why the SecretaryGeneral and the Chairperson of the AU Commission
jointly invited the former President of the Niger,
Mr. Mahamadou Issoufou, to lead an independent panel
to assess the situation in the Sahel. We anticipate its
recommendations on responses to the region’s complex
challenges this fall.
The imperative of providing predictable, flexible
and sustainable financing for AU-led peace support
operations is well known to the Council. In 2015, for

S/PV.9329

example, the report of the Independent High-level Panel
on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) concluded that
the lack of sustained, predictable and flexible funding
mechanisms to support AU peace operations undermines
their sustainability and effectiveness. Recognizing that
common challenge, the Security Council expressed, in
resolution 2378 (2017), its intention to further consider
practical steps to establish a mechanism through which
AU peace operations could be partly financed through
United Nations assessed contributions on a case-bycase basis.
The Council has before it today a report of the
Secretary-General (S/2023/303) with recommendations
on securing such support for AU-led operations
mandated by the Security Council and an update on
progress made since 2017. The report was prepared in
collaboration with the AU, Member States and partners.
We are pleased to note that the AU, in close cooperation
with the United Nations and other partners, has made
significant progress to fulfil the commitments set
out in resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2378 (2017). Most
notably, the AU has worked to address the financial
challenge of its operations, including by committing to
increase its own financial contributions by revitalizing
its AU Peace Fund. The AU, in cooperation with the
United Nations and the European Union, also moved to
develop and operationalize a compliance framework to
meet international human rights and humanitarian law
obligations, as well as conduct and discipline standards.
AU peace operations should be considered as part
of the range of responses to crises in Africa alongside
established United Nations mechanisms. The report
in front of Council members outlines a standardized
consultative planning and mandating process, through
which the United Nations, the AU and subregional
configurations can assess together the required response
to an emerging crisis. That process would reassure the
Council that a given situation has been systematically
reviewed by all the relevant entities. It would therefore
help the Council decide whether assessed contributions
can be mandated. The report presents the joint mission
model and the support packages delivered by the United
Nations as the two most practical options for ensuring
the funding that AU-led operations need. That support
would be authorized on a case-by-case basis.
The case for adequately financing AU-led peace
support operations is beyond solid. We are therefore
hopeful that the Security Council will agree to provide
its backing, including by allowing access to United

23-146563/19

S/PV.9329

Peace and security in Africa

Nations assessed contributions. As the SecretaryGeneral has stated, concrete action on this long-standing
issue will address a critical gap in the international
peace and security architecture and bolster the efforts
of the African Union to tackle peace and security
challenges on the continent.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Adeoye.
Mr. Adeoye: On behalf of the Chairperson of
the African Union (AU) Commission, I recognize
with deep gratitude the resourceful leadership of the
Secretary-General in his endeavours in support of the
African peace and security agenda, particularly with
regard to measures to promote effective and sustainable
financing for AU peace support operations.

25/05/2023

Nations assessed contributions to better tackle the
persisting and complex operations of peace missions on
our continent.
The current funding of African Union-led, African
Union-authorized peace support operations cannot
respond to the compelling agenda for sustainability and
effectiveness or to the powerful need for innovative
funding. This is the fundamental goal of the African
Union: that access to United Nations assessed
contributions will be in the interest of all members of
the international community. Our value proposition
today is that we as the African Union continue to
promote this need for predictability, adequacy,
flexibility and sustainability in the financing of all AU
peace operations.

Today is Africa Day. The commemoration of the
sixtieth anniversary of the founding of our continental
body symbolizes the significance, the promise and the
vision of an Africa that is free, united, peaceful and
prosperous. Since the 1960s, the Organization of African
Unity and now the AU have continued to contribute to
global peacekeeping, peacebuilding and sustainable and
inclusive development for shared progress. We join the
United Nations today, after 75 years of peacekeeping
operations, to salute our fallen heroes, who have paid
the ultimate price for global peace.

Happily, in response to earlier Security Council
directives, in February 2023, the African Union
Assembly of Heads of State and Government adopted
a consensus paper on predictable, adequate and
sustainable financing for African Union peace and
security activities. This consensus paper reached the
understanding that three actionable financing models
would be to the benefit of the African Union and
indeed the world: assessed contributions by the United
Nations for hybrid missions; United Nations assessed
contributions through the United Nations Support
Office model; and the possibility of direct support to
AU subregional peace support operations.

Today many parts of Africa remain a hotbed of
insecurity. We cannot continue to use traditional
peacekeeping methods in the face of the complex
nature and scope of the conflicts that traverse our
beloved continent, particularly those involving violent
extremism, hateful ideologies, terrorism, rebellion
and insurgency. There is therefore a compelling need
for a paradigm shift in the concept of operations from
peacekeeping to peace enforcement.

This is indeed the right time if we are to decisively
respond with one appropriate mechanism and support
model to address the critical conflict issues on our
continent. The ongoing crises in Somalia, the Lake
Chad basin, the Sahel, the Great Lakes, Mozambique
or, indeed, the Sudan, today provide us valuable lessons
on the inadequacy of the current international peace
architecture. The ad hoc nature of these missions is
not sustainable.

On this auspicious occasion of Africa Day, we
appreciate the very constructive and positive thrust
of the Secretary-General’s report (S/2023/303), which
highlights the progress made in the implementation of
resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2378 (2017). We also refer
to the 2017 report of the Secretary-General on available
mechanisms to finance and support AU peace support
operations authorized by the Council (S/2017/454).
Indeed, it is a call to innovative and concrete action
in the understanding that, with political will and
concerted action, agreement can be reached on the
detailed modalities to access the much-needed United

However, the African Union remains committed
to the unwavering display of African ownership
and African solutions for African problems, with an
emphasis on burden- and responsibility-sharing with
the international community. To this end, the States
members of the African Union have resourced the
revitalized Peace Fund to the tune of over $340 million
today and still counting. The pilot use of the Peace Fund
is set for 2024, but its crisis reserve facility has already
been used, with $2 million authorized for support for the
African Union Transition Mission in Somalia (ATMIS),
pursuant to resolution 2670 (2022). Similarly, $2 million

4/19

23-14656

25/05/2023

Peace and security in Africa

from the Peace Fund’s crisis reserve facility have been
used to fund the East African Community regional
force in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We are doing and playing our part. We are committed
to and highly commend States members of the AU for
demonstrating their pan-African spirit. Hopefully, the
international community represented in the Security
Council will also support these African efforts.
I am pleased to report that the AU Commission
continues
to
make
significant
progress
in
mainstreaming and implementing international
human rights law, international humanitarian law
and conduct and discipline standards in the planning,
conduct, management and liquidation of missions.
These efforts are currently facilitated through the
tripartite partnership project among the African
Union, the European Union and the United Nations,
which focuses on the AU compliance framework that
was established on 1 February 2022. This project has
also enabled the Commission to conduct a number of
training programmes as part of the AU compliance
and accountability framework curriculum, including
for ATMIS, the Multinational Joint Task Force in the
Lake Chad basin and the Somalia National Army. More
efforts are being planned at the regional level.
The AU is also undertaking a number of
initiatives to facilitate the operationalization of the
African Standby Force, including the adoption of a
memorandum of understanding between the AU and
relevant member States. Clearly, the Second World
War model for peacekeeping operations needs to be
overhauled, and its financing, as a critical part of the
means of implementation, will also have to reflect the
exigencies of peace enforcement.
In conclusion, the Chilean poet Gabriela Mistral
advised us decades ago that the child cannot wait.
On this special day for the African Union, we say it
loudly and clearly that African women, children and
youth — mostly the victims of conflict — can no
longer wait or afford to wait any longer. We therefore
call on the Security Council to consider changing the
methods and the solidarity in intensity and reach. The
compelling twin agendas of Agenda 2063 and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, and particularly,
for the AU, the flagship Silencing the Guns initiative,
would be better served if the Secretary-General’s
recommendations are endorsed and concretized into
relevant action.

S/PV.9329

I trust that the elements of both the African Union
consensus paper and the report of the SecretaryGeneral, presented for the Council’s consideration, will
enable its members to decide on the key issues and the
modalities included therein. It is the conviction of the
African Union in its entirety and without a doubt that
the support for the effective deployment and operations
of African Union peace operations will serve as a global
good — a global good for the benefit of the preservation
of peace and security worldwide.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Adeoye for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Tadesse.
Ms. Tadesse: I wish everyone a happy Africa Day.
I would like to thank the Swiss presidency for the
invitation to address the Security Council on my behalf
and on behalf of my organization, Amani Africa Media
and Research Services.
Amani Africa is a pan-African policy research,
training and consulting think tank that works on
multilateral processes in relation to peace and security
and democratic and constitutional rule in Africa, with a
focus on the role of the African Union (AU) and its Peace
and Security Council. It is an honour for me to draw on
and use the rich research work of my organization in
addressing Council members today.
We would like to propose that at its core the subject
of this meeting is not money. Rather it is first and
foremost about the kind of arrangement that can best
deliver on the pledge of the United Nations Charter to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war
at a time when existing arrangements and tools for
delivering on this promise have been found wanting.
At various junctures in its 78 years, the Security
Council has had to make bold decisions for adapting
the arrangements and tools for the maintenance of
international peace and security to the challenges
of each era. Although not always successful, there is
no doubt that they give the United Nations a fighting
chance for doing better in its efforts towards saving
succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
Considering the nature of the peace and security
challenges facing Africa, which account for 60 per cent
of the decisions of the Council, it is the moment to make
the necessary decision for adapting the arrangement
and the tools for the realization of the Charter’s most
fundamental pledge. The Council can achieve that

23-146565/19

S/PV.9329

Peace and security in Africa

by heeding the Secretary-General’s call in the report
presented today (S/2023/303) for the Security Council
to signal its clear support for providing African Union
peace support operations with access to the United
Nations assessed contributions.’
As discussed in some detail in Amani Africa’s
special research report , the question of financing of
AU peace support operations has been an important
part of the policy discourse on international peace and
security in Africa for nearly 15 years. At the turn of the
century, the Protocol Relating to the Establishment of
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union
recognized the need to resort to the use of United
Nations assessed contributions. That was premised on
the fundamental recognition that when the AU deploys
peace support operations with Security Council
Chapter VII authorization, it does so as part of the
arrangement deemed necessary and in pursuit of the
global public good for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
The experiences witnessed in the use of AU peace
support operations under the Council’s auspices have
made it clear that the full potential of that arrangement
can be realized only if AU peace support operations
are provided with sustainable, predictable and flexible
funding. The Council has affirmed the imperative for
such funding on many occasions.
The Council has actually deployed assessed
contributions for funding AU peace support operations,
although always as an exception. Following resolution
2320 (2016) and resolution 2378 (2017), as well as
presidential statement S/PRST/2022/6, of 31 August
2022, which requested the preparation of the SecretaryGeneral’s report presented today, I wish to indicate that
the Secretary-General is spot on in stating that this is
“an opportune, timely moment for the Security
Council to rise to the challenge of laying the
foundation for a new generation of African Union-led,
United Nations-supported peace operations on the
African continent” (S/2023/303, para. 43).

25/05/2023

That can be strengthened further. The implementation
of the compliance standards can also be enhanced with
further support.
With respect to burden sharing, institutionally the
most critical development is the revitalization of the
AU Peace Fund, dedicated to mobilizing funds from
within the continent for financing AU’s peace and
security work.
Although the question is framed narrowly in
monetary terms, also to be considered are the enormous
price that AU personnel pay with their lives and limbs
and the resultant financial, social and other costs that
result from such losses to the families, communities
and institutions that these personnel are part of.
The use of United Nations assessed contribution is
the avenue for crafting — along the lines outlined in the
Secretary-General’s report and the AU Consensus Paper
on Predictable, Adequate, and Sustainable Financing
for African Union Peace and Security Activities — this
arrangement and the accompanying combination of
tools required for this era in order to give the United
Nations, working in concert with the AU, the fighting
chance to make meaningful effort towards the promise
of the Charter to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war in Africa.
The conflicts in various parts of the continent,
including those in which the major United Nations
peacekeeping operations are currently engaged, require
the use of the combination of peace enforcement,
stabilization and peacebuilding instruments. Lacking
the combination of those tools and the doctrinal space
for using some of them, United Nations missions
in the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Mali have come to face
enormous challenges.

On whether the institutional and technical work
accomplished is good enough for such action, solid
enough progress has been made, albeit with some areas
requiring further consolidation.

As the progress made in Somalia, under the
AU’s mission there, clearly attests, AU peace support
operations are willing and, when properly resourced,
able to use peace enforcement for creating conditions
for peace. In similar conflict situations, AU peace
support operations financed through United Nations
assessed contribution can be the necessary alternative
to United Nations peacekeeping.

There is significant progress with respect to a
compliance framework for AU peace support operations,
pursuant to resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2378 (2017). The
AU has also established a unit dedicated to compliance.

At a time when there is apathy on using United
Nations peacekeeping, using AU peace support
operations offers the Council an avenue for preventing
the emergence of such a dangerous vacuum for security

6/19

23-14656

25/05/2023

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV.9329

arrangements that do not operate on the basis of
multilateral principles.

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Tadesse for her briefing.

The future of multilateralism lies in Africa. The
interest of the peoples of the African continent is best
served under a multilateral system, even when it is
imperfect. As Kwame Nkrumah wrote 60 years ago:

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Vice-President of the Swiss Confederation.

“Although confidence in the United Nations has
suffered several shocks since its foundation …
it remains the only world organization in which
the many problems of the world have a chance of
finding reasonable solution”.
His endorsement of multilateralism within the
framework of the United Nations was so absolute that he
was emphatic that the United Nations “must, therefore,
be supported by all interested in the preservation of
peace and the progress of human civilization.”
The adoption of a framework resolution on the
use of United Nations assessed contributions for AU
peace support operations will contribute materially
to restoring Africa’s faith in the multilateral system,
as forcefully put by Nkrumah, and facilitate the
harnessing of the enormous reservoir of support for
multilateralism in Africa.
Moreover, the use of United Nations assessed
contributions
within
an
agreed
institutional
arrangement jointly worked out by the AU and the
United Nations offers the best framework for the AU’s
role in the maintenance of international peace and
security to be one that meets the expectations of the
United Nations Charter. All indications are that AU-led
peace support operations financed by United Nations
assessed contributions are cost effective.
This is not about writing a blank cheque nor is it
a matter of charity. Instead, this is about the Council
crafting a framework for shouldering its part of the
responsibility in the shared global public good of
maintaining peace and security in Africa.
Africa is looking up to the Council. It is our firm
believe that the Council will rise to the occasion and
muster the will for demonstrating, as the SecretaryGeneral puts it, its readiness to
“address a critical gap in the international peace
and security architecture, as well as strong
reaffirmation of the willingness of the Council to
stem the scourge of armed conflict on the African
continent.” (ibid., para. 44)

I
thank
Commissioner
their briefings.

Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo,
Adeoye and Ms. Tadesse for

This day is important in two respects. We
are commemorating 75 years of United Nations
peacekeeping, and we are celebrating Africa
Day. Congratulations to us all. Our debate on
future peacekeeping models and their financing is
therefore timely.
Peacekeeping missions are an essential instrument
of the Security Council for peace and security in the
world. They are particularly important in Africa,
where many of those missions are deployed, but even
more significantly, 13 of the top 20 troop-contributing
countries are African.
It is therefore evident that Africa is fulfilling its
responsibility for African-led solutions to African
challenges. Switzerland welcomes that important
contribution. We look forward to using our term on the
Security Council to work even more closely with Africa
and to continue our long-standing support for the peace
and security architecture on that continent.
In order to fulfil their mandates, peace missions
must be able to depend on predictable, sustainable
and flexible funding. That also applies to the regional
missions authorized by the Security Council. That is
crucial for the credibility of the United Nations system.
We therefore welcome the proposal to use assessed
contributions for that purpose.
The debate on the financing of African Union-led
peace support operations is not new. The African Union
is well placed to play an active role in addressing current
and emerging security challenges on the continent.
Switzerland has always been committed in that regard.
For example, in 2018, when the Security Council was
considering this issue, Switzerland co-sponsored the
draft resolution proposed by the three African members
of the Security Council (S/2018/1093).
Today we take note of the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2023/303) and its conclusions, which allow us
to focus our attention on the key elements.

23-146567/19

S/PV.9329

Peace and security in Africa

First, all security forces must respect the Charter
of the United Nations, international humanitarian
law, human rights and refugee law. That respect must
be a prerequisite for the provision of United Nations
funding. It is a human rights due diligence requirement
on the part of the United Nations. Switzerland
acknowledges and welcomes the progress that the
African Union has made since 2018 on the normative
framework for peace support operations. The task now
is to implement it through a robust structure in order to
prevent violations, ensure compliance with applicable
standards, enable independent investigations and, when
necessary, punish violations.
Secondly, our goal must be to promote and facilitate
sustainable solutions. In that regard, regional ownership
of peace operations is key. Regional organizations must
be able to plan, carry out, manage, support and finance
their operations independently. In that regard, we are
encouraged by the consensus paper adopted by the
African Union this year. It will therefore be important
to find an ambitious and achievable form of burdensharing for peace support operations.
Lastly, we must promote effective leadership and
division of labour vis-à-vis cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union. To that end, we
must draw on past experiences and clearly delineate
the roles and responsibilities of each organization.
Established budgetary processes, including oversight
mechanisms, must be applied without exception to all
United Nations funding.
In conclusion, Switzerland welcomes the A3
initiative for a new decision by the Council on predictable,
sustainable and flexible funding for African Union-led
peace support operations. That would be a decisive step
for the future of peace operations. Switzerland intends
to contribute constructively to that end.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): On the auspicious occasion
of Africa Day, which also marks the sixtieth anniversary
of African unity, I have the honour to deliver this
statement on behalf of the members of the African
members of the Security Council (A3), namely, Gabon,
Mozambique and my own country, Ghana.
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2023/303) pursuant to the Council’s presidential
8/19

25/05/2023

statement of August 2022 (S/PRST/2022/6) and thank
Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo and the
African Union Commissioner for Political Affairs,
Peace and Security, Ambassador Bankole Adeoye, for
their briefings and unique insights. We also welcome
the participation at this meeting of Ms. Bitania Tadesse,
who spoke on behalf of Amani Africa.
As we have heard, today’s debate also coincides
with the International Day of United Nations
Peacekeepers and the commemoration of the seventyfifth anniversary of United Nations peacekeeping. It is
therefore fitting that I begin by paying special tribute
to all peacekeepers. Their sacrifices have helped to
bring peace to many parts of our world. And for those
who have made the ultimate sacrifice, our solemn
recommitment to achieving global peace should be the
fitting memorial that we establish, as we condole with
their families.
The strength of peacekeeping and its noted
challenges have been raised several times and are largely
understood. Peacekeeping has, however, endured and
served as a veritable tool for the Security Council
over the past 75 years, as it has pursued its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security. With the presentation of the SecretaryGeneral’s report, however, we have the opportunity to
preserve the strengths of peacekeeping and embrace
the additional instrument that the African Union (AU)
has offered to the Organization: to lead, on behalf of
the international community, robust peace enforcement
operations that would enjoy adequate, predictable and
sustainable financing from United Nations-assessed
contributions on a case-by-case basis. It is worth
mentioning that the evolving context and outlook of
peace and security in Africa require the adaptation of
the responses to be designed by the Council through
more proactive and offensive approaches, when
necessary. On that note, we fully support the SecretaryGeneral's assertion in his report that,
“On several occasions, I have emphasized the
need for a new generation of peace enforcement
missions and counter-terrorist operations, led
by regional forces, with guaranteed, predictable
funding. The African Union is an obvious partner
in that regard.” (S/2023/303, para.43)
It is evident that, if the Council is to remain effective
in addressing the complex and persisting conflict
situations on the African continent, we will need to
carefully consider the options that the Secretary-General
23-14656

25/05/2023

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV.9329

has presented to us and retain the Council’s capacity
to leverage existing United Nations partnerships with
regional and subregional arrangements to address the
new and emerging threats on the African continent. In
recalling the long journey that Africa has travelled in
its quest to be an effective partner to the Council in
the maintenance of peace and security on the continent,
it is important to refer to the first request that was
made to the Security Council by the Organization of
African Unity, in December 1981, for support to deploy
a pan-African peacekeeping force to Chad, as well
as resolution 1769 (2007), which established a basis
for the funding of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur and resolution 1863 (2009),
which initiated the United Nations logistical support
package for the African Union Mission in Somalia and
its successor, the African Union Transition Mission
in Somalia.

high discipline and conduct standards in its doctrines,
training principles and practices for peace support
operations. In that regard, it is important to note that,
on 12 May, the African Union Specialized Technical
Committee on Defence, Safety and Security adopted
three key documents, namely, the African Union
strategic framework for compliance and accountability
in peace support operations, the African Union
policy on the protection of civilians in peace support
operations, and the African Union policy on selection
and screening of personnel for peace support operations.
These policies assure compliance with standards that
are similar to those of the United Nations. The tripartite
project of the AU, European Union and United Nations
partnership is also an important mechanism that has
contributed to reinforcing the compliance framework
through the exchange of experiences and good practices
among the three organizations involved.

Following the adoption of resolutions 2320 (2016)
and 2378 (2017), and building on the momentum
generated by the positive work done on the financing of
African-led peace support operations, we believe that
there is a very good basis for the Council to engage
constructively in unlocking the potential of AU-led
peace support operations to serve as a critical enabler for
the realization of the Sustainable Development Goals,
the Silencing the Guns initiative and Agenda 2063 of
the African Union. That firm conviction is borne out
by the capability shown by Africa-led peace support
operations in understanding the context and dynamics
of the conflicts on the continent, pre-empting them and
advancing durable strategies in addressing them.

On the issue of prudential and fiduciary standards,
we note that the African Union has made steady and
significant progress in enhancing its financial rules
and arrangements to ensure transparency in the use of
and accountability over the funds allocated for peace
support operations. We believe that the evolved and
strengthened structure and arrangements of the AU
Peace Fund and its crisis reserve facility also provide
rigorous financial oversight over funds that are
committed to AU peace support operations to ensure
proper use and accountability for those funds.

In reaction to the report of the Secretary-General,
and guided by the consensus paper on predictable,
adequate and sustainable financing for African Union
peace and security activities, as well as the concerns
of other delegations, the A3 would like to comment
on four issues, related to: first, the compliance
frameworks and mechanisms for respecting human
rights and international humanitarian law; secondly,
the prudential and fiduciary standards of the financial
arrangements of the African Union; thirdly, the joint
planning and decision-making process for missions;
and, fourthly, the question of burden-sharing.
Concerning the compliance frameworks, the
African Union has demonstrated strong efforts and
good-faith commitment to strengthen its compliance
framework and mechanisms for respecting human rights
and international humanitarian law and conforming to

Pertaining to the issue of joint planning and
decision-making for missions, we welcome the number
of safeguards provided by the African Union itself and
the United Nations, which helps to avoid arbitrariness
in the process. The chart in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2023/303) and the internal African Union
procedures that have to be followed before a mandate
can be triggered, including a layer of confirmation and
approval by the relevant organ of the African Union
prior to consideration by the Security Council, are
useful safeguards, which, we believe, facilitate the
Security Council’s reporting needs and oversight in
accordance with its responsibilities.
Lastly, on the issue of burden-sharing, we welcome
the clarification that the AU consensus paper has
provided in relation to the allocation of 25 per cent of
the Union’s budget towards broader peace and security
activities to come from the AU Peace Fund. We believe
that starting discussions on a common understanding
around this matter is crucial for coherent, constructive

23-146569/19

S/PV.9329

Peace and security in Africa

and fruitful deliberations. We also welcome the full
operationalization of the Peace Fund, which as of
February 2023, had a balance of $337 million. We
look forward to the implementation of the AU Peace
and Security Council’s recent decision to increase,
after due financial processes, the ceiling of the crisis
reserve facility from $5 million to $10 million for the
2023 and 2024 financial periods and the request for the
AU Commission to use the Peace Fund to contribute to
addressing the financial gaps in ongoing missions such
as the African Union Transition Mission in Somalia
(ATMIS).
We believe that within Africa’s ability to pay,
the ongoing financial decisions of the Union, as
well as the strong contribution of African troop- and
police-contributing countries that have on countless
occasions sacrificed their personnel’s lives for the cause
of peace, we would, during further consultations, seek
a convergence of views on a pragmatic and constructive
basis for reaching a common ground that would be
satisfactory to all.
While we have noted existing comments on the
issue of command and control, we remain mindful that
a more useful discussion on that matter would be most
appropriate after the Council has clarified its common
understanding on the choice of option proposed for
consideration by the Secretary-General. Nevertheless,
the existing command-and-control architecture,
through the presently deployed AU-led peace support
operations authorized by the Council, could serve as a
ground for further discussions.
As we all know, based on lessons learned, in his
report, the Secretary-General has put forward two
practical financing models: first, the United Nations
Support Office model for African peace support
operations such as we have with the African Union
Mission in Somalia and ATMIS, with some additions,
and, secondly, joint financing of a United NationsAfrican Union Hybrid mission like the UNAMID model
in Darfur. These models provide useful elements that
we can leverage to shape the best framework for United
Nations assessed contribution support for financing
Africa-led peace support operations.
Having received a mandate from the AU Peace and
Security Council to resume consultations towards the
adoption of a Security Council framework resolution on
financing AU-led peace support operations, as set forth
in the AU Peace and Security Council communiqué
issued at its Ministerial meeting held on 12 May 2023,
10/19

25/05/2023

the A3 intends to listen carefully to the views of all
Member States within and outside the Council, and
it would ensure that the views of all delegations are
taken on board as we advance the further processes
to give effect to the aspiration for a new and effective
engagement between the African Union and the United
Nations in our common objective for peace and security
on the African continent. Our engagements would seek
to bridge the gap in understanding that exists between
the African Union ambitions and the expectations of
the other members of the Security Council.
In conclusion, peace support operations have
become an essential mechanism for responding to the
crises affecting the continent, and they must also be
integrated into our discussions on the New Agenda for
Peace. The A3 reaffirms its support for the SecretaryGeneral’s call in his report for adequate, sustainable
and predictable funding from United Nations assessed
contributions for AU-led peace support operations. The
Security Council holds the key to making this a reality.
Together we can stem the scourge of the needless armed
conflicts on the African continent.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): Let me begin by thanking
our briefers for their insightful briefings.
My delegation is also grateful to the SecretaryGeneral for preparing his report on the financing of
African Union peace support operations (S/2023/303).
Today’s meeting is timely, as we celebrate Africa
Day. In this context, let me take the opportunity to
extend very warm wishes to our many, many friends
in Africa. It is a significant opportunity to engage in
discussions that acknowledge the indispensable role
played by the people of Africa, African countries and
the African Union (AU) in ensuring peace and security
on the continent.
In addition, our discussion today is timely in
relation to upholding the “African solutions for African
problems” approach. From a pragmatic point of view,
it recognizes the comparative advantages of the United
Nations and the AU in leading peace operations. Our
unwavering support for the endeavours undertaken by
African nations in addressing crises must be translated
into a more meaningful and consistent contribution
from the United Nations to the African Union.
As recognized in the report, this debate has evolved
significantly in the last few years. It takes stock of all
the lessons learned and all the progress made to date
in terms of legal, administrative and doctrinal matters.
23-14656

25/05/2023

Peace and security in Africa

Today we have greater clarity in many of the aspects
that prevented a decision from being taken in the
past. However, some issues still have to be addressed
and refined.
First, peace operations that make use of United
Nations assessed contributions should be subject to
appropriate oversight by the Security Council. The
decision as to whether and to what extent support will
be given to any particular operation ought to be taken
on a case-by-case basis, always in accordance with the
specific political, security and humanitarian features
pertaining to each situation.
Secondly, an adequate set of frameworks on
human rights, international humanitarian law, troop
conduct and discipline compliance is needed to guide
the relevant forces. These standards become even
more critical when the AU missions perform tasks
with higher risks, which can often be the case if the
operation in question goes beyond peacekeeping. In
this vein, we call for the completion of the work on
joint guidelines for operational planning, deployment,
review and transition of AU peace support operations.
Moreover, the application of the proper standards and
regulations should encompass other areas, such as
strategic communications, to name one example, in
order to equip a mission with the appropriate tools to
tackle challenges like hate speech and disinformation.
Another key step would be the conduct of a thorough
assessment of the operational support capabilities
available and of the need to adapt them.
Many administrative and budgetary questions
remain pending. We hope they will be addressed as
the discussion progresses. Nevertheless, the focus
on funding should not overshadow the need to have
comprehensive approaches to address Africa’s security
challenges. Those must include effective political
strategies aimed at conflict prevention and at addressing
their root causes.
As stressed by the Secretary-General in his report,
we must ensure that political solutions remain at the
centre of the missions’ mandates. We have a unique
opportunity of working towards the establishment of
an innovative solution that can contribute significantly
to improving the African security environment. Brazil
is ready to engage with other Council members for the
next steps in this discussion.
As this is the last Council meeting I will attend in
my capacity as Permanent Representative of Brazil to

S/PV.9329

the United Nations, I would like to extend to everyone
my deep appreciation for the close collaboration and
for the friendship throughout our current mandate as
an elected member of the Council. The support and
valuable lessons that my team and I, personally, take
from this period will remain with us. I sincerely hope
that our paths cross again in future.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I would like to express
my gratitude to Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo;
Mr. Adeoye, African Union (AU) Commissioner for
Political Affairs, Peace and Security; and Ms. Tadesse,
of Amani Africa, for their briefings.
Let me start by paying tribute to all the personnel
of peacekeeping operations and peace operations led by
the AU and subregional arrangements for their courage
in fighting for a stable and prosperous Africa. We
appreciate regional peace initiatives with a strong sense
of ownership to prevent, mediate and settle conflicts on
the African continent.
Sustainable peace requires context-specific
peacebuilding. Each conflict has its own distinguishing
features, and any successful operation must give
those features careful considerations, whether they
are geopolitical, economic or cultural. A strong
understanding of the unique circumstances of each
situation in Africa and an approach that is crafted
accordingly, should be a comparative advantage of
the AU and its peace support operations. To address
increasingly complicated challenges in Africa
effectively, the United Nations and the AU must
continue to strengthen their partnership in order to
maximize their combined capacities, bearing in mind
that the African Union mission will eventually support
its capacity on its own.
Back in 2016 and 2017, Japan, as member of the
Security Council, joined the consensus on resolutions
2320 (2016) and 2378 (2017). Since then, we have been
fully engaged in an extensive discussion on various
potential financing and assistance options for AU peace
support operations, aiming to enhance predictability,
sustainability and flexibility.
Sharing the strong concern about this perennial
challenge and the changing international context, Japan,
in principle, supports the establishment of a mechanism
through which AU peace support operations, authorized
by the Security Council under Chapter Ⅷ of the
Charter of the United Nations could be partly financed
through United Nations assessed contributions, on a

23-1465611/19

S/PV.9329

Peace and security in Africa

25/05/2023

case-by-case basis. Such a mechanism should also be
inclusive to reflect the voices of relevant stakeholders.

Rosemary DiCarlo, Commissioner Bankole Adeoye
and Ms. Bitania Tadesse for their briefings.

We remain committed to further consultations with
all stakeholders on possible assistance to those peace
support operations, and in that regard we believe the
following points should be highlighted.

On Africa Day, on the International Day of United
Nations Peacekeepers, I am delighted that we are
meeting again to discuss African peace operations
following the publication of the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2023/303). This is a key issue for the future
of the African continent. France is committed to
ensuring that the Council can guarantee sustainable
and predictable funding for African peace operations.

First, we must continue to prioritize conflict
prevention and the peaceful settlement of disputes
through peaceful means, while maintaining the
primacy of politics. That is primarily the responsibility
of States, and any peace support operation should help
and complement efforts by national Governments.
Good governance through institution and capacitybuilding must be promoted in parallel for sustaining and
consolidating peace. The Peacebuilding Commission,
with its unique role in the United Nations system, gives
a valuable platform for such national efforts.

These operations are a concrete response to
promoting peace and stability in Africa. They are
adapted to their environment and to the threats they face,
including terrorism. As such, they can achieve rapid
results at controlled costs. It is therefore essential that
the Council make concrete progress on the sustainable
and predictable funding that they have thus far lacked.

Secondly, a mutually leveraging and complementary
approach requires a close United Nations-AU
coordination, while the central role of the United
Nations should remain unchanged in the maintenance
of peace and security. Effective cooperation on joint
planning, mandating and mutual burden-sharing is the
key in the full spectrum of peace support activities
throughout their life cycles. Ensuring proper oversight
and accountability through appropriate processes
is a prerequisite for any support by United Nations
assessed contributions.

Let me remind the Council of France’s historic
position in favour of African peace operations and their
funding from United Nations assessed contributions.
In 2018, we support the initiative of the African Union
and the African members of the Security Council
(S/2018/1093) at the highest level and made every effort
to reconcile divergent points of view.

Finally, it is our shared goal that all operations,
whether led by the United Nations or the AU, ensure
strict observance of the principles of the United
Nations, including respect for human rights, as well as
the conduct and discipline compliance framework. In
that regard, we welcome that the AU made significant
progress, as articulated in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2023/303), issued 1 May. It is important
to build appropriate systems to review and track
their implementation during and after operations for
continuous improvement.

We must take a further step towards the principle of
financing African peace operations on a case-by-case
basis from United Nations assessed contributions in
order to complement the African Union’s commitment
to finance a part of its peace and security efforts. That
African commitment must also be put into practice so
that we can move forward.

Africa continues to suffer from human security
crises caused by multiple factors. It is essential to
further strengthen the close partnership between the
United Nations and regional entities. Japan remains
committed to playing its part to support international
and regional efforts for peace and security in Africa.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
12/19

France is ready to support Ghana, Gabon and
Mozambique in relaunching discussions in the Security
Council. We will be at their side to give this project
every chance to succeed.

A draft resolution should enable us to affirm the
added value of African peace operations, to move
towards a consultative planning and decision-making
mechanism and to take stock of the efforts still to
be made in terms of human rights, international
humanitarian law and conduct and discipline.
I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute
to the considerable work accomplished by the African
Union, with the support of the United Nations and
thanks to funding from the European Union. That
work has made it possible to adopt the human rights
compliance framework. We encourage the African
23-14656

25/05/2023

Peace and security in Africa

Union to continue its efforts towards the full operational
implementation of the framework.
France is convinced that it is the responsibility
of the Council to support the African Union and its
member States in meeting the security challenges on the
African continent. That is also the purpose of the work
on a New Agenda for Peace. I am delighted by the spirit
of the members of the Council and their commitment to
bolstering African peace operations.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank Vice
President Amherd for convening this important debate.
As we mark the International Day of United
Nations Peacekeepers, let me begin by paying tribute
to all those who have contributed to United Nations
peacekeeping over the past 75 years, in particular those
who have made the ultimate sacrifice in pursuit of
peace and stability. Let me also congratulate all of our
colleagues of African descent on this Africa Day.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s 1 May report
(S/2023/303). I would also like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo, African Union (AU) Commissioner
Adeoye and Ms. Tadesse for their statements.
The changing nature of conflict in Africa requires
the United Nations, the AU and other partners to adapt
our different capabilities to prevent, mitigate and
respond to evolving peace and security challenges. One
of those key challenges is how to address funding gaps
and capability shortfalls that have affected performance.
Security Council members have returned to the issue
of using United Nations-assessed contributions to fund
AU-led operations a number of times in recent years.
The United Kingdom supported the framework set out
in resolution 2320 (2016), but we recognize that that
has not translated into practical support. How can we
therefore make progress? I have three suggestions.
First, since financing for each operation will need to
be determined on a case-by-case basis, we must ensure
that the Secretariat supports work to determine options
for future operations and that the Security Council has
an early role in determining the scope of joint United
Nations-AU assessment and planning.
Secondly, the AU has made significant progress to
determine its compliance framework for international
humanitarian law, human rights, conduct and discipline.
It must now be applied to new operations effectively.
We encourage the continued development of those
essential compliance frameworks.

S/PV.9329

Thirdly, we should establish openly and clearly
how we intend to share the financial burden between
the United Nations and the African Union. Any scope
for misinterpretation will cause new initiatives to stall.
While the international community has relied
predominantly on United Nations peacekeeping to
date, we acknowledge the comparative advantage that
AU and other Africa-led peace support operations
can offer, with an ability to deploy more rapidly and
respond more robustly to certain threats for which
United Nations peacekeeping operations are not always
the appropriate response.
In conclusion, the United Kingdom is committed
to working with all countries, particularly our African
partners, to develop a working financial mechanism
that enables predictable and sustainable support.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I would like to thank Switzerland for hosting
this critical debate, and we welcome your participation
with us here today, Ms. Amherd. I also thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, Commissioner
Adeoye and Programme Director Tadesse for their
insightful perspectives.
During the annual protection of civilians open
debate earlier this week (see S/PV.9327), we heard about
the threats far too many people in Africa face: food
insecurity, forced displacement, conflict and violence,
persecution and human rights violations and abuses. This
year’s report of the Secretary-General on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict (S/2023/345) is chilling,
and it demands a response. As the African Union (AU)
Commission Chairperson rightly noted at the February
AU summit, Africa’s evolving security challenges call
for new and innovative tools. And AU peace support
operations are one of those important tools.
We know that the lack of predictable, sustainable
and flexible funding has been an impediment to AU
peace support operations. The United States supports,
in principle, the use of United Nations-assessed
contributions for AU peace support operations. We
believe that such contributions must be subject to
Security Council authorization and the important
conditions set forth in resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2378
(2017) and must be consistent with the standards we
apply to all United Nations peacekeeping missions.
The AU’s past track record of peace support
operations shows that it often has the political will,
regional expertise, language skills and ability to quickly

23-1465613/19

S/PV.9329

Peace and security in Africa

deploy to address African conflicts. The bottom line is
this: the AU is sometimes best positioned to respond to
the continent’s security challenges. At the same time,
we recognize the potential oversight and accountability
requirements associated with using United Nationsassessed funds for AU peace support operations.
We will all need to work together to ensure there are
mechanisms in place to mitigate challenges and risks,
including by ensuring the appropriate authorization
standards and mechanisms I just outlined. We welcome
the progress the AU has already made in that regard,
including through its compliance framework. As we
move forward in these discussions, there are four areas,
as outlined in previous Council resolutions, in which
we look forward to working with Security Council
members and the AU to achieve progress.
First, we hope to reaffirm the importance we
attach to Security Council authorization, primacy and
oversight. As outlined in previous Council resolutions,
it is key that we ensure the Security Council authorizes
AU peace support operations on a case-by-case basis,
while retaining oversight, just as it does for United
Nations peace operations elsewhere.
Secondly, regarding financial oversight, as it does
for all United Nations peacekeeping missions, the
General Assembly should have budgetary oversight and
approval consistent with United Nations regulations,
rules, policies and procedures.
Thirdly, we are glad to see that the AU has made
progress in developing frameworks on human rights,
conduct and discipline and performance over the past
several years. We expect to see the full implementation
of those frameworks, as the United States is eager to
support those efforts. In that vein, we want to ensure
that AU peace support operations, if authorized under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, would
use force under the framework of a protection of civilians
Security Council mandate. And any operation must
work towards a political solution, as already outlined in
the AU Doctrine on Peace Support Operations.
Finally, we remain committed to meaningful
burden-sharing of the AU peace support operations
costs, as outlined in resolution 2320 (2016). We are
aware of the challenges in that regard, but we look
forward to working with our fellow Council members
and the AU to explore creative paths forward — just
as we look forward to working with the full range of
partners, including all Council members, the AU and
14/19

25/05/2023

its member States, the United Nations and civil society
groups, as well as the United States Congress, to move
this issue forward.
By working in those four areas, we believe that we
can — and that we will — advance our shared goals of
an integrated, prosperous and peaceful Africa, in line
with the AU’s Agenda 2063. Happy Africa Day.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes you, Ms. Amherd, as you preside over today’s
meeting. I also thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
and Commissioner Adeoye for their briefings. I also
listened attentively to the statement of the other briefer.
Today is Africa Day. I would like to begin by
extending my warm congratulations to all our African
colleagues and brothers and sisters in Africa.
On this day of celebration of African independence
and unity, it is of special significance for the Security
Council to discuss the topic of African Union (AU)-led
peace support operations. For many years, the AU and
subregional organizations in Africa have organized and
carried out peace support operations. They have made
enormous efforts to maintain stability and silence the
guns in Africa, and they have made huge sacrifices.
On the occasion of the seventy-fifth anniversary
of United Nations peacekeeping operations, I pay the
highest tribute to those peacekeepers who have made
the ultimate sacrifice for the cause of peace. At the
same time, we must recognize that some parts of Africa
are still witnessing conflict and turmoil. Terrorism and
transnational crime are still rampant, and they have
caused deep suffering to the African people.
AU peace support operations are now more urgent,
with more daunting tasks, more pronounced funding
problems and other challenges. In February this year,
the AU summit adopted a consensus paper stressing
the need to provide AU peace support operations with
adequate, predictable and sustainable funding and
calling for support from the United Nations. African
countries’ aspirations in this regard are legitimate and
reasonable and merit the great attention and active
support of the international community.
Since 2007, the Security Council has deliberated on
the funding of AU peace support operations on multiple
occasions. While some initial consensus has been
reached, numerous differences still exist. Last August,
during its presidency of the Security Council, China
facilitated the adoption of a presidential statement
23-14656

25/05/2023

Peace and security in Africa

(S/PRST/2022/6) on capacity-building for Africa,
requesting the Secretary-General to submit a report for
all parties to refocus on this key issue. In this context, I
wish to stress the following points.
First, when addressing the funding of AU peace
support operations, the fundamental principle of
“African solutions for African problems” should be
applied. Since they are AU-led, AU peace support
operations should be fully African-led and Africanowned throughout the whole process of planning,
mandating, deployment and management. After taking
United Nations funding support, AU peace support
operations will remain operations of the AU. It is a
question of resolving funding issues, not turning AU
forces into United Nations peacekeeping forces.
Secondly, the protection of human rights is part
of the mandates of AU peace support operations, but
it should be put in the right place. African countries
have already made considerable efforts to strengthen
capacity-building of their forces and raise awareness
of human rights protection. These efforts cannot be
denied. Meanwhile, nobody has a perfect human rights
record. Some countries’ forces stationed overseas and
some United Nations peacekeeping forces have had
problems in conduct and discipline. It is not acceptable to
presume the existence of human rights protection issues
at the mere mention of AU peace support operations.
This is a form of bias. We cannot dismiss the whole
of AU peace support operations and their important
contributions simply because of previous isolated cases
of human rights violations or out of worries with regard
to possible future isolated cases. Most importantly,
human rights accountability provisions must not be
used as a pretext to indefinitely delay the discussion of
funding options and defer decisions thereon.
Thirdly, support from United Nations assessed
contributions should be a complement to the existing
funding modes of the AU. Developed countries, which
are the traditional financial contributors, must not
reduce their funding support for Africa as a result of this
and must refrain from simply submitting contributions
already intended for Africa to the United Nations with a
changed name so as to shirk their historic responsibility
towards Africa. If the total external funding ultimately
available to AU peace support operations does not
increase but only declines, such an outcome, I am
afraid, will be completely contrary to the intended
purpose of the reform.

S/PV.9329

Fourthly, Africa faces a wide variety of security
challenges, and the future AU-led peace support
operations are not all identical in their modes. There
should therefore not be a one-size-fits-all funding
solution. The latest report by the Secretary-General
(S/2023/303) put forward four options. Any of the
four should not be too readily discarded. The key is,
which one can enjoy an early consensus and maximize
benefits for Africa? Once political decisions are
made, procedural formalities should be minimized
so that the AU — and not the United Nations — will
be responsible for managing the details of budgeting
and implementation.
Fifthly, at present, multiple United Nations
peacekeeping operations in Africa are faced with
complex challenges, making it important to make
timely strategic assessments and mandate adjustments,
including the formulation of exit strategies. The funding
of AU peace support operations should be considered
in conjunction with the reform of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and in a holistic manner.
We support decisive and necessary streamlining and
optimization of some United Nations peacekeeping
operations. The resources saved could be used to better
support AU peace support operations.
China firmly supports Africa in improving its own
peace-support capacity and favours the provision of
adequate, predictable and sustainable funding support
to AU peace support operations. We expect the Security
Council to take this meeting as an opportunity to stay
pragmatic and results-oriented and work for early and
substantive progress on the relevant issues.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
and African Union Commissioner for Political Affairs,
Peace and Security Bankole Adeoye for their briefings
this morning. I also thank you, Madam President, for
your presence and for the timely convening of today’s
meeting. Naturally, our thanks also go to Ms. Bitania
Tadesse, representative of Amani Africa, whose
briefing we have listened to with attention.
During the process leading to its election as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council,
Ecuador had the privilege of taking in different
African perspectives and visions on the continent’s
current challenges and found a common factor: the
will for ownership of the solutions, that is, “African
solutions for African problems”. Of course, this does
not mean that peace and security in Africa is isolated

23-1465615/19

S/PV.9329

Peace and security in Africa

from the rest of the world, or that it excludes or limits
the participation of countries from other regions in
supporting the search for those solutions. The situation
on the African continent is and will continue to be a
priority for the United Nations, and the international
community has an important role to play, including in
areas related to cooperation, assistance and funding for
development and peacebuilding. We hope that all these
aspects will be considered in crafting the New Agenda
for Peace.
A few months ago, the Security Council welcomed
the important efforts of the African Union, subregional
organizations and regional mechanisms in peace
operations and the growing role they play in them, in
accordance with its resolutions and decisions. It further
recognized that one of the major constraints faced
by the African Union in effectively carrying out the
operations it conducts, with the authorization of the
Council and in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter, is the need for predictable, sustainable and
flexible resources.
In his report on the subject (S/2023/303), the
Secretary-General noted that the African Union,
working closely with the United Nations and other
partners, had made significant progress in the key
areas of human rights and compliance frameworks
on conduct and discipline, the operationalization of
the Peace Fund and agreements on accountability
for financial activities. Ecuador welcomes these
advances and expresses its support for any initiative
to make peace operations more efficient and effective,
while unconditionally respecting human rights and
international humanitarian law at all times. We believe
it is necessary for the United Nations to work with the
African Union to strengthen monitoring and reporting
policies so that the General Assembly may be provided
with the budgetary, financial and performance reports
it needs. Resources are always scarce, and decisions
on their use must be analysed in depth, taking into
account the specific circumstances of each case and
the existence of an adequate level of co-responsibility,
always prioritizing political solutions and maximizing
the impact of capacities and operations.
Finally, we wish to stress the importance of
the United Nations continuing to respect the basic
principles of peacekeeping, such as the consent of the
parties, impartiality and the non-use of force except in
self-defence and in defence of a mandate authorized by
the Council, as that is essential for the success of such
16/19

25/05/2023

operations. We also recall that peacekeeping operations
do not eliminate the need to address the root causes of
conflict. It is therefore crucially important to also ensure
adequate financing for the Peacebuilding Fund and, in
general, to invest in sustainable development — the
only path to lasting peace.
I conclude, on this symbolic Africa Day, by echoing
the words of the Secretary-General from this morning:
let us work together towards the Africa we want; the
Africa the world needs; and the Africa that the African
people deserve.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, I would like to wish all of
our African colleagues a happy Africa Day. On this
day, exactly 60 years ago in Addis Ababa, the first
conference of independent African States was held and
laid the foundations for the creation of the Organization
of African Unity, the work of which the African Union
is now successfully continuing. That also constituted
the culmination of the first phase of decolonizing the
African continent. Today, thanks to the joint efforts of
African countries, it has become possible to establish
mechanisms for collective responses to local crisis
situations and to launch regional integration processes
in various formats, undoubtedly contributing to Africa’s
socioeconomic development and enhancing its role in
international affairs.
I would also like to highlight the contribution of
African countries to United Nations peacekeeping, both
on their own continent and beyond. Let us pay tribute to
all those who have sacrificed their lives for that noble
cause. It is also most symbolic that we are discussing
the topic of African peacekeeping today,
We thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo, African Union Commissioner for Political
Affairs, Peace and Security Bankole Adeoye and
Ms. Bitania Tadesse for their briefings.
We carefully studied the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of resolutions 2320
(2016) and 2378 (2017), which contains specific
considerations on addressing the issue of financing
of African Union peace support operations on the
continent under the auspices of the Security Council
(S/2023/303). Russia supports the position of African
countries on the need to adopt effective measures to
enhance predictability, reliability and flexibility on
that issue. We consider it abnormal that peace and
23-14656

25/05/2023

Peace and security in Africa

security in Africa depend on the irregular assistance of
individual States and organizations.
We are convinced that Africans themselves know
better than anyone the nature and root causes of
instability in their region. They have come a long way
in shaping the regional peace and security architecture
and today have the necessary mechanisms in place that
take into account local specificities and harmoniously
complement the efforts of the United Nations within its
area of responsibility and mandate. The African Union
Peace and Security Council is functioning effectively
and is supported by the African Commission, the Panel
of the Wise, the Continental Early-Warning System and
the African Standby Force. The Peace Fund is also being
replenished, and the African Union’s flagship initiative
to end armed conflict which has been extended until
2030 is being implemented. Significant progress has
been made on ensuring human rights, transparency and
accountability in African military contingents.
The United Nations, on numerous occasions, has
extended material and financial assistance to African
efforts in the field of international peace and security,
including through assessed contributions from United
Nations Member States. Recent examples include the
logistical support provided by the United Nations
Support Office in Somalia to African peacekeepers
in the country; the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur; and the assistance of Blue
Helmets in Mali to the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel.
The advantages of African peacekeeping as
compared to United Nations peacekeeping operations
include the ability to respond quickly to emerging
challenges and threats, as well as a willingness to use
force in order to restore peace. That is particularly
relevant in the context of the growing terrorist threat
on the continent and the unsustainability — or indeed,
absence — of peace agreements.
The need for an in-depth discussion on predictable
and sustainable financing is objectively dictated by the
ever-increasing number of crises and armed conflicts in
Africa, which organizations and States in the region are
quick to engage in resolving. The lack of access to the
resources necessary to resolve those crises inevitably
results in the ineffectiveness of such efforts and the
further spread of instability.
Our African colleagues are capable of taking
responsible decisions to ensure peace and security

S/PV.9329

in their region. That was demonstrated at the recent
African Union summit, at which it was agreed to use the
Peace Fund and its crisis reserve facility to support the
East African Community’s operation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and to address the financing
issues faced by the African Union Transition Mission
in Somalia. We appreciate the willingness of regional
players, as reaffirmed at the summit, to self-finance
25 per cent of the continent’s total expenditure on
peace and security activities, including peacekeeping
operations. This step affirms — not in words, but in
deed — the principle of African solutions to African
problems.
We are studying the lessons learned in the report of
the Secretary-General from United Nations and African
Union interactions and possible future planning and
joint decision-making on peacekeeping missions on
the continent, including the most viable financing
modalities, while maintaining rigorous transparency
and accountability measures on the use of funds. We
stand ready to engage in substantive discussions as part
of the forthcoming negotiations process on a future
Security Council draft resolution on the matter.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): I thank Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo, African Union (AU) Commissioner Adeoye
and Ms. Tadesse for their insightful briefings.
As the International Day of United Nations
Peacekeepers approaches, we pay tribute to all those who
have served and continue to serve, working resolutely
towards the maintenance of peace and security and
the protection of civilians. We also congratulate our
African colleagues on Africa Day.
The latest report of the Secretary-General on the
financing of African Union peace support operations
(S/2023/303) and the recent adoption of an African
position on the matter, as well as our experience as a
member of the European Union (EU) in partnering with
the African continent on its path towards peace and
security, represent key reference points towards our
constructive engagement on that important topic. Malta
is committed to ensuring adequate, predictable and
sustainable funding for AU peace support operations.
We firmly believe in the value and feasibility of that
long-standing request from our African partners
from both a political and an operational perspective.
It is crucial that responsibility and ownership for the
African Union to lead on its peace operations be met
by equal commitment from within this Chamber in
adequately supporting those calls.

23-1465617/19

S/PV.9329

Peace and security in Africa

We should use the enhanced relationship between
the Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council to build on and improve concrete cooperation on
addressing crises on the African continent. We view that
exercise as a complementary one, jointly strengthening
our approaches to common challenges and interests. AU
peace support operations offer us a critical opportunity
to implement such joint approaches. Properly financed
AU peace support operations would allow us to perform
in a broad peacekeeping space, possibly with more
than one operational model. We look forward to better
defining the operationalization of AU peace support
operations through the upcoming discussions.
With that in mind, we commend the AU for the
progress achieved in the critical areas of human rights,
conduct and discipline compliance frameworks, the
operationalization of the Peace Fund and financial
accountability arrangements. We also acknowledge that
genuine engagement in solving pending matters, such
as burden-sharing for those operations, is still required.
The EU is committed to continue to cooperate with
the AU, including through its ongoing engagement
in the tripartite United Nations-AU-EU project for
enhancing and operationalizing the AU human rights
compliance framework to put into practice AU policies
in human rights and due diligence. As the EU has
provided €600 million for the period from 2022 to 2024
to support the military aspects of the African-led peace
support operations, we further encourage additional
funding from a diversified donor base to truly ensure
the sustainability of the peace operations.
In conclusion, Malta stands ready to engage on the
road ahead and during the upcoming negotiations on this
important topic. We firmly believe that cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations in maintaining
peace and security, consistent with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, can improve collective
security. Now is the time to translate those principles
into reality.
Mr. Spasse (Albania): Let me begin by
congratulating our African colleagues on Africa Day.
On this day, we also pay tribute to all those who have
contributed, and are contributing, to peacekeeping
operations. I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo,
His Excellency Mr. Adeoye and Director Tadesse for
their valuable insights.
I join others in commending the African Union
(AU) on the significant progress made towards the
18/19

25/05/2023

implementation of resolution 2320 (2016), which calls
for closer AU-United Nations partnership based on
clear parameters and requirements. We are particularly
encouraged by the progress made towards meeting
United Nations standards in peacekeeping, especially
with regard to the selection of personnel, the protection
of civilians and the prevention and tackling of genderbased violence and exploitation. Peacekeeping missions,
whatever their mandate, can succeed only if they put
human rights at the heart of their activities and comply
fully with human rights standards and due diligence.
We welcome the determination of the African
Union to assume a greater role in maintaining peace
and security in Africa in partnership with the United
Nations. We see a clear demand for a stronger AUUnited Nations partnership to confront the immense
challenges that the continent faces, including rampant
violence, armed groups, terrorist activities and the
failure of State institutions to provide basic goods.
However, that will work only if we ensure steady and
predicable financial support for peacekeeping and
peace support missions in Africa in order to counter
the daunting challenges that violate the vital interests
of people across the continent. The security threats
that Africa faces require a long-term and sustainable
strategy that allows for the mobilization of financial and
political support to eradicate violence and restore peace
and security. The strategy needs to be human centred,
gender sensitive and advance the realization of equal
rights for everyone, whereby no one is be excluded or
discriminated against. All violations of human rights
must be swiftly and effectively investigated, and their
perpetrators must be held to account. We welcome the
tripartite cooperation among the African Union, the
United Nations and the European Union in that regard.
Peacekeeping missions face a treacherous
environment, with manifold lethal threats to civilians
and peacekeepers themselves. Those threats are posed
by armed extremists and transnational organized
crime, as well as the growing role of private military
companies, which undermine the rule of law and
human rights. Those threats must be taken extremely
seriously in efforts to strengthen the AU-United
Nations partnership.
In conclusion, Albania will actively support
discussions on the revitalization of this important
partnership. We need to do more, always putting human
rights first, to ensure long-lasting peace in Africa.
23-14656

25/05/2023

Peace and security in Africa

Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I want to begin by thanking Your Excellency
Ms. Amherd for presiding over this important meeting.
I also thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, African
Union Commissioner Adeoye and Ms. Tadesse for their
comprehensive briefings.
As this meeting coincides with Africa Day and
the commemoration of the sixtieth anniversary of
the African Union (AU), we take this opportunity to
express our appreciation for the efforts of African
States in supporting regional and international peace
and security.
The United Arab Emirates welcomes the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2023/303) on this important
issue, as it provides the Security Council with a
vision for a new generation of peace operations and
counter-terrorist operations led by regional forces,
with guaranteed, predictable funding. The report also
reflects on the steps required to guarantee predictable
funding needed for AU peace support operations.
Over the past two decades, the international peace and
security architecture has demonstrated its reliance on
the African Union’s leadership to respond to emerging
conflicts wherever they have taken place on the
continent, whether in Burundi, Mali or Somalia. We
see that developing the African Peace and Security
Architecture, has enhanced the AU’s capacity to
deploy peace operations, in line with Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations. The framework fits
within the broader AU mandate for conflict resolution
on the continent. The AU’s knowledge of the local
environment and dynamics are unmatched. Because
of such expertise and experience, the international
community’s reliance on the AU’s toolkit is justified.
Joint assessment and planning exercises are therefore
critical to responding effectively and immediately
to emerging crises. Peace is a shared endeavour,
and the responsibility should be supported by the
necessary resources.
Calls for ensuring that those operations are
provided with the resources necessary for their success
have long and repeatedly been made, including in the
Council. Since 2008, the Security Council has adopted

S/PV.9329

resolutions and presidential statements acknowledging
the need for adequate, sustainable and predictable
funding. The Council has placed great emphasis on
effective accountability and compliance frameworks.
And we welcome the fact that the AU continues to
develop and implement its framework for compliance
with international humanitarian law, human rights
law and conduct and discipline standards, which was
clearly demonstrated at the most recent meeting of
the AU Specialized Technical Committee on Defence,
Safety and Security. We welcome the decision by
the AU Peace and Security Council to significantly
increase the ceiling of the crisis reserve facility. That
decision and additional contributions to the AU Peace
Fund illustrate Africa’s commitment to financial
burden-sharing and ownership of conflict resolution
throughout the continent. We believe that support for
AU peace support operations should be tailored to
every situation. There is no one-size-fits-all solution to
responding to conflict, and the same logic should apply
to the funding that supports those operations.
It is imperative to ensure that peace operations
are capable of achieving their intended objectives
through both relevant partnerships and adequate and
sustainable resources. Therefore, in the context of the
Secretary-General’s call, we believe that it is important
for the Council to explore supporting the financing of
African Union peace support operations authorized by
the Security Council through United Nations-assessed
contributions on a case-by-case basis. The different
models presented by the Secretary-General, including a
hybrid mission and a support office, have the potential
to make a meaningful difference on the ground. They
must be given serious consideration by the Council and
discussed with the AU. Agreement on the issue would
serve as a tangible and practical sign of the deepening
partnership between the two organizations.
In conclusion, we look forward to the upcoming
discussions to be led by the three African members of
the Council on this important subject and to engaging
constructively in them.
The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.

23-1465619/19
