S/2018/244

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 March 2018
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force for the period from
25 November 2017 to 23 February 2018
I. Introduction
1.
The present report gives an account of the activities of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) during the period from 25 November 2017
to 23 February 2018, pursuant to the mandate contained in Security Council resolution
350 (1974) and extended in subsequent resolutions, most recently resolution 2394
(2017).

II. Situation in the area of operation and activities of the Force
2.
During the reporting period, the ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab
Republic was maintained, albeit in a volatile environment attributable to the ongoing
conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic and notwithstanding a number of violations of
the Agreement on Disengagement between Israeli and Syrian Forces (Disengagement
of Forces Agreement) of 1974, which are described below. The Syrian armed forces
and non-State armed opposition groups engaged in exchanges of heavy weapons fire
in the areas of separation and limitation on the Bravo side. Different arm ed groups,
including the listed terrorist groups Jabhat Fath al-Sham (formerly the Nusrah Front) 1
and Khalid ibn al-Walid Army, 2 which pledged allegiance to Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL), continued to exchange fire in the UNDOF area of operat ion. As
underscored again by the Security Council in its resolution 2394 (2017), there should
be no military activity of any kind in the area of separation.
3.
In employing its best efforts to maintain t he ceasefire and see that it is
scrupulously observed, as prescribed in the Disengagement of Forces Agreement,
UNDOF reports all breaches of the ceasefire line that it observes. All incidents of
firing into the area of separation and across the ceasefire line, as well as the crossing
by individuals of the ceasefire line are violations of the Disengagement of Forces
__________________

In July 2016, the Nusrah Front announced that it had changed its name to Jabhat Fath al Sham
and declared that it had cut ties with Al-Qaida.
2
The merger between Yarmouk Martyrs Brigade and Harakat al Muthana was initially announced
on 12 April 2016. On 24 May 2016, open sources reported that both groups were operating under
the umbrella name of “Khalid ibn al-Walid Army”. On 20 July 2017, the group was listed by the
Security Council, pursuant to annex III of resolution 2368 (2017), as being associated with ISIL
or Al-Qaida.
1

18-03793 (E)

220318

*1803793*

S/2018/244

Agreement. In its regular interaction with both sides, the leadership of UNDOF
continued to call upon both parties to exercise restraint and pre vent any
miscalculations that might lead to an escalation of the situation. That was particularly
the case when it responded to incidents of spillover and retaliatory fire.
4.
An incident of particular concern occurred on 10 February involving an
escalation of tension between the parties to the Disengagement of Forces Agreement.
On that day, the Israel Defense Forces informed UNDOF that it had “intercepted an
Iranian unmanned aerial vehicle launched from Syria” and that it had taken defensive
action against the unmanned aerial vehicle and Syrian targets. The Israel Defense
Forces also reported that one of its F-16 fighter jets had been shot down, crash-landing
on Israeli territory, injuring two Israeli pilots. The senior Syrian Arab delegate
informed UNDOF on 10 February of air strikes by Israeli aircraft in Homs and east
of Damascus. On the same day, UNDOF observed that three rockets had been
launched from the vicinity of Harrah on the Bravo side, about 10 km from United
Nations observation post 54, had flown over observation posts 53 and 54 and had
subsequently crossed the ceasefire line. UNDOF was not in a position to determine
the exact point of impact.
5.
There were several other incidents in violation of the Disengagement of Forces
Agreement. On 2 December 2017, United Nations personnel at observation post 51
saw four missiles from the Alpha side (Israeli-occupied Golan) flying over the area
of separation into the area of limitation on the Bravo side. Shortly thereafter, two
heavy explosion impacts were observed on the ridgeline between Tall al Sha ' r and
Tall al-Bazzaq, in the area of limitation on the Bravo side. The Israel Defense Forces
stated to UNDOF that it had no knowledge of the incident. On 1 February, United
Nations personnel observed two fighter jets from the Alpha side flying over the
ceasefire line and observation post 54, and across the area of separation into the area
of limitation. A short time later, heavy explosions were heard approximately 14 km
south-east of observation post 54, in the general vicinity of Tasil and Tall al-Jamusin
the area of limitation on the Bravo side. Later the same day, United Nations personnel
at observation post 54 observed two rockets fired from the Alpha side over the
observation post and across the area of separation. UNDOF did not see the exact point
of impact of the rocket rounds.
6.
On 4 January 2018, United Nations personnel at observation post 51 observed
three Israel Defense Forces soldiers, who were patrolling the ceasefire line, disembark
from their vehicle and fire two flares into the area of separation. On 6 January 2018,
United Nations personnel at observation post 53 saw an Israel Defense Forces soldier
fire three single shots from his personal weapon into the area of separation.
7.
UNDOF continued to observe, on a daily basis, the crossing of the ceasefire line
by unidentified persons from the Bravo side to the Alpha side. In the vicinity of
observation post 54, individuals from the Bravo side were observed regularly entering
an Israel Defense Forces position on foot on the Alpha side and subsequently leaving,
crossing the ceasefire line and moving towards Al Mullaqah on the Bravo side. The
Israel Defense Forces had previously informed UNDOF that a hospital located
adjacent to its position was providing humanitarian assistance to local civilians.
8.
On Mount Hermon, instances of interaction between Israel Defense Forces
personnel and individuals from the Bravo side were observed by UNDOF during the
first half of the reporting period. UNDOF cannot confirm or verify the nature of the
interactions, which typically involved unidentified individuals from the Bravo side,
with unloaded mules, approaching the Israeli technical fence as well as Israel Defense
Forces positions and subsequently returning to the Br avo side with loaded mules
carrying unidentified supplies. On 30 November 2017, UNDOF observed persons on
stretchers being handed over to Israel Defense Forces personnel.
2/9

18-03793

S/2018/244

9.
The level of transborder movements through Mount Hermon of unidentified
individuals crossing between Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic decreased during
the reporting period.
10. In the context of the ongoing Syrian conflict, the northern part of the areas of
separation and limitation saw fighting of medium- to high-level intensity, in particular
during November and December 2017, between the Syrian armed forces supported
by pro-Government forces and armed groups in the Bayt Jinn pocket area, which
consists of the towns of Bayt Jinn, Mazra’at Bayt Jinn and Mughur al-Mir, following
an attack by the former in September 2017. A high level of military activity was
observed and heard by UNDOF in the general vicinity of Bayt Jinn. On 29 November
2017, UNDOF personnel heard high explosives in the area. On 1 December 2017,
UNDOF personnel observed an Mi-24 helicopter with its engines on fire, flying at a
high altitude, approximately 10 km south-east of their position. Subsequently, the
helicopter lost altitude and exploded in mid-air. During December, UNDOF observed
high explosives emanating from Bayt Jinn and the surrounding area, with
approximately 1,377 heavy explosions heard on 25 December. in Camp Faouar, which
is within 8 km of Bayt Jinn.
11. Throughout the reporting period, UNDOF also observed heavy and small arms
fire around Hadar and the surrounding hilltops. On 26 December 2017, Syrian armed
forces took control of the village of Mughur al-Mir, with open sources reporting that
the end of hostilities was negotiated between the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic and the armed groups in the remaining villages surrounding Bayt Jinn. The
military activity subsided considerably following the regaining of the area by
pro-Government forces. The fighting has since remained at a low level.
12. Fighting between armed groups and Syrian armed forces in the central parts of
the areas of separation and limitation continued at medium- to low-level intensity.
Throughout the reporting period, an M-46 artillery gun was observed at a firing
position in the vicinity of Qunaytirah, occasionally firing nor th and east. On
11 December 2017, United Nations personnel at observation post 51 observed the
M-46 artillery gun firing eight rounds. The precise point of impact of the artillery
rounds could not be determined. Later, incoming fire was observed, presumabl y in
response to the firing of the M-46 artillery gun. Two heavy explosions were heard
impacting within 1 km north of Camp Ziouani. UNDOF was not in a position to
determine the origin of the retaliatory fire. On 31 December 2017, two heavy
explosions were observed in the vicinity of Qunaytirah. On 30 January 2018, UNDOF
heard rounds being fired from the M-46 artillery gun in the vicinity of Qunaytirah and
observed explosions occurring in the vicinity of Hamidiyah al-Jadidah. On 22 January
2018, United Nations personnel at observation post 51 observed three individuals
inspecting what appeared to be a towed self -propelled artillery gun near the vacated
United Nations outpost 60A, located near the southern access to the berm constructed
by armed groups in 2016 inside the area of separation. The berm facilitates movement
of armed groups between Hamidiyah al-Jadidah and Jubbata al-Khashab in the area
of separation.
13. In the southern part of the areas of separation and limitation on the Bravo side,
which remain for the most part under the control of non-State armed groups, including
those listed by the Security Council as terrorist groups, fighting continued between
armed groups, especially the Khalid ibn al-Walid Army, on one side, and the Free
Syrian Army and Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham, on the other. According to open sources,
intermittent fighting continued around the area of Tasil in the area of limitation.
United Nations personnel at position 80 and observation post 54 occasionally heard
heavy explosions and bursts of heavy machine gun fire from the general direction of
Tasil.

18-03793

3/9

S/2018/244

14. During the reporting period, UNDOF observed the continuous presence of
unidentified individuals at United Nations observation post 71, ranging from two to
six individuals at the post. At times, UNDOF observed construction work taking place
in the vicinity of post 71 and a number of other nearby locations on what appeared to
be defensive positions. On 8 December 2018, at least 10 unidentified persons were
observed carrying out construction work5 km north-east of observation post 73. On
12 December 2017, 15 individuals, equipped with a bulldozer, were carrying out
construction work in the vicinity of observation post 71. On 15 December 2017,
UNDOF observed two bulldozers being utilized to fo rtify protective locations east of
temporarily vacated UNDOF position 10.
15. Throughout the reporting period, the Syrian armed forces maintained positions
in the area of separation, in particular in the vicinity of Ba ’th and Khan Arnabah, as
well as along the main road connecting Qunaytirah to Damascus.
16. The military violations on the Alpha side included approximately 90 reports of
the presence of 155-mm artillery, as well as Iron Dome systems and missile carriers
within the 25 km zone of the area of limitation, which are considered unauthorized
military equipment in the area of limitation pursuant to the terms of the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement.
17. UNDOF protested all violations of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement that
it observed to both parties, including the crossing of the ceasefire line by civilians
from the Bravo side, the presence of unauthorized equipment and armed individuals
in the area of separation, as well as firing into the area of separation and across the
ceasefire line.
18. During the reporting period, UNDOF observed several locations where
approximately 550 tents and other structures appeared to have been set up for
internally displaced persons in the area of separation and in its vicinity. The number
of people in the camps could not be ascertained and appeared to fluctuate. Owing to
the closure of the established crossing point at Qunaytirah between the Alpha and
Bravo sides since late August 2014, UNDOF remains unable to facilitate, in
cooperation with the International Committee of the Red Cross, humanitarian
crossings, including for students, between the two sides.
19. Since its temporary relocation from a number of positions in September 2014,
and pending its full return to the area of separation, UNDOF has continued to maintain
visibility, albeit limited, of the area of separation and the ceasefire line from its
positions on Mount Hermon, Camp Faouar, position 80, in the southern part of the
area of separation, and position 22 on the Alpha side. UNDOF operations continue d
to be supported by United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) military
observers in Observer Group Golan, who are under the operational control of UNDOF
and have maintained five fixed and four temporary observation posts along the
ceasefire line, as well as four temporary observation posts on Mount Hermon. The
focus of the activities of Observer Group Golan is on continuous static observation
and situational awareness. The occupation by Observer Group Golan of observation
posts on Mount Hermon was suspended on 3 December 2017 with the onset of winter
and will resume in the spring.
20. Through Observer Group Golan, UNDOF continued to carry out fortnightly
inspections of equipment and force levels in the area of limitation on the Alpha side.
Liaison officers from the Alpha side accompanied the inspection teams. Inspections
in the area of limitation on the Bravo side remained suspended because of the security
situation.
21. Engagement between UNDOF and the Israel Defense Forces continued to
endeavour to address restrictions of movement and access to United Nations positions
4/9

18-03793

S/2018/244

in the area of separation and to reduce delays and challenges experienced by United
Nations personnel in crossing through the technical fence to observation posts and
positions. The Head of Mission and Force Commander of UNDOF continued to
remind the parties of their obligation to scrupulously abide by the terms of the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement, to ensure the safety and security of United
Nations personnel on the ground and to extend all cooperation to UNDOF in the
fulfilment of the tasks under its mandate.
22. UNDOF, in consultation with both parties, continued to review the situation in
the area of separation in order to assess whether the conditions on the ground
permitted the return to vacated positions in the area of separation. In that regard,
UNDOF conducted assessment visits and continuously monitored the prevailing
security situation in the area of separation, mainly in the vicinity of United Nations
observation posts 52, 56, 71 and 72, and positions 10, 16 and 32.
23. During the reporting period, UNDOF made progress towards the limited return
to Bravo side operations, in line with the phased UNDOF plan. Following the
completion of phase 1 of the plan re-establishing on 14 November 2016 the presence
of UNDOF at Camp Faouar, UNDOF continued to develop the infrastructure and
steadily improve the living conditions at the camp. The security and defence of the
Camp have been continuously practised, and all deployed elements have been
integrated into a cohesive and effective component, with clear command and control
mechanisms.
24. Following the deployment of the UNDOF mechanized infantry company from
Nepal to Camp Faouar at the end of September 2017, UNDOF activated phase 2 of
the plan to return to vacated positions in the area of separation. Phase 2 involves, over
a period of six to eight months, a resumption of limited patrolling in the northern part
of the areas of separation and limitation. In line with the plan, the mec hanized infantry
company commenced, on 8 February 2018, limited protected patrolling from Camp
Faouar to Jaba, Khan Arnabah, Mount Hermon and Ya’fur. The limited patrolling was
suspended on 10 February owing to the security situation and resumed on
14 February. A comprehensive, considered and cautious approach to UNDOF limited
patrolling has been adopted. UNDOF implemented a range of force protection
measures to mitigate risks to personnel conducting the limited patrolling.
25. Phase 2 of the UNDOF plan also includes the refurbishment of facilities and
security infrastructure of select observation posts in the area of separation, with a
view to reoccupying observation posts 56, 71 and 72 in phase 3 of the incremental
return to the Bravo side operations, conditions permitting. The UNDOF Joint
Operations Centre will also commence its relocation to Camp Faouar during phase 2.
The return of the UNDOF temporary headquarters from Ya’fur, Damascus, and of the
Force Reserve Company from Camp Ziouani to Camp Faouar is also planned to take
place during phase 3. Observer Group Golan will not be deployed at observation posts
on a permanent basis until such time as the security conditions permit and adequate
accommodation and appropriate force protection measures are in p lace.
26. In accordance with the provisions of resolution 2394 (2017), and the UNDOF
operational concept, UNDOF continued its efforts to deploy appropriate technology
to ensure the safety and security of UNDOF personnel and equipment. A surveillance
trailer was deployed on the Alpha side to Camp Ziouani and position 22, while another
was deployed to Camp Faouar. Additional surveillance trailers are expected to be
deployed in other United Nations posts. In addition, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations continued to engage with the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
and the Government of Israel regarding “the sense and warn” system, the technical
specifications of which were shared with the parties in July 2017. The responses of

18-03793

5/9

S/2018/244

the parties remain pending. The Security Council will continue to be updated as
necessary on progress made and challenges encountered in this respect.
27. UNDOF continued to resupply its positions on Mount Hermon and Camp Faouar
from Damascus. UNDOF convoys between Damascus and the United Nations
positions were conducted almost daily, using main supply route 7 and the Salam
highway, with a UNDOF security escort, accompanied by a liaison officer from the
office of the senior Syrian Arab delegate. UNDOF continuously monitors the situation
and takes the necessary precautionary measures in planning and conducting its
convoys along main supply route 7 and the Salam highway. UNDOF continued to
conduct and update its contingency planning for the reinforcement and evacuation of
United Nations positions and observation posts on both the Alpha and Bravo sides, as
well as in Damascus. UNDOF, through its Force Reserve Company, conducted regular
rehearsals, exercises and training for identified contingencies. The implementation of
risk mitigation measures, including force protection measures recommended in the
military capability study of UNDOF, continued to be developed at the observation
posts, positions and operational bases at Camp Ziouani and Camp Faouar.
28. UNDOF continued to follow closely the developments related to the
de-escalation zone in the south-west part of the Syrian Arab Republic, which was
established in accordance with an agreement reached on 9 July 2017 between Jordan,
the Russian Federation and the United States of America. Given the partial overlap
between the de-escalation zone and the UNDOF area of operation. UNDOF
maintained contact with relevant interlocutors to seek clarity with regard to
arrangements envisaged under the agreement and their potential implications for
UNDOF. The continuation of these contacts is particularly important in facilitating
the implementation of the UNDOF mandate and in ensuring the freedom of movement
of the Force, as well as the safety and security of United Nations personnel.
29. As at 26 February 2018, UNDOF comprised 982 troops, including 42 women.
Troops are currently deployed from Bhutan (3), Czechia (3), Ghana (2), Fiji (299),
Finland (2), India 199), Ireland (135), Nepal (337) and the Netherlands (2). In
addition, 70 military observers from UNTSO/ Observer Group Golan, including 8
women, assisted UNDOF in carrying out its tasks.

III. Implementation of Security Council resolution 338 (1973)
30. In its resolution 2394 (2017), the Security Council called upon the parties
concerned to immediately implement its resolution 338 (1973), decided to renew the
mandate of UNDOF for a further period of six months until 30 June 2018 and
requested the Secretary-General to report every 90 days on developments in the
situation and the measures taken to implement resolution 338 (1973). The search for
a peaceful settlement in the Middle East, in particular the efforts made at various
levels to implement resolution 338 (1973), is addressed in my report on the situation
in the Middle East (A/72/333), submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolutions
71/24 on the Syrian Golan and 71/25 on Jerusalem.
31. Since the discontinuation of indirect peace talks in December 2008, there have
been no negotiations between the parties. The Syrian conflict is further reducing the
prospects for their resumption and for progress towards peace between Israel and the
Syrian Arab Republic. I look forward to a peaceful resolution of the conflict in the
Syrian Arab Republic and the resumption of efforts towards a comprehens ive, just
and durable peace settlement, as called for by the Security Council in its resolution
338 (1973) and other relevant resolutions.

6/9

18-03793

S/2018/244

IV. Observations
32. I am gravely concerned about the escalation of tension between the parties to
the Disengagement of Forces Agreement, as shown by the events of 10 February. I
also note with concern the continued military activities in the areas of separation and
limitation on the Bravo side and incidents involving the firing of rockets and missiles
from the Alpha side and rockets from the Bravo side across the ceasefire line. These
developments jeopardize the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. I urge the parties
to exercise maximum restraint. I encourage members of the Security Council to
support efforts to sensitize both parties and regional stakeholders to the risks of
escalation and the need to preserve the long-standing ceasefire between Israel and the
Syrian Arab Republic.
33. It remains critical that the parties maintain their liaison with UNDOF, in the f irst
instance, to prevent any escalation of the situation across the ceasefire line. The
United Nations will maintain its efforts to ensure that the long-standing ceasefire
between Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic continues to hold.
34. I remain gravely concerned about the prevailing security situation in the Syrian
Arab Republic, its impact on the Syrian population and its implications for the
stability of the region. On the Bravo side, the continued presence of and fighting
between the Syrian armed forces and armed groups, including listed terrorist groups,
such as Jabhat Fath al-Sham, and ISIL affiliates, such as Khalid ibn al-Walid Army,
in the UNDOF area of operation jeopardize the long-term ceasefire between Israel
and the Syrian Arab Republic and continue to significantly affect UNDOF mandate
implementation and the UNDOF area of operation.
35. There should be no military forces in the area of separation other than those of
UNDOF. I urge all parties to the Syrian conflict to cease military actions t hroughout
the country, including in the UNDOF area of operation, and to remove all military
equipment and armed personnel from the area of separation.
36. Interaction and perceived interaction between the Israel Defense Forces and
unidentified individuals from the Bravo side have the potential to lead to clashes
between armed elements and the Syrian armed forces. I reiterate my call to both
parties to the Disengagement of Forces Agreement regarding the requirement to
maintain stability in the area. All military activities in the area of separation
conducted by any actor pose a risk to the ceasefire and to the local civilian population,
in addition to United Nations personnel on the ground. I call upon all parties to take
all measures necessary to protect civilians.
37. The Israel Defense Forces should refrain from firing across the ceasefire line.
The firing by the Israel Defense Forces across the ceasefire line has the potential to
escalate tensions between the two sides. The continued presence of unauthori zed
weapons and equipment in the area of limitation on the Alpha side is also of concern.
38. As UNDOF continues to consolidate its presence at Camp Faouar and maintain
its efforts to intensify its operations in the area of separation, it remains critical that
the safety and security of United Nations personnel be assured. The circumstances
under which the troops and military observers are operating remain complex and
challenging, and require continued vigilance and risk mitigation measures. I renew
my call on the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to fulfil its primary
responsibility for the safety and security of United Nations personnel on the Bravo
side. I also renew my call upon countries with influence to strongly and urgently
convey to the armed groups in the UNDOF area of operation the imperative to cease
any action in violation of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement, including actions

18-03793

7/9

S/2018/244

that jeopardize the safety and security of United Nations personnel, and to enable
UNDOF to carry out its mandate safely and securely.
39. Both Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic have stated their continued
commitment to the Disengagement of Forces Agreement and support for the presence
of UNDOF in calling for a return to vacated positions in the area of separati on. The
full return of UNDOF to the area of separation remains a priority for the mission,
conditions permitting. The Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Jean-Pierre Lacroix, visited UNDOF, and also met with Israeli and Syrian officials at
the end of February 2018, including on mandate implementation and the ongoing
gradual return of the mission to the Bravo side.
40. I count on the continued cooperation of both parties to assist the mission in
advancing its plans for the incremental return to operations and positions in the area
of separation and to ensure that it can implement its mandate. As a matter of priority,
the deployment of technology and equipment necessary to enhance UNDOF
observation of the area of separation and the ceasefire line, while also augmenting
UNDOF force protection, remains critical. In this regard, the support and cooperation
of both Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic is essential.
41. It is equally important that the Security Council continue to bring to bear its
influence on the parties concerned to ensure that UNDOF is accorded the ability to
operate in a safe and secure manner and is allowed to operate freely in accordance
with the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. As long as the area of separation
remains militarized and the presence of armed groups and/or Syrian armed forces
continues, UNDOF will only fulfil its mandate in a limited manner. It is essential that
this issue be addressed by the parties to the Disengagement of Forces Agreement and
in the wider framework of the Syrian political process. Furthermore, the reopening of
the regular Qunaytirah crossing point would benefit the ability of UNDOF to
implement its mandate. It is also necessary for UNDOF to continue to have at its
disposal all means and resources necessary for it to return fully to the area of
separation, conditions permitting.
42. The confidence and commitment of troop-contributing-countries with respect to
UNDOF remains a key factor in the mission’s ability to carry out its mandate. I
continue to count on the support of troop-contributing-countries as UNDOF proceeds
with its agreed plan for increased operations in the area of separation. I am grateful
to the Governments of Bhutan, Czechia, Fiji, Finland, India, Ireland, Ghana, Nepal
and the Netherlands for their contributions, their commitment, their resolve and their
consummate professionalism. I am also thankful to the Member States contributing
military observers to UNTSO.
43. In conclusion, I wish to express my appreciation to the Head of Mission and
Force Commander, Major General Francis Vib-Sanziri, and to the military and
civilian personnel serving under his leadership in UNDOF and the military observers
in Observer Group Golan, who continue to perform the important tasks assigned to
them by the Security Council with efficiency and commitment, under extremely
challenging circumstances.

8/9

18-03793

S/2018/244

18-03793

9/9
