A /74/PV.28

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fourth session

28th plenary meeting

Thursday, 7 November 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Muhammad-Bande  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nigeria)

In the absence of the President, Mr. García Moritán
(Argentina), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 39 (continued)
Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba
Report of the Secretary-General (A/74/91/Rev.1)
Draft resolution (A/74/L.6)
Mr. Gertze (Namibia): The Namibian delegation
welcomes the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Cuba at the General
Assembly, and we thank everyone for being in this Hall
this morning.
More than 70 years ago, out of the ashes of the
Second World War and having seen the devastation
and misery caused by the cruel pursuit of power
and domination, world leaders came together to
found this international community of nations. They
committed to doing everything in their power to do
good for humankind. They had the shared objective
of establishing a forum that would be at the forefront
of efforts aimed at achieving peace and security in
the world. It was United States President Franklin
Delano Roosevelt who, I would like to believe, might
have drawn inspiration from the age-old wisdom that
in unity lies strength when he coined the name for the
Organization now known as the United Nations.

We should never lose sight of the fact that the
Organization was never envisaged to cause harm to the
world’s citizens; rather, it was established to seek the
peaceful resolution of conflicts. Therefore, as we come
together yet again to join our voices on the necessity
of environment nding the economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by the United States
of America against Cuba, let us send a strong and
unequivocal message to the people of the Republic of
Cuba that the United Nations remains steadfast in its
resolve to do good for humankind and bring peaceful
resolution to conflicts.
As my delegation has done for decades, we continue
to stand with and reiterate our firm and unwavering
support for the people and the Government of Cuba.
My delegation joins the many speakers before me
in reminding us all that the United States blockade
contravenes international law and the Charter of the
United Nations and that it represents an impediment
to the implementation of Cuba’s national economic
and social development plan, which was put in place to
accelerate its implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
In 2016, we assembled in this Hall to welcome
the change in United States policy towards Cuba. We
expressed hopes that the blockade would finally come
to an end. Three years later, we reassemble in this same
Hall frustrated by United States actions that have only
become more aggressive and are being imposed on a
larger scale. Sadly, rather than moving forward to bring
an end to the suffering and exclusion of the Cuban

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-35659 (E)

*1935659*

A/74/PV.28

people, we have seen many steps taken backwards
in 2019.
We note with great concern the new measures
announced in April against Cuban enterprises,
companies and individuals or third countries that do
business in Cuba. No citizen or sector of the economy
has escaped the negative effects of this unilateral policy,
which hinders Cuba’s development. We are disappointed
at these new and tightened measures, and we urge the
United States to reconsider them. We remain hopeful
that the economic, commercial and financial blockade
imposed by the United States against Cuba will be fully
lifted, relations will improve and the two countries will
restore full economic activities to their mutual benefit.
As we work to consolidate multilateralism, I
would like to remind everyone of the President’s call
to galvanize our efforts for the inclusion of all. Rather
than working in isolation, let us therefore stand together
to promote a stronger culture of cooperation for the
advancement of the well-being of all citizens of the
world and bring an end to the Cuban people’s suffering.
In conclusion, for Namibia, the Cuban people are
family. Notwithstanding all the challenges the Cuban
people have had to face and endure over all these years,
they are a resilient people. Like many of the nations
in this Hall, Cuba was at the forefront of contributing
to the freedom and independence of my own country.
More importantly — and again like many of the
Member States here — Cuba has spared no effort in
contributing to the welfare of millions of people around
the world through its selfless contributions in so many
cases where natural disasters or adversity had struck or
through science, technological advancements, training
and capacity-building support to the international
community and medical professionals in much of the
developing world.
Imagine how much more the people of the United
States and Cuba, and indeed the rest of the world,
could benefit if we could concentrate our energies on
constructive engagement and interaction. This can
happen only when this unjust blockade is lifted. It is
against this background, and in standing up in defence
of international law and United Nations resolutions,
that my delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution. We urge all Member States to stand by the
Cuban people.
Mr. Ahmed (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
aligns itself with the statements made by the observer of
2/20

07/11/2019

Palestine and the representatives of Tunisia, Azerbaijan
and Uganda on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, the
Group of African States, the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countires and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
respectively (see A/74/PV.27).
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report on the necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba (A/74/91/Rev.1).
I reiterate Egypt’s firm position in support of the
people and Government of Cuba, as the unilateral
measures imposed in the form of the embargo
on the country directly and adversely affect vital
economic sectors and have grave repercussions for
the socioeconomic welfare of the Cuban people. The
embargo obstructs access to food, medicine, education
and state-of-the-art technology.
Egypt also stresses the importance of upholding
the principles of multilateralism, the Charter of the
United Nations and international law, and the need to
respect the numerous relevant Assembly resolutions
that have been adopted by overwhelming majorities.
We also reiterate that the continuation of the embargo,
which has lasted for more than five decades, will never
deter the international community from repeatedly
calling for the lifting of measures that run counter to
international law.
In conclusion, Egypt calls for the full and
immediate lifting of the embargo against Cuba and for
enabling the Cuban people to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals.
Mr. Arreaza (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela welcomes the convening of this plenary
meeting to address an issue to which our delegation
attaches particular importance, the necessity of ending
the economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed by the United States of America on Cuba.
The fact that we sent a special delegation at the
highest level, headed by our Minister for Foreign
Affairs, reflects the importance that the President of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Mr. Nicolás Maduro
Moros, attaches to the debate and vote on the just and
legitimate draft resolution before us (A/74/L.6). We are
in this Hall to support Cuba at a time when the United
States Government has tightened the criminal embargo
that has been imposed on its noble people for almost 60
19-35659

07/11/2019

years. But we are also in this Hall at a time of global
turbulence in order to highlight how urgent it is for
all Member States to strengthen multilateralism and
respect for the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations by demanding an end to all forms
of unilateral coercive measures imposed in violation of
international law.
In that regard, we thank Secretary-General
António Guterres for submitting his report (A/74/91/
Rev.1) and extend our warmest greetings and respect
to His Excellency Mr. Bruno Eduardo Rodríguez
Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Cuba, and his entire delegation, who are with us at this
meeting. I assure the Foreign Minister that no matter
how many obstacles we face, no action by the United
States bureaucracy will be able to prevent Cuba and
Venezuela from continuing to fight and win together.
We are succeeding. We are in this Hall now and we will
always stand with Cuba.
Our delegation also associates itself with the
statements made by the observer of the Observer State
of Palestine and the representative of the Republic of
Azerbaijan on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, respectively
(see A/74/PV.27).
For 28 years in a row, the General Assembly — the
most democratic organ of our Organization — has
called for the repeal of the economic, commercial and
financial embargo that seeks not only to restrict the right
to development of the heroic Cuban people, but also to
promote an unconstitutional change of Government in
our sister socialist and revolutionary Republic of Cuba,
the country of Martí and Fidel. They have not achieved
that political objective, nor will they ever. The Cuban
people are determined to exercise their inalienable right
to self-determination and thereby freely define their
political, economic, social and cultural system, as laid
out by Commander Hugo Chávez in a letter sent to the
General Assembly in September 2011, when referring
to the embargo against Cuba:
“Since all arguments of international good
sense have been exhausted, we have no choice but
to believe that such aggravated cruelty against the
Cuban Revolution is the result of imperial arrogance
in the face of the dignity and courage shown by the
defiant Cuban people in their sovereign decision
to determine their own fate and fight for their
happiness.” (A/66/PV.29, p.4)

A/74/PV.28

This nearly universal appeal is simply a sign of the
firm commitment of the States Members of the United
Nations to the principles enshrined in its founding
Charter, which include the principles of sovereign
equality and political independence of States, as well
as non-intervention in internal affairs. However, the
repeated appeal has been disregarded with the full
contempt of those whose actions systematically violate
international law with total impunity.
Venezuela demands an end to economic and
financial terrorism and to the non-conventional war
with lethal consequences waged against the people of
the Republic of Cuba and now also against the people
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. International
relations should not be managed by political intolerance.
Only uncivilized, virtually primitive governing
elites can use economic asphyxiation as a weapon of
mass destruction in order to impose their political
preferences on sovereign countries by inflicting
widespread suffering on their peoples. It is a criminal
practice no matter how one looks at it. In fact, it fits
without a moment’s hesitation into the category of
crimes against humanity. It is a collective punishment
that derives from the whims and arrogance of those who
believe themselves to be superior and masters of the
world. Incidentally, through its admirable resistance,
Cuba has shown that those people are neither superior
nor masters of the world. And sooner or later, they
will have to compensate the Cuban people for the
pain and unquantifiable impact of their brutal and
arbitrary policies.
The siege policy imposed on Cuba is the most
unjust, severe and prolonged system of unilateral
coercive measures implemented against any people
in modern history, with immeasurable human cost.
The embargo on Cuba is the most emblematic
example of the perversity of unilateral actions with
forced extraterritorial impact, not for its duration and
intensity, but because of the heroism and creativity that
the Cuban people and their revolution have shown in
confronting it with unparalleled dignity and courage.
And we must also say that it is further emblematic
because after almost 60 years of brutal application,
the most powerful country on the planet has not only
not achieved any of the political objectives it laid out
59 years ago but on the contrary has strengthened the
national unity and shared roots of the Cuban people
and bolstered popular support for its leadership and its
historic revolution among the new generations.

19-356593/20

A/74/PV.28

The human consequences of the attempt to prevent
the Cuban people from having access to health,
education, housing, and food, and to deny them their
basic social rights, have been direct and cruel. The
embargo, tightened under the current United States
Administration, leads to millions of dollars in losses,
particularly in tourism, banking sectors, trade and
foreign investment. It also affects the financial sector
by harassing and threatening financial institutions and
banks for carrying out perfectly legal transactions with
the Government of Cuba, and leads to a phenomenon
known as overcompliance, owing to its intimidating
effect on the international business community.
The extraterritorial impact of these arbitrary
policies also affects any country or entity that seeks to
maintain economic, commercial or financial relations
with Cuba in a legal and sovereign manner. It is not, as
the United States Government asserts, a bilateral issue
or an embargo against Cuba alone. It is a comprehensive
policy that affects the entire international community,
violating every rule of international law and even the
multilateral trade system itself and the very nature of
the World Trade Organization. The Government of the
United States of America has no authority over the
sovereignty of States, and its attempt to turn national
laws into universal ones is spurious.
Despite the embargo, throughout its revolutionary
history Cuba has not only developed a robust
system of social protection and human development
guarantees within its borders, it has even showed its
spirit of solidarity by offering — despite its economic
difficulties, and within the framework of SouthSouth cooperation — disinterested aid and technical
assistance to brotherly peoples of the developing world,
particularly in the areas of health, education and sport.
We commemorated the nineteenth anniversary of the
signing of the Cuba-Venezuela cooperation agreement
only a week ago. Thanks to the international solidarity,
talent, training and integrity of individual Cubans,
millions of lives have been saved and millions of
Venezuelan families now have happier and fuller
lives, with better education, culture and values. We
remember the words of Commander Fidel Castro when
he affirmed that solidarity is not sharing what we have
left over but sharing what little we have.
We affirm that the blockade is an obsolete policy,
with no ethical or legal basis in the twenty-first century,
used in an attempt to isolate Cuba. By every measure
that policy has failed, just as the coup d’état against
4/20

07/11/2019

President Maduro in Venezuela failed. Meanwhile,
thanks to its contempt for world opinion and failure to
comply with the resolutions adopted year after year in the
General Assembly, in addition to many other unilateral
actions, it is the very Government of the United States
that has isolated itself from the global community. This
can be seen in many areas of international coexistence.
Today, for example, Washington seeks to revive
the ancient and infamous Monroe Doctrine of
1823 — America for Americans, or rather for North
Americans — according to which it considers our region,
Latin America and the Caribbean, as its backyard and
according to which our peoples must renounce their
independence and their right to self-determination.
Latin America and the Caribbean are not and never will
be the backyard of any empire. We are free peoples,
still resisting. With Cuba at the forefront, we are a zone
of peace demonstrating the irrevocable character of our
freedom and independence. Our destiny is Bolivarian
unity, not Monroeist annexation.
Multilateralism is more than joint action. It is the
most powerful and legitimate instrument we have, not
only for the peaceful resolution of conflicts but also
for the promotion of international cooperation and
understanding among peoples based on mutual respect
and a core value of international relations, tolerance.
Today, in the face of growing tendencies towards
unilateralism, Venezuela reiterates its firm commitment
to an inclusive and democratic multilateralism that will
enable full and effective progress towards a world of
peace and prosperity.
We hope that one day the corporate elite that
governs Washington will make amends and give a clear
demonstration of the commitment of the United States
to multilateralism and international legality through the
elimination and lifting of the Cuban embargo and its
series of coercive measures, which, incidentally, affect
one third of the international community — one third of
humankind. Until that happens, and we hope it does, it
is incumbent on the United Nations to stop the attempts
of the United States to impose its desire to dominate
others by enforcing compliance with the Charter and its
purposes and principles, and by safeguarding the very
existence of the Organization.
The draft resolution that gathers us here today,
which enjoys nearly universal consensus and which
we will vote on for the twenty-eighth consecutive year,
is critical. But Venezuela demands that all United
19-35659

07/11/2019

Nations entities, including its Secretariat, the Security
Council and its human rights system, bring greater
determination, courage and strength to bear, not only in
denouncing any form of unilateral arbitrary measures or
those disguised as false collective unilateralism, but in
proposing and taking concrete actions and decisions to
stop those inhuman policies, which defile the body and
spirit of the Charter and therefore represent an affront
to the United Nations, hampering its performance
and its achievement of its noble objectives. As Cuba’s
apostle José Martí often said, “Action is the best way of
speaking”. We must bravely take action.
As a responsible member of the international
community, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
concludes its statement by announcing that it will
once again vote in favour of draft resolution A/74/L.6,
which establishes the need to end the embargo imposed
against Cuba, while demanding that the United States
of America comply with the provisions of the resolution
once it is adopted, and submit to the undeniable will
of this General Assembly, in line with the Declaration
on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, adopted on
24 October 1970.
It is time to hear and obey the clamour of the vast
majority, not just of Member States but of the peoples of
the world, who are united in demanding an immediate
and definitive end to the anachronistic and inhumane
blockade of Cuba. It is time to put an end to double
standards in international relations. Almost 200 years
ago, the liberator Simón Bolívar prophesied that the
United States seemed destined by providence to plague
America with miseries in the name of freedom. It is
therefore time to stop the imperialist madness and
prevent it from plaguing humankind with miseries
based on intolerance and in the name of a twisted and
false notion of freedom.
Together the States and peoples of the world
must unite in defence of peace and the Charter of the
United Nations. Only when united and together can we
be victorious.
Ms. Williams (Saint Kitts and Nevis): Saint Kitts
and Nevis would like to add its voice to this extremely
important debate on agenda item 39, on the necessity
of ending the economic, commercial and financial
embargo against Cuba, which addresses the very core
of international law, sovereignty, non-intervention

A/74/PV.28

and the strengthened role of the United Nations in
international affairs.
Saint Kitts and Nevis has very good relations with
the United States of America. However, we are in
this Hall today to lend our support to draft resolution
A/74/L.6. My delegation therefore associates itself with
the statements made yesterday by the observer of the
State of Palestine and the representatives of Azerbaijan
and Grenada on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the Caribbean
Community (see A/74/PV.27).
In its contribution to the Secretary-General’s
report on this matter (A/74/91/Rev.1), Saint Kitts and
Nevis expressed its disappointment at measures being
sought to intensify the economic aggression against
Cuba and reiterates its unequivocal opposition to the
maintenance of this unjust embargo, which continues
to create widespread economic hardship for the people
of Cuba. Cuba is a close ally of Saint Kitts and Nevis
and has aided in my country’s economic and social
development, especially in the areas of agriculture,
education and health. This is a testament to the fact
that Cuba could do more internationally if the embargo
were lifted, since it constitutes a key obstacle to Cuba’s
efforts to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals.
We consider the financial and economic embargo
to be a burden on our brothers and sisters in Cuba. The
negative impact on the economy of that small island
developing State is quite profound and unfair to its
people. Now is a critical time for trying to achieve
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and
no country should be left behind. It is a time for
international cooperation and for pooling resources so
as to assist each other in this great challenge. That is
why Saint Kitts and Nevis once again calls on the United
States of America to remove the embargo on Cuba.
The fact that the majority of the membership
traditionally votes in favour of the draft resolution
signifies the overriding sentiment that the embargo is
wrong on all levels. We implore all States Members to
respect the sanctity of the General Assembly and the
decisions it makes. Failure to do so undermines the
functioning of the United Nations system.
While Saint Kitts and Nevis continues to enjoy
friendly relations with the United States of America
and Cuba, it is my delegation’s hope that both countries
can improve their relationship and embark on a process
of cooperation. There is much that we can learn from

19-356595/20

A/74/PV.28

each other, but the embargo remains an impediment
to that. That is why Saint Kitts and Nevis supports
draft resolution A/74/L.6 and will vote in favour of it.
Every year we reiterate our call to both countries to
find common ground so that the entire international
community can move beyond the current impasse, yet
every year little is done. There has to be recognizable
change. We call on the United States to put an end once
and for all to the unjust blockade against Cuba.
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): Every
year for 28 years, the General Assembly has voted
on a draft resolution calling for the United States to
end its economic embargo on Cuba. For the twentyeighth time, the draft resolution will likely be almost
unanimously adopted. My Government, and perhaps a
few others, will oppose it.
Like all nations, we get to choose the countries
with which we trade. That is our sovereign right. So it is
worrying that the international community, in the name
of protecting sovereignty, continues to challenge that
right. But what is even more concerning is that every
year, this body entertains the claim that the Cuban
regime has no choice in response to the embargo other
than to abuse its own people. This claim has been made
both explicitly and implicitly in the past 24 hours.
So today I want to pose a simple question. Does the
United States policy force the Cuban regime to violate
the human rights of its own people? Exploring this
question does not require long-winded speeches — and
I promise that this statement will not be long — because
our aim is to reveal the truth, not confuse it.
Still, we must name the abuses endured by the
Cuban people, abuses that are antithetical to the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, a document
signed by Cuba, and ask whether the Cuban regime was
forced to commit them. Article 9 of the Declaration
states that “[n]o one shall be subjected to arbitrary
arrest, detention or exile”. In Cuba, reports estimate
that 50,000 journalists, activists and others have been
arbitrarily arrested since 2010. Just this past October,
human rights defender José Daniel Ferrer García and
other advocates were arrested on fabricated charges.
Mr. Ferrer has not been seen since. Our embargo does
not force the Cuban regime to arrest independent
journalists and human rights defenders without cause.
That is a choice, freely made.
Article 4 declares that “[n]o one shall be held in ...
servitude”. In Cuba, doctors are sent to work abroad,
6/20

07/11/2019

where they are stripped of their passports, kept under
watch by members of Cuba’s security forces, required
to work without rest and forced to turn over all but a few
dollars of their income to the Communist Party. Our
embargo does not force the Cuban regime to impose
those conditions on women and men who have pledged
to heal the sick. That is a choice, freely made.
Article 23 grants each person the right to free
choice of employment. In Cuba, private industry is
frequently subjected to arbitrary property seizures,
business-licence suspension and demands for bribes.
Our embargo does not force the Cuban regime to
strangle the efforts of entrepreneurs or push women
and men out of their preferred fields of work. That is a
choice, freely made.
Article 19 guarantees the right to freedoms of
opinion and expression, including the right to hold
opinions without interference and to seek, receive and
impart information through any media. But in Cuba,
all political parties besides the Communist Party
are outlawed, political activists are silenced, and the
country’s media is entirely controlled by the State. Our
embargo does not force the Cuban regime to monitor
or muzzle the voices of those demanding a better life
for themselves and their families. That is a choice,
freely made.
As with all choices, there comes a time for
responsibility. But to date, responsibility is what the
Cuban regime has tried to avoid — responsibility for its
destructive economic decisions, repression of political
diversity and denial of civil and political rights. That
is not the kind of regime we should ever even expect
to take responsibility. At home, it refuses to lessen
the misery of its own people, unwilling to import the
hundreds of millions of dollars in agricultural and
medical goods authorized by the United States each
year. Abroad, it collaborates with the former Maduro
regime, creating an economic and humanitarian crisis
that is spreading beyond Venezuela’s borders. Cuba is
an active contributor to regional instability. Its leaders
will not hold themselves to account.
But while the regime will not act responsibly,
the General Assembly can. We can speak truthfully
about what the Cuban regime is doing, and what it is
responsible for, because a commitment to speaking
the truth is ultimately what is at stake in this context
today. If we fail to act, knowing the truth, there would
be a good reason for anger. But frankly, a failure to
19-35659

07/11/2019

A/74/PV.28

act would provoke even more sorrow than anger. For
it is sorrowful indeed to see the futures of 11 million
Cubans dimmed by the specific and informed choices
of their leaders.

our greetings to His Excellency Mr. Bruno Eduardo
Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Cuba. We also welcome the report of the
Secretary-General (A/74/91/Rev.1).

And so I now return to my question. I now answer
that the United States is not responsible for the Cuban
regime’s endless abuses of its people. We do not accept
responsibility for these abuses and we never will. We
will vote against draft resolution A/74/L.6.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea fully aligns itself
with the statements delivered by the representatives of
Tunisia and Azerbaijan and by the observer of the State
of Palestine on behalf of the Group of African States,
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the Group
of 77 and China, respectively (see A/74/PV.27), and we
would like to add the following observations in our
national capacity.

As members of the Assembly, it is our first
responsibility as leaders to defend those without a
voice, today most especially the people of Cuba. We
should be ashamed of ourselves if we refuse to raise our
voices in defence of theirs.
Ms. Mose (Solomon Islands): My delegation aligns
itself with the statement delivered by the observer of
the Observer State of Palestine on behalf of the Group
of 77 and China (see A/74/PV.27).
We would like to add the following remarks in
our national capacity and in solidarity with Cuba on
the discussions on draft resolution A/74/L.6, entitled
“Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba”.
At the outset, I would like to express our thanks to
the Secretary-General for his report on this particular
matter (A/74/91/Rev.1). Solomon Islands would also
like to thank Cuba for the strong bilateral relations that
our two countries enjoy and in particular for Cuba’s
assistance to our people through its training of Solomon
Islands students in the medical field.
However, we note with regret that the embargo
imposed on Cuba for almost six decades remains in
place. In the past year, the tightening of measures under
the embargo has done Cuba severe economic damage,
depriving Cubans of financial resources. They are even
being denied the fuel supply they need not only for
development but for their daily livelihoods.
Solomon Islands reiterates its position and calls
for lifting the embargo placed on Cuba. We encourage
the restoration of good relations between Cuba and the
United States in the name of peace and in furtherance
of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): Allow me to extend a warm welcome and

In accordance with the provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations and the norms of international
law, with which our own foreign policy is aligned,
the Government of Equatorial Guinea continues and
will continue to advocate the principles of sovereign
equality and non-interference in the internal affairs of
States. In line with those principles and international
law, as well as with the excellent bilateral relations
we maintain with Cuba, Equatorial Guinea has not
enacted any laws or measures aimed at imposing any
unilateral economic, commercial or financial embargo
against Cuba.
Furthermore, in our belief in the right of sovereign
States to elect their own political, economic, cultural
and social systems in order to meet the collective
aspirations of their peoples, we have reiterated through
our statements and our vote in favour of resolution 73/8
and its precedents how urgent it is to immediately and
unconditionally lift the unilateral measures imposed
on Cuba, a friendly country that has been deeply
affected and punished by the economic, commercial
and financial sanctions imposed by the United States,
another country with which we maintain good relations.
We therefore want to take advantage of this opportunity
to urge both States to take the necessary measures to
end the blockade and the economic isolation that Cuba
has been subjected to for many years and that continue
to impede its development today, causing the Cuban
people suffering. We hope to see the two countries
normalize their relations in all fields for the benefit of
the peoples of both countries.
In conclusion, we want to express our deep concern
and firm condemnation of the fact that such unilateral
measures are hampering the economic development of
a developing country. The Cuban delegation has also
condemned this and demonstrated that the embargo

19-356597/20

A/74/PV.28

on their country has slowed its implementation of its
national economic and social development plan, as well
as its achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the Sustainable Development Goals.
The virtually unanimous support for resolution 73/8
showed that the blockade is universally considered to
be unfair and contrary to the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations.
At the national level, our position remains clear
on this issue. We will continue our support for the
sister Republic of Cuba by voting in favour of the draft
resolution (A/74/L.6) once again.
Mr. Mero (United Republic of Tanzania): Tanzania
associates itself with the statements made by the
observer of the State of Palestine and the representatives
of Tunisia and Azerbaijan on behalf of the Group of
77 and China, the Group of African States and the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, respectively (see
A/74/PV.27).
In 2015, the world welcomed a historic and
momentous decision taken by the United States of
America and the Republic of Cuba to restore diplomatic
relations. To most of us, it was the beginning of high
hopes and expectations for a harmonious coexistence.
However, we have since begun to feel that those hopes
are fading, because the efforts to lift the embargo,
which has condemned the people of Cuba to many
years of suffering, are flagging. It is important now for
all of us to note that the sanctions under the embargo
are unjust and that they have subjected the economy
of Cuba to an unacceptable blockade that makes most
policy interventions virtually ineffective.
My delegation would like to urge the international
community to call for lifting the unilateral sanctions
imposed on Cuba. Cuba has borne sanctions that have
negatively affected its people, especially the most
vulnerable — women, children and the elderly — for
far too long.
Before the embargo, the United States and Cuba were
natural trading partners. There is no reason to believe
that if the embargo were lifted, the trading partnership
between the two nations would not immediately
flourish again. My delegation believes that lifting the
sanctions and strengthening the bond between the two
countries through trade and commerce will improve the
quality of life of both Cubans and Americans. Ending
the embargo is an investment in economic progress and
8/20

07/11/2019

in a better future for both countries. They therefore
have a moral obligation to try to make it happen.
In conclusion, we hope that, through the power
of reason and diplomatic means, there will be a total
removal of the embargo against Cuba, leading to a new
dawn of cooperation.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation welcomes
the Secretary-General’s report (A/74/91/Rev.1).
We also align ourselves with the statements
made by the observer of the State of Palestine and the
representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Group
of 77 and China and the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, respectively (see A/74/PV.27).
At the outset, we welcome the presence among us
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Cuba, His Excellency Mr. Bruno Eduardo Rodríguez
Parrilla, and his delegation.
The economic, commercial and financial embargo
on Cuba is one of the most important items on the
United Nations agenda and one that warrants serious
attention, because it embodies the raison d’être and
the very purpose of our Organization, as well as the
challenges that threaten it. The embargo on Cuba is
illegal, unjust and immoral, and it violates the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
the economic and social rights of the Cuban people.
I would like to remind the Assembly of the special
declaration of the fifth Summit of Heads of State and
Government of the Community of Latin American
and Caribbean States, issued on 25 January 2017,
concerning the need to end the economic, commercial
and financial embargo of Cuba by the United States
of America, which stated that the Heads of State and
Government of Latin America and the Caribbean,
“[r]eaffirm[ed] their strongest rejection of
economic coercive measures not supported by the
international law, including all those unilateral
actions imposed on sovereign countries for political
reasons that impair the well-being of their peoples
and are designed to prevent these countries from
exercising their right to decide, by their own free
will, their political, economic and social systems”.
I know that today’s General Assembly meeting
is being watched in the homes, universities and
workplaces of all Cubans. I extend to all of them my
19-35659

07/11/2019

heartfelt tributes and revolutionary greetings. This
meeting is a demonstration of the world’s solidarity
with Cuba. The embargo is real. It affects international
cooperation, health, food, education and culture in
Cuba. It impairs its foreign trade, foreign investment,
construction, tourism, transportation, civil aeronautics
and sugar industry.
But today’s meeting is more than a show of
solidarity with Cuba. It is a meeting to express our
thanks for Cuba’s enormous, wonderful and exemplary
solidarity with the peoples of the world. When racism
and colonialism held our African brothers hostage,
Cuba was there. When illiteracy held back many of
our peoples, Cuba was there. When Ebola, malaria and
other diseases attacked the poorest of the planet, Cuban
solidarity was there. When hurricanes struck our
brothers in the Caribbean, Cuban solidarity was there.
When earthquakes hurt our brothers in Asia, Cuban
solidarity was there. In the words of Nelson Mandela,
“The Cuban people hold a special place in the hearts
of the peoples of Africa. The Cuban internationalists
have made a contribution to African independence,
freedom and justice, unparalleled for its principled
and selfless character”.
I want to pay tribute to the almost 30,000 Cuban
health-care professionals who provide support in 85
countries around the world. As President Evo Morales
has said, they share what little they have and do so
selflessly. They have never asked anyone for mining,
oil or forest concessions in exchange for their solidarity
and support.
But we are not merely discussing Cuba today, we
are talking about the entire multilateral system, which is
under threat. Multilateralism is under deliberate attack.
We have only to look at what is happening with the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change, the Global Compact for
Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration, the International
Criminal Court, the Human Rights Council and
agreements on denuclearization and disarmament, or to
consider the unilateral military actions and threats of the
use of force against Member States and the proliferating
unilateral coercive sanctions. What should we do?
We must fight to defend the multilateral system, the
United Nations, international law and the purposes and
principles that unite us as an international community.
We are not just voting against the economic,
commercial and financial embargo at today’s meeting.
We are voting for hope, for the wonderful possibility

A/74/PV.28

of making the world more just. Bolivia joins its voice
to those who ask, call for and demand the lifting of
the embargo.
Mr. Ke (Cambodia): At the outset, allow me to
warmly welcome His Excellency Mr. Bruno Eduardo
Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Cuba, to this important meeting. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report on the issue before us (A/74/91/Rev.1).
My delegation associates itself with the statements
delivered by the observer of the State of Palestine and
by the representatives of Azerbaijan and of Singapore
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries and the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, respectively (see A/74/PV.27).
Cambodia will vote in favour of draft resolution
A/74/L.6, on the necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United State of America against Cuba. We join the
overwhelming majority of Member States in urging the
United States to lift a unilateral economic measure that
has adversely affected the living conditions and rights
of the Cuban people and has undermined the Cuban
Government’s efforts to achieve its trade, economic
and development objectives.
As the global community strives to implement the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in a timely
manner, it is crucial to ensure that nations strengthen
their economic, commercial and financial ties through
closer cooperation and engagement so that they can fulfil
their shared development ambition of leaving no one
behind. In this context, all nations should fully embrace
the promotion of global trade and the end of preferential
treatment and trade barriers. It is through respect for
the Charter of the United Nations and the principles
of equality, multilateralism and friendly cooperation
among States that the global community will flourish.
How any nation chooses to conduct its domestic affairs
must be left to its people. They are the ones who can
rightfully decide their own fate in accordance with their
national culture, traditions, history and circumstances
without external interference or pressure.
Cambodia and Cuba have enjoyed long-standing
bilateral relations. I would like to take this opportunity
to express my appreciation to Cuba for the generous
assistance and support it has provided to Cambodia,
particularly in the health-care sector.

19-356599/20

A/74/PV.28

I would like to conclude by stressing that an open,
friendly and constructive dialogue between the United
States and Cuba is important if this long-standing
problem is to be properly addressed. We believe
that such a dialogue could lead to the normalization
of bilateral cooperation between the neighbouring
countries. It is time to immediately end the unilateral
sanctions against Cuba.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I want to take this opportunity to offer our warm
welcome to the Foreign Minister of Cuba.
We are currently witnessing the fact that the
expansionist and arrogant approach of a certain
Government presents the greatest threat and challenge
to world peace and security today. Increased reliance
on unilateral coercive measures, coupled with an
interventionist, flawed and short-sighted foreign
policy, is one of the clearest symptoms of unilateralism.
Unilateral embargoes and coercive sanctions are one of
several ways of achieving national policy objectives
that have a seriously adverse impact on the promotion
of peace both regionally and internationally. They
are fundamental impediments to establishing not
only a peaceful and prosperous world, but also a just
and equitable international order, which is a vital
prerequisite for sustainable development.
The inhumane sanctions and blockade imposed
on Cuba by the United States for almost six decades
represent the most unjust and prolonged system of
unilateral measures ever applied against any country.
These aggressive measures constitute a gross violation
of the norms and principles underpinning the order
of international relations. No Cuban citizen or sector
of the economy has been immune to the negative
effects of this unilateral policy, which is hindering the
development that every country is entitled to construct
in its own sovereign manner.
In the past year, the tightening of the blockade
has continued to be the central focus of United States
Government policy on Cuba, with ever-more notable
effects in its extraterritorial applications. We deplore
the United States Department of State’s expansion on
various occasions of its list of entities associated with
Cuba that are restricted under blockade regulations,
which has done considerable damage to the country’s
economy as it has had the effect of intimidating the
international business community. In fact, the United
States has been addicted to imposing unilateral
10/20

07/11/2019

sanctions when it comes to States that do not submit
to or follow its contradictory and expansionist policies.
In reality, Iran and Cuba are paying the price for
their resistance to and independence from the United
States colonialist policies. Iran has experienced the
United States’ unlawful sanctions since the triumph of
the Islamic Revolution 40 years ago. In the past four
decades the rate of the unilateral coercive measures it
has imposed on the Iranian people has increased to the
extent that the current Administration’s defiance of the
established norms has even targeted the importation
of medicine and medical equipment. Patients, women,
children, refugees, the poor and those in vulnerable
situations have consequently become a prime target
of the United States genocidal economic terrorism, in
violation of all principles of international law.
The United States Administration wants the world
to believe that it is concerned about the Iranian people.
Yet the very first sanctions that it reimposed, under
absurd pretexts, revoked licences for the sale of more
than 200 passenger jets, endangering ordinary Iranians.
The hypocrisy of the United States knows no bounds.
The economic war that the United States has
initiated under the rubric of exerting maximum
pressure through the imposition of new sanctions not
only targets the Iranian public, it also has harmful
repercussions for the peoples of other countries and
has disrupted the state of global trade. The message of
today’s meeting is a reaffirmation of the fact that the
time for interventionist policies and interference in the
farthest reaches of the world is long over.
Iran will continue working with its partners to create
a new environment in which self-respecting nations can
pursue their own interests and fulfil their international
obligations. We will continue to work to offset unlawful
United States sanctions and irreversibly eliminate
the destabilizing phenomenon of the extraterritorial
application of United States domestic legislation. The
world must find solutions to counter such destructive
interventions and unilateralism. Iran strongly believes
in cooperating with friendly countries, including
Cuba, to prudently address this challenge and prevent
the United States Administration, which has stripped
United States foreign policy of every principle, from
achieving its illegitimate objectives.
Ms. Matyola Lemba (Zambia): I have the
honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the
Zambian delegation.
19-35659

07/11/2019

At the outset, I would like to state that my
delegation aligns itself with the statements made by
the representatives of Tunisia and Azerbaijan and by
the observer of the Observer State of Palestine on
behalf of the Group of African States, the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries and the Group of 77 and China,
respectively (see A/74/PV.27).
Over the years, Zambia has supported the call for
lifting the economic, commercial and financial blockade
on Cuba, and today we reiterate that call. We remain
concerned about the impact of the continued blockade,
which has lasted almost six decades. In the recent past,
the world witnessed improved relations between Cuba
and the United States of America, in an indication that
the two nations can in fact work together. The lifting of
the embargo would therefore be for the mutual benefit
of the peoples of the two countries and, of course, the
world at large.
As indicated in the conclusions of the report of the
Secretary-General (A/74/91/Rev.1), it is estimated that
the total cost of this blockade, over its existence for
almost six decades, is more than $138.4 billion. In the
one year ending in April 2019, it created losses for Cuba
in excess of $4.4 billion. It is therefore clear that the
impact of the embargo will make it almost impossible
for Cuba to be able to successfully implement the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development while the
blockade remains ongoing. How then are we, as a global
family, to uphold our collective undertaking of leaving
no one behind?
Cuban businesses, including entrepreneurial
ventures, continue to suffer repercussions that in turn
have an effect on third countries, which amplifies
the already dire effects that the blockade has had on
the social and economic development of Cuba and
ultimately on ordinary Cuban citizens. The Zambian
Government continues to appeal for unrestricted
people-to-people contact and for allowing normal
operations of non-commercial aircraft and passenger
ships in order to create a normal economic environment
between Cuba and the United States.
Zambia therefore once again stands in solidarity
with the General Assembly in calling for the abrogation
of the 1996 Helms-Burton Act and the normalization of
trade relations in order to allow for free trade of Cuban
goods and services. It is in keeping with the spirit of
solidarity with the suffering people of Cuba that we
join the global consensus on this matter. We would like

A/74/PV.28

to reassure the Cuban people that they can count on
Zambia’s continued support.
Mr. Khan (Pakistan): I acknowledge the presence
among us of the Foreign Minister of Affairs of Cuba
and welcome him to the United Nations.
My delegation aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the representatives of Azerbaijan and
Uganda and by the observer of Palestine on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation and the Group of 77 and China,
respectively (see A/74/PV.27).
The United Nations Resident Coordinator has made
the assessment that ending the economic, commercial
and financial embargo would be a significant step
towards improving the quality of life of the people of
Cuba and ensuring their human rights, particularly their
right to development, information that is also included
in the report of the Secretary-General (A/74/91/Rev.1).
My delegation considers that the imposition of
unilateral economic measures is counterproductive and
inconsistent with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and international law.
Such measures decrease the prospects for the peaceful
resolution of differences and disputes between Member
States. Accordingly, Member States should resolve
disputes in an environment based on trust that is
conducive to friendly negotiations.
Mr. Barman (Trinidad and Tobago): At the outset,
Trinidad and Tobago aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the observer of the State of Palestine
and the representatives of Azerbaijan and Grenada on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China, the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries and the Caribbean Community,
respectively (see A/74/PV.27).
In 2015, the General Assembly committed to a new
collective vision for the peoples of the world through
the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. The 2030 Agenda marked a new phase in
the focus of multilateralism and displayed the evolution
of the United Nations as a dynamic body capable of
responding to the emerging needs and challenges
facing all people across the globe, with the clear and
unambiguous goal of leaving no one behind. Yet despite
that universal commitment, the economic, commercial
and financial embargo on Cuba continues to impede its
potential to fully achieve the Sustainable Development
Goals and hinders its full enjoyment of human rights,

19-3565911/20

A/74/PV.28

including the right to development. Trinidad and
Tobago therefore remains resolute in its principled view
that discriminatory trade practices and extraterritorial
application of domestic laws are in violation of the
Charter of the United Nations and international law
and serve only to undermine the collective ambitions
enshrined in the 2030 Agenda.
Opposition to this anachronistic policy is now
almost universal, with the General Assembly having
adopted a resolution on the subject every year since
1992, condemning the embargo’s impact and declaring
it in violation of the Charter and international law.
Trinidad and Tobago had therefore welcomed with
enthusiasm the reopening of direct and frank dialogue
between both parties in 2015 and the adoption of a
previous iteration of this very draft resolution at the
seventy-first session of the General Assembly, when not
a single Member State voted against it (resolution 71/5).
Regrettably, however, that optimism was short-lived,
and additional restrictions through the Helms-Burton
Act were imposed that Trinidad and Tobago maintains
are inconsistent with international law.
In the light of this, my delegation would like to
emphasize that the challenges we face as an international
community require us to emphasize multilateral rather
than unilateral approaches. We should be strengthening
our partnerships through mutual respect and
cooperation. Trinidad and Tobago consistently supports
subregional, regional and international efforts aimed at
promoting constructive dialogue to bring an end to the
embargo on Cuba, which significantly challenges the
achievement of sustainable development in the country
and by extension the wider Caribbean.
In conclusion, the Government of Trinidad and
Tobago remains fully committed to the purposes
and principles of the Charter and, in particular, to
the principles of the sovereign equality of States,
non-intervention, non-interference and the freedom of
international trade and navigation. In keeping with this
commitment to the Charter and the 2030 Agenda, which,
again, calls for no one to be left behind, the Government
of Trinidad and Tobago reaffirms its unceasing call for
the lifting of the economic, commercial and financial
embargo against Cuba sooner rather than later and the
full reintegration of Cuba into the international system.
It is in this context that Trinidad and Tobago will once
again support the draft resolution on the necessity
of ending the economic, commercial and financial
12/20

07/11/2019

embargo imposed by the United States of America
against Cuba (A/74/L.6).
Mr. Thomas (Antigua and Barbuda): I have the
honour to speak in my national capacity. We align our
statement with those made by the observer of the State
of Palestine and the representatives of Azerbaijan and
Grenada on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM) (see A/74/PV.27).
The continued economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed by the United States on Cuba continues
to have catastrophic consequences for ordinary Cubans,
but especially the most vulnerable. The embargo, which
has lasted more than 50 years and has failed in its intent
to break the relationship between the Cuban people and
their Government, has had unintended consequences
far beyond the shores of Cuba. It greatly affects my
country’s ability to expand trade with Cuba and build
on the generosity of its Government and people in order
to expand the delivery of technical assistance that Cuba
so generously gives to my nation.
Antigua and Barbuda considers Cuba a legitimate
member of our community in the western hemisphere
and a member of the CARICOM family of nations. We
call on the United States to lift the embargo, which has
gone on for far too long and has no useful purpose. The
Government of Cuba remains relevant and popular with
its people. Good governance depends on the legitimacy
it receives from its people, and legitimacy of a
Government is a function of that popularity. Because the
Government of Cuba remains popular and functional, it
should not be subject to any force from outside simply
on the basis of others’ dissatisfaction with the structure
and function of the Cuban Government.
Antigua and Barbuda believes that dialogue and
diplomacy are essential tools for ending the embargo.
The application and tightening of unilateral measures
impedes progress towards normalization and positive
relations between the two countries.
Antigua and Barbuda considers both the United
States and Cuba as friends. We see both of these
countries as essential partners in matters of trade,
economic cooperation, cultural exchange and regional
security. As I said, the unilateral economic embargo has
extraterritorial effects for Antigua and Barbuda that
are negative in nature and hinder the full realization of
economic and commercial relations between Antigua
and Barbuda and Cuba.
19-35659

07/11/2019

It is my Government’s view that the United States
embargo is a hindrance to Cuba’s achievement of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Sustainable
Development Goals and other internationally agreed
goals. Against this background, we once again call on
the United States and the Government of Cuba to meet
and find peaceful ways to bring about a relationship
based on mutual respect and shared responsibility
between the peoples of both neighbouring nations.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Bruno Eduardo
Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Cuba, to introduce draft resolution A/74/L.6.
Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): In recent months, President Donald
Trump’s Administration has begun to escalate its
aggression against Cuba through the implementation of
non-conventional measures to prevent the supply of fuel
to our country from various markets from reaching us,
including through sanctions and threats against vessels,
shipping companies and insurance companies. The goal
in this regard, aside from affecting our economy, is to
damage the living standards of Cuban families.
The United States Government is responsible for
this aggression. In April the filing of lawsuits before
United States courts against Cuban, North American
and third-country entities was authorized under Title
III of the Helms-Burton Act; attacks on our financial
and banking relationships with the rest of the world
have intensified; remittances sent to Cuban citizens
have been restricted; the number of visas granted has
been reduced and consular services have been limited;
an agreement between the baseball federations of both
countries has been cancelled, as has individual travel by
United States citizens; direct flights to Cuban airports,
except for La Habana, and cruise-ship stops have
also been banned; aircraft leasing and the acquisition
of technology and equipment with United States
components composing more than 10 per cent have
been prohibited; and commercial promotion activities
and cultural and educational exchanges have ceased.
The United States Government is responsible
for this aggression. It has aggressively intensified
the extraterritorial implementation of its blockade
against Cuba to reach third States, their companies
and citizens. It does not conceal its intention of
economically suffocating Cuba and exacerbating the
damages, deficiencies and hardships that our people

A/74/PV.28

face. The United States Government has also resolved
to sabotage the international cooperation that Cuba
offers in the area of health. In a campaign of lies,
United States officials and politicians are directly
attacking a programme based on genuine proposals for
South-South cooperation that has been recognized by
the international community.
The United States Ambassador has grossly
manipulated the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, particularly article 3 on the right to life. The
embargo on Cuba has caused incalculable humanitarian
damage. It constitutes a massive, systematic and flagrant
violation of human rights and an act of genocide under
sub-paragraphs (b) and (c) of article II of the 1948
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide.
There is not a single Cuban family that has been
spared from suffering the consequences of this
aggression. A Cuban child with severe heart disease
does not have access to the most advanced paediatric
mechanical circulatory support because the device
in question is manufactured in the United States,
and although repeated requests to acquire it have
been made, no response from the North American
companies selling it has been received. As a result of
the prohibitions imposed on Cuba, a person suffering
from severe heart disease cannot access the ventricularassistance equipment that prolongs the lives of patients
in critical conditions until it is possible to perform a
heart transplant or, in some cases, until they recover
their cardiovascular function.
As a result of the blockade, 16-year-old Bryan
González Santisteban and 19-year-old Leydis
Posada Cañizares, who are going through periods of
growth spurts, have no access to extensible internal
prostheses — stents — so they are restricted to using
fixed prostheses and must therefore undergo frequent
surgeries to replace them. These stents are manufactured
by the American company Stryker, and its Government
is therefore responsible for this situation.
The blockade also makes it impossible to access new
cancer treatment drugs that are manufactured solely by
American pharmaceutical companies. Mayra Lazus
Roque, aged 57, is a renal-cancer patient who cannot be
treated with the optimal drug, sunitinib, which is only
produced by the American company Pfizer. Thanks to
the treatment she has received with pharmaceuticals
from the Cuban biotechnology industry, she is generally

19-3565913/20

A/74/PV.28

in good health. Eduardo Hernández Hernández, aged
49, suffers from a metastatic melanoma. The optimal
treatment for this type of cancer is nivolumab, a drug
only manufactured by the company Bristol-Myers
Squibb in the United States. As we have no access to
it, the patient has had to be treated with alternative
therapies. The United States Government is responsible
for this outcome.
Here at Headquarters, year after year, the United
States delegation has declared — as its Ambassador
just did, with a healthy dose of cynicism — that its
Government supports the Cuban people. Can anyone
believe such a statement? The Government of the
United States spreads lies and falsifies data with respect
to alleged licences for operations to sell medicines
and foodstuffs to Cuba, which are highly unlikely
to materialize.
The United States delegation sitting in this Hall
should explain to the Assembly the conditions that it
is imposing on Cuban purchases. There is no access to
credit, official or private, so payments must be made in
cash when merchandise arrives in port. The banks that
handle our transactions are subject to mistreatment, and
the use of Cuban vessels is prohibited. The United States
Government is responsible. Who in the world can trade
under such conditions? The successful and effective
Cuban social model has guaranteed and continues to
guarantee equal opportunities, equality and social
justice for Cubans, despite hostility and coercion.
The United States Government has no moral
authority whatever to criticize Cuba or anyone else with
regard to human rights issues. We reject the repeated
manipulation of human rights for political ends and
the double standards it embodies. The Ambassador
said that her aim was to reveal the truth, but a guilty
conscience has betrayed her words even if she did not
come to the Assembly to make a confession.
Article 3 of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights stipulates that everyone has the right to life.
The deaths of civilians at the hands of United States
troops in various parts of the world, the use of torture,
the murder of African-Americans by the police and
of migrants by border-patrol officers, the deaths of
unaccompanied minors in immigrant detention centres
and the abusive and racially discriminative use of the
death penalty, applied to minors and mentally disabled
persons, warrant condemnation. Article 5 sets out the
right that no one shall be subjected to torture.
14/20

07/11/2019

The impunity of the gun lobby is to blame for
the rise in homicides, including of teenagers. During
the first eight months of 2019, approximately 250
confrontations involving firearms took place, resulting
in almost 1,000 victims, nearly one quarter of which
were fatal. In 2018, 100 Americans lost their lives to and
274 were injured by firearms every day. In the United
States, there are 2.3 million people in detention, who
account for a quarter of the world’s prison population,
and, during the span of one year, 10.5 million arrests
were made. Article 9 states that no one shall be
subjected to arbitrary arrest.
Every day, 137 Americans die from opioid
overdoses, 251 die from heart disease, and another 231
lose their lives prematurely to cancer owing to the lack
of proper treatment. Some 170 preventable amputations
owing to complications associated with diabetes take
place every day. Article 25 states that everyone has a
right to health.
The repression and police surveillance of
immigrants, the splitting up of families, the separation
of parents from their children, the indefinite detention
of more than 2,500 children, the deportation of 21,000
of them, and the brutal measures threatening the
children of illegal immigrants who grew up and were
educated in the United States are abhorrent. Article 1
establishes the right to dignity and freedom.
Article 7 sets forth the right to due process. The
United States Government is indefinitely holding
prisoners in legal limbo without legal defence, courts
or due process in the prison of the naval base at
Guantánamo, territory that it illegally usurped from us.
Article 25 states that everyone has the right to a
standard of living adequate to their well-being. In the
richest country, 40 million Americans live in poverty.
Of them, 18.5 million live in extreme poverty. As of the
end of last year, 25.7 per cent of people with disabilities
were living in poverty. More than half a million of its
citizens sleep in the streets.
Article 23 sets forth the right to work. As of the
end of 2018, 6.6 million people were unemployed in the
United States.
Article 25 also refers to the right to medical care.
Some 28.5 million citizens lack health insurance and,
thanks to recently announced measures, millions more
low-wage earners will be deprived of it.
19-35659

07/11/2019

Article 26 speaks of the right to education.
Quality education is not accessible to the majority of
Americans. Half of the adult population is unable read a
book written for readers at the eighth-grade level. Equal
opportunity in the United States is a fantasy. Teenagers
and young people are justifiably protesting, as their
Government is depriving them of environmental rights.
Article 2 sets forth the right to non-discrimination.
Women in the United States earn approximately 85 per
cent of what men earn and would have to work 39
additional days per year to make the same salary. There
are widespread reports of sexual harassment. The
average wealth of white families is seven times greater
than that of families of African descent. The death rates
for children under the age of one and for mothers at
childbirth for the same demographic are twice those for
white people. There is a discriminatory racial pattern
reflected in the American prison population and in the
length of prison sentences.
The political system and the electoral model are
rife with corruption, in contravention of the provisions
of Article 21 of the Universal Declaration with regard
to the right to participate in public service. There is a
widening gap between Government decisions and the
will of the people. Powerful and special interest groups,
in particular corporations, decide on the character and
make-up of the Government, Congress and the justice
and law-enforcement institutions.
The United States is a country in which human
rights are systematically and flagrantly violated, often
on a massive scale. It is party to only 30 per cent of
international human rights instruments and accordingly
fails to recognize the right to life, peace, development,
security and food, and the rights of children.
Article 13 establishes the right to travel. The
blockade also violates the human rights and civil
liberties of United States citizens, whose freedom to
travel to Cuba — the only destination in the world that
they are prohibited from travelling to — is unjustly
and arbitrarily limited. The Government of the United
States is responsible for this result.
In the past year, the Office of Foreign Assets
Control of the United States Department of the Treasury
and other United States agencies have imposed fines on
third-country financial entities such as the UniCredit
Group of Italy and Société Générale of France for
violating the sanctions regime against Cuba. Dozens of

A/74/PV.28

foreign banks have been intimidated and limited and
disrupted in their financial dealings with our country.
Natural legal persons — in other words, people — are
also victims of the blockade. A German citizen working
at the Cuban Embassy in Berlin received notification
that her Amazon account was being closed, allegedly
owing to blockade regulations. The aggressive actions
of the United States against Cuba are carried out in
accordance with the illegal Helms-Burton Act, which
blatantly seeks to violate the Cuban nation’s right to
self-determination and independence. It also imposes
United States legal authority over other countries’
commercial and financial relations with Cuba and
establishes the presumed primacy of United States law
and jurisdiction over third countries. The embargo as
a whole constitutes a serious violation of international
law, the Charter of the United Nations and the principles
of the Proclamation of Latin America and the Caribbean
as a Zone of Peace.
Not everyone complies with the illegal
extraterritorial implementation of the restrictions
imposed by the legislation of the Unites States. In June,
a trial judge of a court in The Hague ruled in favour
of the company PAM International, based in Curaçao,
in a lawsuit it filed against the Dutch company Exact
Software Delft, which is currently a subsidiary of the
United States company KKR, for enforcing provisions
of the United States embargo against Cuba, requiring
Exact Software Delft to continue providing its services
to PAM International for the supply of software to
Cuban companies and organizations. Examples such as
this show that there are antidote laws, forums within
the World Trade Organization, and other ways and
means to deal with the extraterritorial application of the
embargo against Cuba.
The cumulative damages incurred after almost six
decades of the embargo amount to $922 billion, taking
into account the depreciation of the dollar against the
price of gold. In current prices, it has caused quantifiable
damages amounting to more than $138 billion.
Throughout the years it has been in force, the
embargo has been a critical impediment to the
aspirations of well-being and prosperity of several
generations of Cubans and remains the greatest obstacle
to the country’s economic development. It represents
a major constraint on the modernization of Cuba’s
economic and social development model and on the
implementation of its 2030 national plan for fulfilling

19-3565915/20

A/74/PV.28

07/11/2019

the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
attaining the Goals set forth in it.

young and old, like noiseless atom bombs” (A/50/
PV.35, p. 20).

The impact of the embargo, especially the travel
restrictions, has hit the non-State sector of the economy
particularly hard. Without the revenue lost to Cuba in
terms of exports of goods and services and the costs
of geographic trade relocation, which has forced us to
maintain very large inventories of stock, Cuba’s gross
domestic product would have grown at an average annual
rate of approximately 10 per cent at current prices over
the past decade. The annual damages incurred due to
the embargo greatly exceed the volume of foreign direct
investment required for Cuba’s development.

The Government of the Unites States seeks to
exercise imperialist domination over our America.
It is once again revising the old, aggressive Monroe
Doctrine and gunboat diplomacy. It is redeploying its
Fourth Fleet and increasing the presence and power of
its military bases in the region.

For almost six decades Cuba has been victim to the
most unjust, severe and protracted system of sanctions
ever applied against any country. The Government
of the United States is responsible for this situation.
Despite all the difficulties and limitations facing our
people, Cuba has managed to counteract the stated
objectives of the embargo, its overwhelming effect
for six decades and its unquestionable impact on the
country’s potential.

“There is no effective political opposition ... The only
foreseeable means of alienating internal support
[from the Government] is through disenchantment
and disaffection based on economic dissatisfaction
and hardship... [E]very possible means should be
undertaken promptly to weaken the economic life
..., denying money and supplies to Cuba, to decrease
monetary and real wages, to bring about hunger,
desperation and overthrow of Government.”

Despite all the limitations, thanks to the
effectiveness of the Cuban socialist system and State, and
to our people’s patriotism, revolutionary convictions,
solidarity, consensus and unity, Cuba has been able to
overcome the serious challenges imposed on it. One
wonders whether all industrialized and technologically
advanced countries would be able, as Cuba has done, to
endure such a prolonged and overwhelming onslaught
while also ensuring modest but sustained economic
growth,
preserving
development
programmes,
progressing towards a service and knowledge economy
and ensuring the equal enjoyment of all human rights
by all citizens.

The representative of the United States offends the
Assembly with the interventionist and unacceptable
language she used in reference to the heroic people
of Venezuela, its civic and military union, and the
Bolivarian and Chavista Government headed by
President Nicolás Maduro Moros, with whom we
express our unwavering solidarity.

The General Assembly has repeatedly confirmed
its rejection of the use of unilateral coercive measures
as contrary to international law and the Charter of the
United Nations. The United States implements systems
of coercive measures against more than 20 countries
and specific unilateral measures against dozens of
nations, a trend that has intensified under the present
Administration. As Commander-in-Chief Fidel Castro
Ruz expressed from this very rostrum at the fiftieth
anniversary of the founding of the United Nations,
“[w]e lay claim to a world without ruthless blockades
that cause the death of men, women and children,
16/20

The definition of the embargo policy was captured
best in the infamous memorandum written by Deputy
Assistant Secretary of State Lester Mallory in
April 1960.

The Government of the United States is resorting
to falsehoods and slander as a pretext to step up its
aggression against Cuba. I reiterate that neither threats
nor blackmail will ever extract even the smallest
political concession from us. Nor will we back down
from our determination to forge civilized relations
with the United States based on mutual respect and
recognition of our deep-rooted differences.
As was pointed out by Army General Raúl
Castro on 10 April before the National Assembly of
People’s Power,
“Despite its immense power, imperialism does not
have the capacity to crush the dignity of a united
people proud of its history and of the freedom won
through so much sacrifice”.
Cuba recognizes the ethical and political chasm that
exists between the people of the United States and their
19-35659

07/11/2019

Government and will do everything it can to develop the
deep and far-reaching bonds that unite it to its citizens.
We acknowledge with profound gratitude all those
who have repudiated the embargo on our country and
who have always stood with us throughout our tireless
struggle against this policy. As President Miguel Díaz
Canel Bermúdez of Cuba affirmed on 10 October,
“Intense and challenging days await [the Cuban
people], but no one will ever take away from
us the confidence in the future that we owe our
children in the homeland our parents won for us by
standing firm.”
On behalf of the heroic, self-sacrificing and
fraternal people of Cuba, I once again ask the Assembly
to vote in favour of the draft resolution contained in
document A/74/L.6, entitled “Necessity of ending the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States of America against Cuba”.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We have
heard the last speaker in the debate on this item. We
shall now proceed to consider draft resolution A/74/L.6.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote before the voting, I should like to remind
delegations that explanations of vote should be limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Salovaara (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States. The candidate countries Turkey, North
Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania, and the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina, align
themselves with this statement.
The economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed by the United States on Cuba has a damaging
impact on the economic situation of the country and
negatively affects the living standards of the Cuban
people. External trade and foreign investment will play
a crucial role in setting the country on a path towards
modernization, reform and sustainable growth. The
EU therefore believes that lifting the embargo would
facilitate the opening of the Cuban economy to the
benefit of the Cuban people.
The EU believes that positive change in Cuba
is best brought about by closer engagement at all
levels — in terms of Government, the economy and

A/74/PV.28

civil society and through people-to-people exchanges.
We therefore deeply regret the reintroduction of
restrictions on United States relations with Cuba by
the current Administration. The measures restricting
individual self-directed travel and, as of June, banning
people-to-people travel and cruise tourism, not only
curtail possibilities for engagement with the Cuban
people but are also taking a severe toll on Cuba’s
burgeoning private sector, which had benefited most
from such visits.
Beyond the damaging impact of the embargo on
ordinary Cubans, the unilateral sanctions and other
unilateral administrative and judicial measures by the
United States are also negatively affecting EU economic
interests. We have firmly and consistently opposed any
such measures, due to their extraterritorial application
and impact on the European Union, in violation of
commonly accepted rules of international trade. We
cannot accept that unilaterally imposed measures
should impede our economic and commercial relations
with Cuba.
The EU strongly rejects the activation in April by
the United States of Titles III and IV of the HelmsBurton Act, which breaches the commitments made
by the United States in its agreements with the
European Union of 1997 and 1998. We will draw on
all appropriate measures to address the effects of the
Helms-Burton Act, including in relation to our World
Trade Organizations rights and through the use of the
EU Blocking Statute, which protects against undue
interference and problems for EU citizens, businesses
and non-governmental organizations residing, working
or cooperating in Cuba.
For the EU, international cooperation, dialogue
and closer engagement, even if critical, are the way to
go with Cuba. On 1 November we marked the second
anniversary of the provisional application of the EUCuba Political Dialogue and Cooperation Agreement,
which has put our bilateral relationship on a new and
solid legal footing and sets out an agenda of critical
engagement with Cuba that will also allow us to
support and assist the country on its path of reform
and modernization. We are also enhancing dialogue
and cooperation on issues on which we still have
fundamental differences. To this end, the Political
Dialogue and Cooperation Agreement has established a
human rights dialogue as a key pillar of our relationship.
The second formal meeting of the Dialogue was held
last month in a constructive and frank atmosphere.

19-3565917/20

A/74/PV.28

We reiterate our call to the Cuban Government to
fully grant its citizens internationally recognized civil,
political and economic rights and freedoms, including
freedom of assembly, freedom of expression and
free access to information, to ratify the International
Covenants on Civil and Political Rights and on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, and to extend
a standing invitation to all United Nations special
procedures mechanisms to visit Cuba.
Following the generational leadership change that
took place in Cuba in April 2018 and in the context of
the implementation of the country’s new Constitution,
we call on Cuba to pursue a comprehensive reform and
modernization agenda, extending economic and social
reforms and implementing them in a manner that will
address the key concerns of the Cuban population and
meet the legitimate aspirations of the Cuban people
for more opportunities to participate in shaping the
country’s future.
Through the EU-Cuba Political Dialogue and
Cooperation Agreement, the EU offers Cuba a consistent
and reliable partnership of support in seeking to reform
its political and economic model, pursue sustainable
development and find common solutions to global
challenges, while we continue to vigorously promote
democracy and respect for human rights.
It is our considered view that the United States
embargo does not contribute to promoting the foregoing
aims but rather impedes their achievement. Against this
background, the States members of the European Union
will vote unanimously in favour of draft resolution
A/74/L.6.
Mr. Guillermet-Fernández (Costa Rica) (spoke
in Spanish): Costa Rica has historically always voted
in favour of the resolutions adopted by the General
Assembly on the necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba. We have always
given reasons in justification of our vote. This year we
will do the same.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We have
heard the last speaker in explanation of vote before
the voting.
The General Assembly will now take a decision on
draft resolution A/74/L.6, entitled “Necessity of ending
the economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed by the United States of America against Cuba”.
18/20

07/11/2019

A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North
Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao
Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
19-35659

07/11/2019

Uruguay,
Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu,
Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Brazil, Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Colombia, Ukraine
Draft resolution A/74/L.6 was adopted by 187 votes
to 3, with 2 abstentions (resolution 74/7).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Before
giving the floor to speakers in explanation of vote
after the voting, I would like to remind delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Verdier (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I want to welcome the presence with us today
of Mr. Bruno Eduardo Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Cuba, and to thank him heartily for
introducing resolution 74/7.
Argentina fully aligns itself with the statement
made by the observer of the State of Palestine on behalf
of the Group of 77 and China (see A/74/PV.27), and
would like to add the following remarks in its national
capacity.
Argentina reiterates its long-standing position
that the economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed by the United States on Cuba must be
brought to an end as soon as possible. It runs counter
to international law, in particular the principles of
the sovereign equality of States, non-interference in
the internal affairs of States, freedom of trade and of
international navigation, and the peaceful resolution
of disputes.
In keeping with our absolute commitment to the
Charter of the United Nations, international law and
multilateralism, Argentina opposes the use of unilateral
coercive measures, the extraterritorial application of
national laws and the adoption of discriminatory trade
practices. Argentina has therefore always supported
General Assembly resolutions opposing the embargo
and has spoken out whenever this issue has arisen in
regional forums or international organizations.
We regret the fact that the laws extending the
embargo remain in force and that their application
continues to hamper the full development of the Cuban

A/74/PV.28

people. The adoption of resolution 74/7 by a large
majority emphasizes the international community’s
unequivocal message that the embargo against Cuba
must come to an end. Argentina reaffirms its conviction
that dialogue between the two parties without
preconditions and based on mutual recognition by the
Governments as legitimate and equal interlocutors
would facilitate the resolution of all pending issues
between the United States of America and Cuba,
including lifting the embargo.
Mr. Amorín (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to welcome the presence in the Hall
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba, Mr. Bruno
Eduardo Rodríguez Parrilla. We took due note of his
detailed introduction of resolution 74/7, which we have
just adopted.
As in previous years, Uruguay voted in favour
of the resolution because the unilateral economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed against
Cuba runs counter to international law and violates the
purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations. The position of Uruguay is based
on the principles of respect for international law, the
sovereign equality of States, non-interference and
the peaceful resolution of disputes, which constitute
the cornerstones of our foreign policy. Based on
these principles, Uruguay does not recognize any
extraterritorial application of the domestic laws of
another State, and we reject any mechanism, direct
or indirect, that constitutes unilateral action by any
State seeking to sanction sovereign decisions adopted
by another State on a political, economic, trade or any
other matter.
Accordingly, Uruguay once again reiterates its
opposition, stated on many occasions, to the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States against Cuba. Not only is the embargo a
violation of international law, it also has a very negative
impact on the well-being of the Cuban people, leading
to shortages and suffering among the population and
impeding their legitimate right to development.
My delegation also regrets the recent cooling
in relations between the two States in question. The
recent process of rapprochement and mutual adoption
of measures to improve relations, which had improved
bilateral relations, are tangible proof that reaching an
understanding is possible. Uruguay therefore urges
both parties to resume dialogue and move forward

19-3565919/20

A/74/PV.28

towards solving the problems remaining between these
two countries of our continent.
In voting in favour of resolution 74/7, Uruguay
reiterated its commitment to multilateralism, which
we see as the legitimate means for resolving disputes
and an effective tool for promoting cooperation and
understanding among peoples.
Ms. Tiwet (Malaysia): Malaysia reaffirms its
support for the General Assembly and voted in favour
of resolution 74/7, on the necessity of ending the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States on Cuba. We remain opposed to all
forms of unilateral economic, financial and commercial
embargo that contravene the norms of international
law and purposes and principles of the United Nations

20/20

07/11/2019

as set forth in its Charter. Malaysia urges that an end
be put to the unilateral embargo by the United States
of America on Cuba, which has impeded the nation’s
development and caused significant suffering to the
Cuban people, and calls on both parties to resolve their
disputes amicably through dialogue and negotiation.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We
have heard the last speaker in explanation of vote after
the voting.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 39?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

19-35659
