S/2017/454

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 May 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on options for authorization
and support for African Union peace support operations
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2320
(2016) of 18 November 2016 in which the Council, inter alia, requested me to
continue working closely with the African Union to refine options for further
cooperation on the relevant African Union proposals, including on financing,
accountability, joint planning and the process for mandating African Union peace
support operations, subject to authorization by the Security Council; and to provide
the Security Council with a detailed report within six months. This report builds on
the findings of the joint African Union-United Nations review of available
mechanisms to finance and support African Union peace operations authorized by
the Security Council (A/71/410-S/2016/809).

II. Context
2.
The joint review noted that the African Union-United Nations partnership on
peace operations has continued to evolve and innovate in the past 15 years, and has
become essential to respond to common challenges posed by armed conflicts in
Africa. Peace support operations are a key tool on which the international
community increasingly relies to address challenges to peace and security in Africa,
in large part because of the demonstrated ability and willingness of the African
Union to deploy rapidly and its doctrinal flexibility, allowing it to deploy missions
in particularly challenging environments with robust mandated tas ks, including
peace enforcement and counter-terrorism.
3.
The joint review noted that the African Union’s willingness to deploy and
respond to challenging situations through the deployment of peace support
operations has been undermined by a lack of capacity in key areas, particularly
staffing, logistics and some key military capabilities. All African Union missions
have relied to some extent on external partners for support. The joint review made
clear that the African Union must continue to build its capacity to plan, finance,
sustain and oversee its own missions so that it can implement its mandates, meet the
expectations of its membership and partners, and enhance the partnership with the
United Nations. Furthermore, the joint review recognized the need for African
Union peace support operations to have predictable and sustainable financing and
support.

17-07675 (E)

300517

*1707675*

S/2017/454

4.
Since the publication of the joint review, significant strides towards furthering
the partnership have been made. At the African Union summit in Janu ary 2017, I
committed to strengthening the partnership on political issues and peace operations,
with stronger mutual support and continued technical assistance. On 19 April, the
new Chairperson of the African Union Commission, Moussa Faki Mahamat, and I
convened the first United Nations-African Union Annual Conference at United
Nations Headquarters. The Conference, convened at the highest levels of the two
secretariats, illustrated the new chapter of the strategic partnership between the two
organizations. Further, the Conference confirmed our commitment to strengthen
dialogue, enhance existing mechanisms for coordination and cooperation and
continue to forge a common vision in line with our priorities. During the
Conference, the Chairperson and I endorsed and co-signed the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and
Security. It provides for a strategic approach between the two organizations to
address challenges to peace and security across the full spectrum of the conflict
cycle. At the technical level, joint work was undertaken over the past six months to
explore different modalities for future support of the United Nations to African
Union peace support operations pursuant to Security Council resolution 2320
(2016).
5.
In the meantime, the United Nations peace and security architecture continues
to evolve. It is increasingly clear that more must be done to prevent conflicts from
spiralling out of control and that dialogue with regional and subregional partners is
a key aspect of this agenda. It is also clear that United Nations peacekeeping
operations are too often deployed in places where there is no peace to keep and
where they are subject to hostility and lack of cooperation from host governments as
well as terrorist threats. Partnership with regional and subregional organizations to
determine the right and timely responses is imperative to ensuring our effectiveness,
as is ensuring that our systems for the management and administration of our
operations are fit for purpose.

III. Joint planning and mandating of African Union peace
support operations authorized by the Security Council
6.
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations and its three Artic les (52 to
54) define the primacy of the Security Council vis-à-vis regional and subregional
organizations and the complementary and subsidiary nature of the latter. The
Charter provides the Security Council with the oversight role of activities
undertaken under regional arrangements or by regional agencies for the maintenance
of international peace and security. Article 54 provides that regional organizations
shall keep the Council fully informed of these activities.
7.
The report of August 2016 of the High Representative for the African Union
Peace Fund entitled “Securing Predictable and Sustainable Financing for Peace in
Africa” proposed a process for authorizing African Union peace support operations
by the Security Council for which support through a ssessed contributions was
sought. The proposals of the High Representative for financial support by the
United Nations, along with existing United Nations system -wide policy frameworks
such as the United Nations integrated assessment and planning policy an d internal
United Nations guidelines of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support, particularly the peacekeeping planning policy, were
used to develop a general framework for the joint planning, mandating and
oversight of African Union peace support operations by the United Nations and the
African Union. The resulting joint process outlined below is envisaged for, but not
necessarily limited to, situations in which the African Union might seek financial
2/19

17-07675

S/2017/454

support from the United Nations for the deployment of an African Union peace
support operation. Some underlying guiding principles are presented below to frame
the presentation of the key phases and decision points related to a proposed generic
planning, mandating and oversight process of such applicable African Union peace
support operations.
Guiding principles for joint planning and mandating
8.
A key consideration for a joint process is preserving the African Union’s
ability to respond rapidly and its doctrinal flexibility. This may require, in some
cases, that technical aspects of the process are accelerated to the extent possible
when compared to the typical time frames for the planning of new United Nations
peacekeeping operations. The ultimate goal for the United Nations and the African
Union should be to jointly identify and support the best approaches to resolve or
respond to crises on the basis of a common assessment rather than replicating the
existing processes for planning United Nations peacekeeping operati ons or African
Union peace support operations.
9.
While the Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council
should consult closely on peace and security challenges in Africa, it should be
acknowledged that the two organizations have separate and distinct decision-making
processes and governance structures, which should be respected. As the primary
organ for maintaining international peace and security, the Security Council must be
fully confident in a predictable decision-making process when it is requested to
authorize African Union peace support operations for which financial assistance will
be sought through assessments upon Member States, to be approved by the General
Assembly. This process is therefore intended to allow for sufficient and reliable
information to be provided to both Councils in a predictable and transparent manner
to support informed decision-making and to form the basis of my proposals to the
Security Council and the General Assembly, with due consideration for the need to
respond rapidly owing to the urgency of the situation.
10. A standardized joint planning and mandating process alone, however, is not
sufficient to ensure an effective joint decision-making framework; such a
framework must be underpinned by enhanced cooperation between the two
organizations. The earlier the United Nations and the African Union engage, the
likelier it is for the Security Council and the Peace and Security Council to develop
a common understanding of a situation which would form the basi s for decisionmaking. Informal and active consultations would also help to address issues related
to resources and mandate definition thereby avoiding any delay in responding to the
crisis.
11. An effective joint planning process, followed by an ongoing joint review
process, should apply throughout the duration of a peace support operation, to
ensure that staffs of both the African Union and the United Nations have a
commonly agreed and shared understanding of steps, tools and expected outcomes
of the process. The organizations should ensure the development of technical
expertise and promote knowledge exchange in key areas, which would serve as a
basis for the joint planning and coordinated follow -up process. In parallel, a
commonly agreed costing methodology for African Union peace support operations
should be developed to ensure that credible estimates of financial implications can
accompany options presented for consideration by the Security Council.
12. Reporting on mandate implementation will also be a key element in the
lifespan of peace support operations authorized under the proposed framework. The
Chairperson of the African Union Commission will be expected to provide regular
reports to both the Peace and Security Council and the Security Council. A reporting
17-07675

3/19

S/2017/454

framework should therefore be developed and jointly agreed. This would establish
clear, consistent and predictable reporting channels between the Secretariat, the
Commission and the two Councils, as well as standardize reporting requirements
depending on the type of reporting, including for general updates, joint assessment
findings, and reporting on financial and human rights compliance.
Proposed consultative planning and mandating process
13. The following flow charts (figures I and II) provide a summary of the
proposed joint United Nations-African Union planning and decision-making
process:

4/19

17-07675

S/2017/454

Figure I
Consultative United Nations-African Union planning and decision-making process: from
initial appraisal to authorization

14. The different steps of the standard proposed process are summarized below. As
a matter of principle, the jointness will be sustained throughout the process,
including through my regular consultations with the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission.

17-07675

5/19

S/2017/454

15. Initial crisis appraisal. Both organizations have internal processes for
assessing and responding when a crisis emerges or an existing crisis worsens within
the African continent. To the extent that they consider it necessary to start assessing
the conditions on the ground and intervention options, including the possible
deployment of a peace support operation, the African Union Commission and the
United Nations Secretariat will activate their own early warning mechanisms and
internal analysis in accordance with usual practice. Following this initial crisis
appraisal, the Chairperson of the African Union Commission may officially reach
out to me to communicate the African Union’s intention to conduct a strategic
assessment of the situation on the ground. This assessment will recommend a broad
range of options to address the situation, including through the possible deployment
of an African Union peace support operation for which United Nations support may
be required. The Chairperson will then invite the United Nations to participate in
what would become a joint strategic assessment of the situation. The Chairperson
may do so at his or her own initiative or at the request of the Peace and Security
Council.
16. Joint strategic assessment. If agreement is reached to undertake a joint
strategic assessment, a joint United Nations-African Union team will be constituted,
led jointly by the African Union Commission and the United Nations Secretariat.
The team could include other stakeholders, such as African Union regional
mechanisms for conflict prevention, management and resolution and Member
States, as appropriate. The joint assessment should be understood as a flexible tool
which can be adapted depending on the urgency of the situation and th e availability
of pre-existing analysis. However, it should contain a detailed conflict analysis and
a range of options for response by the two Councils, identifying distinct roles for
the African Union, the United Nations and other actors. The joint team should
ensure that political solutions guide any option to deploy a peace support operation.
Each option should include the estimated financial and support implications for both
organizations as well as any other information required for both Councils to m ake
informed decisions. The joint strategic assessment report will be submitted
separately by the African Union Commission Chairperson and myself to the Peace
and Security Council and the Security Council, respectively.
17. Mandating. Informal consultations between the Security Council and the
Peace and Security Council should be encouraged throughout the process to find
common ground on resource requirements and mandate definition before any formal
decision is taken by either Council. Such exchanges could occur at the discretion of
both Councils and in a format to be jointly agreed. If the Peace and Security Council
eventually decides that an African Union peace support operation represents the best
option for response under the prevailing circumstances and determines that United
Nations support may be required, it may invite the African Union Commission
Chairperson to transmit a letter to me to inform the Security Council of its decision.
The Security Council will subsequently consider the African Union’s r equest and
the joint strategic assessment report, as well as any other relevant documents it may
have requested from me, and provide an appropriate response.

6/19

17-07675

S/2017/454

Figure II
Consultative United Nations-African Union planning and decision-making process: from
authorization to mandate renewal

18. Mission start-up. Once an African Union peace support operation has been
mandated, the United Nations Secretariat and the African Union Commission will
jointly develop the detailed planning documents, such as the mission and
component-level concepts, and secure the appropriate approvals. The United
Nations-African Union planning team will continue to develop and finalize
methodologies and templates to this end. Clear benchmarks for an African Union
exit strategy and possible subsequent role of the United Nations should be
established at the earliest stages in the planning of the mission and these
benchmarks should be kept under regular joint review.
19. The African Union will develop policies and processes to ensure that
international humanitarian law, international human rights law and a conduct and
discipline compliance framework are integrated in all aspects of mission operations,

17-07675

7/19

S/2017/454

including planning, force generation and police selection and recruitment (including
verification and screening), predeployment training, conduc t of operations and
monitoring and reporting procedures. The United Nations requires that support to all
non-United Nations entities be provided in compliance with the human rights due
diligence policy on United Nations support provided to non -United Nations security
forces. Therefore a United Nations capacity will likely be needed to ensure that the
United Nations can undertake activities required under the due diligence policy,
including risk assessment, support to the implementation of mitigation measure s and
establishment of mechanisms to prevent, monitor, report on and address violations
of international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law. These compliance
tasks could be undertaken by a new or pre-existing civilian presence already in the
mission area or in a neighbouring country, depending on the nature of the conflict
and the environment.
20. The African Union and the United Nations will appoint their respective senior
mission leadership teams, in line with international humanitarian and human rights
law and conduct and discipline compliance requirements.
21. General reporting to the Councils. The African Union Commission
Chairperson and I would provide regular joint reports to the Peace and Security
Council and the Security Council on the implementation of the mission’s mandate,
as defined by the two Councils. I may provide additional reporting as required
through briefings to the Security Council.
22. Joint assessments. The Security Council will be requested to authorize a
peace support operation and related support through the United Nations for a
specific period and with a specific mandate. The extension of the mandate and
support will require appropriate consideration by the Council. Accordingly, it will
be important for the African Union Commission and the United Nations Secretariat
to continue to undertake joint assessments, including joint evaluations and joint
benchmarking exercises, throughout the duration of the mandate of the peace
support operation, in order to review its impact on the ground and measure its
performance against benchmarks or targets. Both will then inform the Peace and
Security Council and the Security Council on the progress made by the mission, and
make joint recommendations for adjustments in the mandate or su pport provided to
the mission. Towards the end of the authorized period, joint reviews will be
conducted in order to discuss mandate renewals and exit strategies, and will follow
a similar decision-making process as for the initial mandating.
23. Accountability and compliance. The reports of the African Union
Commission Chairperson to the Peace and Security Council and the Security
Council will include updates on accountability, including issues pertaining to
international humanitarian and human rights law as well as compliance with
standards of conduct pertaining to military, police and civilian personnel in the
mission. All allegations of violations, whether of international humanitarian and
human rights law or misconduct, would be investigated and a repor t submitted on an
annual basis to the Peace and Security Council and the Security Council on the
actions taken by the African Union and its troop- and police-contributing countries.
24. Transparency and access to information. As part of the enhancement of the
partnership, the African Union Commission would ensure, on the basis of agreed
modalities, that access is provided to its planning, management and oversight
processes, where appropriate.
25. Financial reporting and audit. The African Union Commission would
provide access to United Nations oversight mechanisms on the basis of agreed
modalities. If a peace support operation is financed at least in part through United
Nations assessed contributions, sufficient information must be provided to the
8/19

17-07675

S/2017/454

United Nations Secretariat to enable my requisite reports containing proposals for
appropriation of resources and subsequent performance reports to be submitted for
consideration by the General Assembly. Any use of assessed contributions would be
considered by the General Assembly, through the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the Fifth Committee, through the
normal budget process. The United Nations will support the African Union to
reinforce its monitoring and reporting policies in order to provide the required
budgeting, financial and performance reports to the General Assembly.

IV. Financing of peace support operations
A.

Considerations with regard to financial support to peace
support operations
26. The United Nations and Member States could provide financial support to an
African Union peace support operation through a number of different financing
models, including voluntary contributions through a United Nations -managed trust
fund; a subvention in exceptional emergenc y situations; joint financing of a jointly
developed budget; establishment of a United Nations support office; or joint
financing of a hybrid mission. Each financing arrangement has potential benefits,
and no one model is appropriate for every situation. D ifferent models may be more
appropriate for different peace support operations, as determined by factors such as
the size, character, expected duration and the nature of mandated tasks of the
operation; the respective capabilities of the African Union Comm ission, troop- and
police-contributing countries and external partners; and the results of human rights
risk assessments. Each option developed as a result of the joint strategic assessment
would be accompanied by a recommended financing model, which would in turn
determine the role to be played by United Nations legislative bodies. It is expected
that the Security Council would indicate the financing model to apply when
authorizing a mission under the joint process outlined above.
27. A number of assumptions underpin the various financing models. First, these
models assume that peace support operations will receive funding from the African
Union Peace Fund in addition to any financial support from the United Nations.
Second, the types of costs covered by the financial resources of the United Nations
through assessed contributions on Member States for peace support operations
would generally be in line with those usually incurred by United Nations
peacekeeping operations; for example, the acquisition of conti ngent-owned
equipment would remain a national responsibility and would not be financed by the
United Nations. In all of the models, some form of mandated United Nations
presence would be necessary to undertake tasks in areas such as planning, reporting
and accountability, including those required for implementation of the human rights
due diligence policy. Where a support office or hybrid mission is authorized, this
capacity can be included in the structure. Finally, different models could be applied
at different phases of an operation.
28. Although the types of costs covered would be similar to those of United
Nations peacekeeping, the rates and structures of reimbursement used by the United
Nations are based on costs, planning assumptions and operational requirements that
are different from those applicable to African Union peace support operations. Even
contingents deployed to United Nations peacekeeping missions with more robust
requirements have experienced difficulties in fulfilling provisions under th e existing
United Nations contingent-owned equipment system, as evidenced by the
discussions during the 2017 session of the Working Group on Contingent -Owned
Equipment (see A/C.5/71/20). In Somalia, the United Nations contingent-owned

17-07675

9/19

S/2017/454

equipment system has struggled to meet the requirements of contingents deployed to
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) engaged in combat operations.
On average, the equipment deployed by AMISOM contingents is subject to greater
wear and tear and has a much higher likelihood of loss or damage due to hostile
action than that deployed to United Nations peacekeeping missions. It follows,
therefore, that the African Union should develop personnel and con tingent-owned
equipment reimbursement systems applicable for its peace support operations.
29. Financing of reimbursements to African Union troop - and police-contributing
countries under rates developed for African Union peace support operations can
either remain the responsibility of the African Union or be shared between the
African Union and the United Nations. However, before such reimbursement can be
financed through United Nations assessed contributions, the rates of reimbursement
must be approved by the General Assembly. The General Assembly should also
consider the human rights due diligence policy-related implications of the payment
of reimbursement through assessed contributions.

B.

Financing models
30. The Security Council has, in the past, requested the establishment of trust
funds through which to support African Union peace support operations through
voluntary contributions. As noted in the report of the joint review, trust funds have
been a flexible means of meeting targeted requirements, particularly when used to
supplement other types of support (A/71/410-S/2016/809, para. 59). However, past
experience has demonstrated that trust funds do not provide an adequate, predictable
or sustainable source of funding. A trust fund should therefore not be the primary
source of financing for a peace support operation but would supplement funding
from the African Union Peace Fund and other sources of funding.
31. The Security Council could also consider a number of potential financing
models through which assessed contributions could be used to support a peace
support operation, as illustrated below.
Subvention
32. Requirements for an African Union deployment, in exceptional or emergency
circumstances where shortfalls in available resources from the Peace Fund and other
sources of funding are experienced, could potentially be financed through a
subvention by the United Nations. Subventions have previously been used to meet
urgent requirements of non-United Nations organizations, although none have been
for field operations. Requests for subventions must be fully justified, but are not
required to be as detailed as formal budget proposals for appropriation and can be
prepared more quickly.
33. In previous cases, an organization would identify the shortfall in available
funding against its planned resource requirements, which would give rise to a
request for a subvention from the United Nations. Likewise, the African Union
Commission would first determine the amount of funding shortfall required from
the United Nations and make a formal request to me for a subvention. I would
inform the Security Council of the request through an exchange of letters and
subsequently transmit the request to the General Assembly for approval. A
subvention, which is sought in exceptional or emergency circumstances, can provide
resources only for a single budget period. Furthermore, the Genera l Assembly
requires reports on how funds provided through a subvention were utilized. All
subventions require the approval of the General Assembly and, because they are
facilitated by an authority to enter into commitments as opposed to an

10/19

17-07675

S/2017/454

appropriation, they have a cash flow impact upon the United Nations and would
require a working capital reserve, such as the Peacekeeping Reserve Fund.
Joint financing of a jointly developed budget
34. Another option for the financing of an African Union peace suppo rt operation
is a formal budget financed partially through United Nations assessed contributions
but managed by the African Union. Budget estimates could be developed jointly by
the United Nations Secretariat and the African Union Commission. The resulting
joint budget submission would be used as the basis for my budget report presented
to the General Assembly for its consideration and approval. The appropriation of the
United Nations share of the approved budget would be apportioned among its
Member States on the basis of the appropriate scale of assessments, while the
African Union share of the approved budget would be charged to the African Union
Peace Fund.
35. This financing model has not previously been used in a peace operation or
field context and efforts would be required before the two organizations would be in
a position to operationalize this model, including agreement on a joint budget
estimation process with agreed planning assumptions and methodologies for
defining costs for my budgetary submission, expenditure monitoring and budget
performance reporting, oversight and audit arrangements and financial reporting
requirements. Development of these processes, as well as the structures required to
implement them, would further enhance the capacity of the African Union
Commission to effectively and accountably manage its peace support operations in
the future.
United Nations support office
36. A fourth option is for the Security Council to authorize the establishment of a
United Nations support office financed through assessed contributions, to undertake
specific tasks determined by the Security Council to support an African Union peace
support operation. This model has been used in Somalia since 2009 to support
AMISOM, through the United Nations Support Office for AMISOM (UNSOA) and
the United Nations Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS). The specific tasks
delivered would be specified by the Security Council and should be determined on
the basis of a comparative advantage exercise and an assessme nt of other sources of
external financial and in-kind support to the African Union. The deployment of
United Nations enabling units to support an African Union mission experiencing
challenges generating such capabilities could be envisaged through a suppor t office
arrangement. As with UNSOA and UNSOS, United Nations assessed contributions
would be used only to finance the United Nations support office and its activities.
This model has the benefit of clear accountability for the management of United
Nations resources but requires strong coordination at all levels to ensure the overall
coherence of the combined operations. However, the AMISOM experience has
shown the limitations of the support office model in effectively supporting highly
kinetic combat missions.
Joint financing of a hybrid mission
37. The final option envisages the joint financing of a United Nations-African
Union hybrid mission managed by the United Nations, but for which the African
Union bears a portion of the costs in line with its c ommitment to meet some of the
financial requirements of its own peace support operations. Hybrid missions benefit
from the consolidation of military and political efforts from both organizations into
a single structure in support of a peace process and also provide a peace support
operation with the full spectrum of support available to United Nations
17-07675

11/19

S/2017/454

peacekeeping operations, including backstopping support from Headquarters and
access to strategic deployment stocks and the Peacekeeping Reserve Fund. The
establishment of a mission as a hybrid mission may also be necessary for political
reasons. However, a hybrid mission may not be appropriate for all operations,
including those focused on combat operations. Costs for hybrid missions could be
apportioned between the two organizations.

V. Mission support considerations
38. The Security Council has repeatedly stressed the importance of partnership
between the United Nations and African Union and of this being underpinned by
principles such as comparative advantage, burden-sharing, jointness, transparency
and accountability. These principles also apply to mission support.
39. Comparative advantage is the ability of an actor to undertake an activity at a
lower opportunity cost than other actors. Opportunity cost should be considered in
the broadest sense, including political, security and financial considerations. In the
integrated assessment and planning process used in the United Nations, these
assessments consider each actor’s legal mandate, demonstrated capacity and ability
to provide a unique contribution in the selected area. Comparative advantage
assessments are context-specific and comparative advantages are, by definition,
relative. In the context of partnerships with regional organizations, comparat ive
advantages may be identified during a strategic assessment, separate technical
surveys and during the course of a joint planning process.
40. While the United Nations has, over several decades, developed extensive
experience, expertise, capacity and processes in the area of mission support and
related tasks, this does not always translate into a comparative advantage for all
support tasks. Moreover, comparative advantages may evolve over time or be
determined by unique circumstances in a particular context. For example, should the
United Nations be required to develop entirely different processes and systems to
undertake a support task in a different manner and under different conditions than in
United Nations missions, it may be more effective for another actor to deliver that
form of support.
41. Transfer of tasks from one actor to another may take place upon start -up,
during the sustainment phase, or during or in anticipation of a transition. As the
African Union develops its internal capacities, including the continental logistics
base and acquisition capacity, it is most likely that it will gain the comparative
advantage for additional support responsibilities.
Flexible model for mission support
42. Several mission support models have, in the past, been used to support
missions mandated or authorized by the African Union. The support package model
which has evolved over time to support AMISOM represents the most
comprehensive arrangement involving multiple actors, namely the United Nations,
the African Union, troop- and police-contributing countries, and subregional and
other partners including the European Union. In other recent African Union peace
support operations in Mali and the Central African Republic, the United Nations
provided support through management of a multi-partner trust fund, but had a
limited role in mission support to the forces prior to the transition of those two
missions into United Nations peacekeeping operations. Instead, external partners
augmented the capacities of the African Union in those operations and also provided
direct support to national contingents. Finally, for operations in which contingents
are primarily operating in their own national territory such as the Multinational
12/19

17-07675

S/2017/454

Joint Task Force to combat Boko Haram and the African Union-led Regional Task
Force for the elimination of the Lord’s Resistance Army, mission support is
primarily the responsibility of the individual troop -contributing countries, to whom
partners provide support on a voluntary and bilateral ba sis.
43. In situations where mission support requires collaboration between numerous
entities to succeed, mission support is most effective when each actor performs
tasks within its expertise, with clearly defined roles and responsibilities and under a
clearly understood command and control framework. However, best practice
indicates that some planning, coordination and compliance elements should always
remain joint responsibilities in a true partnership setting. Mission support
arrangements for African Union peace support operations cannot rely on fixed
templates. Instead, a flexible approach should be employed based on standard
mission support principles adapted and applied to the context and requirements of a
peace support operation to identify which actor — whether the African Union
Commission, the United Nations Secretariat, troop - or police-contributing countries,
subregional or external partners — has the comparative advantage for each mission
support task. Mission support would be considered from the earliest stages of
planning, as support considerations affect other mandating and financing decisions.
Options for mission support would be presented to the Peace and Security Council
and the Security Council as part of the options developed through the jo int strategic
assessment and in alignment with the recommended financing models.
Principles of mission support
44. Mission support to an African Union peace support operation should be
provided in a timely, efficient, effective and accountable manner. General principles
governing mission support should include the use of managed and phased
deployment; a light, flexible support footprint utilizing the capabilities of troop and
police contributors, enabling units and implementing partners; and multiple a nd
combined lines of supply through commercial contracts, military enablers and force
assets. Logistical operations should be designed effectively to avoid double
handling and multiple stages of interim storage and waste, keeping in mind that
mission operations and infrastructure should pose minimal impact on natural
resources, the environment, surrounding communities and cultural sites.
45. Troop- and police-contributing countries are responsible for the preparation of
formed units for service in African Union peace operations. Units should be vetted
during selection, adequately trained and fully equipped. They must deploy with the
required minimum capacity to ensure self-sufficiency for life support during the
initial phase and the capability to be self-sustaining thereafter. Troop- and policecontributing countries should maintain over-the-horizon support, including supply
chains for consumables and spare parts for their deployed units. The critical role of
bilateral partners in assisting troop- and police-contributing countries to meet gaps
in equipment and capabilities must be acknowledged. In addition to operational
requirements, predeployment training must provide personnel with the
understanding of their obligations under international humanitarian, h uman rights
and refugee law as well as standards of conduct, including with regard to the
prohibition against sexual exploitation and abuse, and there must be sufficient
command and control within national contingents to enforce discipline and ensure
adherence to these standards.
46. Support provided by the United Nations would take into account
considerations such as the safety and security and welfare of United Nations
personnel; provision of support in a fully transparent and accountable manner;
conformity with United Nations rules and regulations; and strict compliance with
the human rights due diligence policy and standards of conduct. These arrangements
17-07675

13/19

S/2017/454

would be set out in a memorandum of understanding between the United Nations
and the African Union and in line with United Nations standards and practices.
Mission support tasks
47. Regardless of the mandate of a specific mission, each mission must have the
capability to undertake a core set of mission support tasks in order to deliver on its
mandate. The decision to assign responsibility for delivering on these tasks to the
African Union, the United Nations or another entity would be based upon the
determination of comparative advantage on a case-by-case basis. These tasks
include, but are not limited to:
• recruitment and personnel management
• budgeting, financial and audit management
• reimbursement and claims management
• procurement, acquisition and contracts management
• property management
• movement control
• surface transport
• air transport
• rations management and catering services
• fuel management
• general supplies
• warehousing and material handling
• water and wastewater management
• solid waste and hazardous waste management
• power generation and energy efficiency
• engineering, facilities and camp services management
• vehicle fleet management and maintenance
• medical services including medical evacuation capacity
• equipment verification
• geospatial information systems and cartographic services
• communications and information technology systems
• environmental management
• support to and implementation of compliance and accountability frameworks
on human rights, international humanitarian law and conduct and disciplin e
• welfare management
• other relevant senior management functions.
48. A detailed accountability framework would determine the policies and
procedures to govern actions to be taken, including clear delineation of roles and
responsibilities, delegations of authority, key performance indicators, monitoring
and reporting instruments, audit and other oversight requirements and complaints
and response mechanisms.
14/19

17-07675

S/2017/454

49. The report on the future of United Nations peace operations indicated that the
current administrative framework for United Nations peace operations is slow,
cumbersome and averse to risk, and current processes have proved ineffective when
applied to volatile environments. These challenges are relevant when the United
Nations is requested to support African Union peace support operations and are
compounded when the United Nations is asked to support higher -tempo operations
than those undertaken by the United Nations, as is the case with the offensive
operations currently mandated or authorized by the African Union, entailing combat
or counter-terrorism. As noted in the report of the joint review, the United Nations
must revise its internal administrative processes, policies and procedures to more
effectively support modern field operations, both its own and those of the African
Union. Indeed, I indicated during the Security Council thematic debate on
peacekeeping on 6 April 2017 that changing the rules and regulations to facilitate
the work of peace operations is one of nine areas of reform to be pursued by the
Organization.

VI. Compliance and oversight for United Nations support of
African Union peace support operations
50. The Security Council in its resolution 2320 (2016) encouraged the African
Union to finalize its human rights and conduct and discipline frameworks to ensure
that its peace support operations are conducted in compliance with international
humanitarian and human rights standards and to ensure oversight and accountability,
underscoring the importance of these commitments and the requirement for
oversight by the Security Council for operations authorized by the Security Council.
The contours of this framework were outlined in the report of the High
Representative for the African Union Peace Fund of August 2016. The African
Union Commission is working on mainstreaming human rights as part of mission
planning and management as well as standardizing protection mechanisms — which
currently exist only in AMISOM — across all of its missions. Pursuant to resolution
2320 (2016), the African Union is expected to provide an update on revised
benchmarks and timelines for the implementation of the outstanding elements of t he
frameworks.

A.

Human rights
51. The need to develop and implement a robust and effective human rights
framework for African Union peace support operations has previously been
recognized by the African Union, the United Nations and United Nations Member
States. Some of the peace support operations the African Union is likely to
undertake, specifically high-tempo combat missions, carry their own specific risks
and requirements in relation to compliance with international human rights,
humanitarian and refugee standards.
52. Building and implementing an adequate human rights framework and
establishing the related capacity for peace support operations will require a
significant political and financial investment in both organizations by the
international community, member States and troop-contributing countries. The
current capacity of the African Union consists of a very small number of dedicated
staff.
53. Considering its own mandate and institutional experience, the United Nations
is in a strong position to support and advise the African Union on the establishment
and adoption of relevant policies, methodologies, guidance and mechanisms in the

17-07675

15/19

S/2017/454

field of selection and screening, training, conduct and discipline, monitoring,
accountability, protection of civilians, rules and regulations guiding African Union
peace support operations, and planning. It will be critical to ensure that the United
Nations is able to devote specific and adequate capacity to meet African Union
requests for support.
54. In 2011, the United Nations adopted a formalized approach to the issue of
human rights standards and United Nations support to security forces with the
promulgation of the human rights due diligence policy. That policy sets out
principles and measures to ensure that such support is consistent with the
Organization’s purposes and principles as set out in the Charter and its obligations
under international law to respect, promote and encourage respect for international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law. Observations from recent experiences
in implementing the policy for peace support operations were presented to the
Security Council in the report of the joint review ( A/71/410-S/2016/809). While the
human rights due diligence policy is primarily an internal United Nations
requirement, its implementation undoubtedly provides a space to support
compliance by African Union operations with international human rights and
humanitarian standards and therefore improves the c hances of the ultimate success
of the operation.
55. To realize fully the strengthened partnership between the United Nations and
African Union on peace and security, the United Nations needs to significantly
reinforce its existing capacity, processes and structures at Headquarters to ensure
full compliance with the requirements under the hu man rights due diligence policy,
including with regard to communication to entities receiving its support, and
clarification of roles and responsibilities for conducting risk assessments and
implementing mitigating measures. In addition, the United Nations must have
appropriate capacity to perform the required monitoring and reporting functions in
the theatre of operations receiving support.

B.

Conduct and discipline
56. The management of autonomous forces in peacekeeping, including those of
the African Union, requires a framework of accountability intrinsic to an external
command and control structure, operating within the standards of conduct of the
African Union. It also requires monitoring mechanisms to ensure compliance and
mechanisms to ensure the provision of victim assistance, where required.
57. The African Union needs to put in place a conduct and discipline framework
that sets out strategic, programmatic and operational expectations for all
stakeholders — including the United Nations, the African Union and troop - and
police-contributing countries. This framework would include (a) standards that are
equivalent to United Nations standards and are reflected in standard agreements
with contributing countries and host country authorities, as appropriate;
(b) monitoring mechanisms to ensure the consistent implementation of standards of
conduct, including systems to support monitoring activities, such as misc onduct
tracking databases; (c) compliance mechanisms to ensure preventative measures,
including training to enable uniformed components to discharge their
responsibilities, vetting and awareness-raising; (d) accountability measures to
address cases of non-compliance, including but not limited to immediate removal
and replacement of individuals reported to have violated conditions of service,
sanctions in substantiated cases and criminal prosecution, as applicable, in the most
serious cases such as those involving sexual exploitation and abuse; (e) remediation
measures to address harm done to victims of violations of the standards of conduct,

16/19

17-07675

S/2017/454

including sexual exploitation and abuse; and (f) reporting mechanisms to ensure
transparency in matters of conduct and discipline.
58. The standards for deployment set out in the United Nations operational
guidance for the implementation of Security Council resolution 2272 (2016) are a
critical point of reference for the African Union in developing its conduct and
discipline framework and in considering the criteria that should be in place prior to
the deployment of military contingents and formed police units.
59. There is also a need for a joint agreement between the United Nations and the
African Union which describes the level, types and extent of support that would be
expected from the United Nations in the implementation of the African Union’s
conduct and discipline framework, while ensuring that responsibility for addressing
violations such as sexual exploitation and abuse remain with those directly
accountable.

VII. Conclusion
60. Over the years, the partnership between the United Nations and African Union
has evolved significantly, as noted on many previous occasions. The Security
Council in resolution 2320 (2016) reaffirmed its commitment to further enhancing
the Organization’s collaboration with the African Union, and that resolution
therefore represented a key milestone in the partnership. In the past six months,
much progress has been made at the technical level on different modalities for
United Nations support to African Union peace support operations as well as on the
necessary safeguards to be put in place to ensure a proper accountability framework,
with a view to more systematically operationalizing the future partnership.
61. African Union peace support operations should be seen as a tool of the entire
international community to address crises on the African continent. This must be
factored in the development of new strategic thinking on the necessary diversity of
peace operations. Considering the limitations of the United Nations peacekeeping
doctrine with regard to peace enforcement and counter -terrorism, the African Union
peace support operations are a tool for the United Nations to better discharge its
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security in certain
situations. This ability of the African Union therefore constit utes an asset for the
international community. The African initiatives in the Sahel, in the Lake Chad
Basin and in Somalia illustrate the increasing complementary role played by the
African Union.
62. However, the joint review of available mechanisms to finance and support
African Union peace support operations mandated by the Security Council noted
how African Union peace support operations had suffered from a number of
recurrent capacity gaps and challenges, arising in part from the Union’s limited
finances. Therefore, while it is clear that the African Union must continue to build
its capacity to plan, finance, sustain and oversee its own missions, predictable and
adequate funding for African Union operations is absolutely crucial for the
international community as a whole.
63. In the past decade, we have seen that these operations benefit from joint
oversight by the two organizations. Notwithstanding the many outstanding technical
aspects related to United Nations support to African Union peace support
operations, the principal decision to take forward sustainable financing and expand
the scope of mission support for African Union peace support operations is first and
foremost political.

17-07675

17/19

S/2017/454

64. While the proposed framework of decision-making will make joint action
more effective, further technical work needs to be undertaken to agree on the
modalities for joint analysis, planning and assessment as well as reporting to the
relevant intergovernmental bodies. Such tools could support Member States in
making informed decisions to address any given situation and help to ensure
coordinated delivery on mandated tasks by both the United Nations and the African
Union. In order for this work to continue, I recommend that the Council endorse the
proposed joint assessment and planning process set forth in this report, which can be
adapted on a case-by-case basis, to support the decision-making of legislative
bodies of the respective organizations.
65. Beyond the use of voluntary contributions through trust funds, the Unit ed
Nations has identified four options through which United Nations assessed
contributions could be used to help to meet the requirements of African Union peace
support operations, noting that no single option is appropriate for all situations:
(a) subvention in exceptional or emergency circumstances, (b) joint financing of a
jointly developed budget, (c) United Nations support office and (d) joint financing
of a hybrid mission. Three of these models are available for use today. The option of
a jointly developed budget would require additional work by the Secretariat and the
African Union Commission before it could be put into practice. In the interim, I
would strongly recommend that the Security Council endorse this option in
principle.
66. The United Nations recommends that the African Union develop its own
reimbursement systems for personnel and contingent -owned equipment that meet
the requirements of its peace support operations. The Secretariat is prepared to work
with all relevant stakeholders to help to develop such a framework, recognizing that
General Assembly approval is required for reimbursement rates determined by the
African Union to be payable through United Nations assessed contributions and for
a process to be established to facilitate the application of the human rights due
diligence policy to reimbursement.
67. In the present report it is also noted that mission support approaches must be
adapted for the context of a specific African Union peace support operation. A
flexible mission support model should be implemented in which tasks such as
planning, coordination, verifications and compliance are shared. Developing joint
planning and coordination structures in which the African Union and the United
Nations function as partners and on the basis of their respective responsibilities as
spelled out in the Charter and the Constitutive Act, as described above, is important
in this regard. The roles of support providers should be determined through an
assessment of comparative advantage and should be subject to review and change.
The multiplicity of support actors, including troop - and police-contributing
countries, the African Union, the United Nations, subregional and other partners,
will increase transaction costs and create challenges in coordina tion but may be
necessary for the success of operations given the unique capabilities and expertise
each actor can bring to bear.
68. As was noted in the report of the joint review, the United Nations must revise
its own internal administrative processes, policies and procedures to better support
modern field operations, whether its own or those of the African Union. I intend to
review these procedures in the contexts of the ongoing peace and security
architecture review and management reform processes. T he time has come to put the
requirements of the field at the heart of the operations of the United Nations.
69. I welcome the efforts made by the African Union in developing compliance
and accountability frameworks for human rights and conduct and discipl ine,
including policies, mechanisms and processes to integrate these elements into the
18/19

17-07675

S/2017/454

planning, functions and conduct of its operations as well as the capacity and
expertise required for their implementation.
70. Significant efforts and investment in both organizations are still required to
complete the development of effective and adequate frameworks and capacities for
compliance and accountability in these areas. The United Nations stands ready to
support the African Union in these efforts, though it ma y require additional
resources to effectively support the conceptualization, establishment and
improvement of relevant mechanisms to prevent and address violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law and cases of sexual
exploitation and abuses committed in the context of security operations.
71. We live in a highly volatile and turbulent world. It is incumbent upon those
with the vested responsibility for ensuring peace and security to consider a full
range of responses required to address existing and emerging threats. Fully
operationalizing the United Nations partnership with the African Union, in
particular its peace support operations, presents a unique opportunity for the
international community to provide a timely and context -specific response to an
emerging crisis. Such a partnership is imperative, given the complexity and
multiplicity of conflicts today.

17-07675

19/19
