48

General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Ses~ion

Having considered the recommendations of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme at its first session 40 arising from the report of
the Secretary-General41 prepared in response to General
Assembly resolution 3001 (XXVII) and from the report of the meeting of experts held at Vancouver,
Canada, from 8 to 12 May 1973, 42 as well as the comments of the Economic and Social Council thereon, 411
Stressing the urgent need for early and co-ordinated
action by members of the international community to
safeguard and improve the quality of life in human
settlements in view of accelerating urbanization
throughout thc world, which is often accompanied by
rural depopulation,
Bearing in mind the importance to the over-all objectives of the International Development Strategy for
the Second United Nations Development Decade44 of
the improvement in the quality of life in human settlements in developing countries as an integral component
in the process of development,
Welcoming the co-operative participation of the
United Nations Environment Programmc and the Centre for Housing, Building and Planning in the detailed
planning for the Conference-Exposition,
Requesting that the Secretary-General take into
account, in the preparations for the ConferenceExposition, the results and recommendations of other
international conferences, including the World Population Conference to be held in 1974,
l. Decides that the United Nations ConferenceExposition on Human Settlements will take place in
Vancouver, Canada, from 31 May to 11 June 1976;
2. Endorses in general the recommendations put
forth by the Governing Council o.° the United Nations
Environment Programme regarding the purposes, objectives and method of financing of the ConferenceExposition;
3. A f]irms that the main purposc of the ConferenceExposition should be to serve as a practica) means to
exchange information ahout solutions to problems of
human settlements against a bread background of environmental and other concerns which may lcad to the
formation of policies and actions by Governments and
international organizations;
4. Requests the Secretarv-General to assume the
over-all responsibility for the Conference-Exposition,
bearing in mind the views expressed during the debates
of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme at its first session;
5. Establishes a Preparatory Committee for the
United Nations Conference-Exposition on Human
Setticments, to advise the Secretary-General, consisting
of highly qualified representatives nominated by the
Govcrnments of the following Member States: Argentin:•, Australia, Austria. Brazil, Burundi ~anada, Central African Republic, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica,
Czcchoslovakia, Domi1lican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
Ethiopia, Finland, Frnnce, Gabon, German Democratic
Hq,ublic, Germany (Federal Rcpublic uf), Ghana,
::ir.:ccc, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Tran. Iraq, Ttaly.,
40 O;iú·i<1i

l?ecords of thc General Asscmbly, Twenty-ei_,:,hth
(A/9025), annex I, decision 4 (I).

\c•.si,,n, S11['{'lemc11t No. 25

,, l INEf', (iC',16 anJ Alld.i
-1~ F,,1 1J1c r-"rort nf 1hc

Fxccutivc D,:,:ctor on the ,rceting

•.·,f cx¡xrt~. ~ee UNEP /GC/L.2.

U[/icial Records of the General Assemb/y, Twentyeighth Session, Supplemenr No. 3 (A/9003 and Corr.l),
chap. XTIT. See also E/ AC'.6/SR.666.

Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Libyan Arab Republic,
Malaysia, Mexico, Netherlands, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Philippines, Romania, Sierra Lcone, Swcdcn, Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Irl'.land, United Republic of Tanzania, United Statcs of
America, Upper Volta, Uruguay, Yugoslavia, Zaire and
Zambia;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to set up immediately a small conference secretariat, drawing
upon the resources of thc United Nations system,
especially those of the secretariat of the United Nations Environment Programme and thc Department
of Economic and Social Affairs, and to :1ppoint at an
early date a Secretary-General who will rcport through
the Executive Director of the Unitcd Nations Envirnnment Programme and work in clase co-operation with
the Under-Secretary-Gcneral for Economic and Soci,11
Affairs, the cxecutive secrctarics of thc regional cco-nomic commissions and the cxccutivc he;Íds pf thc
specialized agencies;
7. Invites the spccialized agencies, thc lntern:ttion~l Atomic Energy Agency and thc regional ccnnom1c commissions to collaborate closely with tlic
Secretary-General in the preparations for the Confrrence-Exposition and to assist, as appropriate. in tlic
work of the Preparatory Committec, in order to he fullv
able to share in the results of the Confcrcnce-Expo~ttion and in the action following therefrom;
8. Urges the intergovernmental and non-governme!1tal org~nizations concerned to lcnd every possibk
1Ss1stance m the preparations for thc Confcrcn,·,· Exposition;
9. Requests the Secretary-Gcneral ,md thc regional
economic commissions, in collaboration with thc Pr\'.paratory Committee, to take the neccssary stcps, as
~art of t~e preparations for the Conferencc-E-xposi t10n, to brmg to global attention the naturc and rclativc
importance of the problems of human settlements;
10. Requests the Sccretary-Gcncr::il to suhmit hril·[
progress reports, through the Governing C"ouncil , if
the United Nations Environment Programme, tn tlh'
General Asscmbly ::it its twcnty-ninth and thirtictl!
sessions.
2199th p!enar_v meetin.~
13 Decelllbcr 1973
3129 (XXVJIJ). Co-operation in 1h1· fü,Jr] of tlw
environnu•nt eoncernin¡,!; ~iatural r1•!mu1Ti·-1
shared hy two or mort• Statt>s

The General Assembly,
Reaf]irming principles 21, 22 and 24 of the DccLu:1tion of the United Nations Confercnce on thc H11m:111
Environment,·1" hcld at Stockholm from 5 tn J 6 Jm,
1972,
Rccalling its rc-solutions 2995 ( XXVTl). '.:' 1)' /'.
(XXVII) and 2997 (XXVII) of 15 Dcccmhn 1<r/.:
relating to co-operaticm herwecn Statcs ir; thc líL·lcl
the environment, t0 international rc:,ponsihilit,
States in rcgard to thc c11, ironrncnl anti id thc ,i~t.:
Iishment of thc Gon:rnim~ Council uf the Unik,1 N.•
tions Env1ronmenl Prograrnmc, rcspcctiwiy.

4 c See

H

Resolution 262.6 (XX Vi.

4 5 See Report of tlze Unitcd Nation.1· Conf Prencc on t/1,.
Human Environment (United Nations publication, Sales No ..
E.73.II.A.14), chap. l.

Resolutioru1 adopted on the report8 of the Second Committee

Reafji,rming the duty of the international community
to adopt measures to protect and improve the environment, and particularly the need for continuous intemational collaboration to that end,
Convinced of the need to pursue, in the field of the
environment, the elaboration of intemational norms
conducive to the achievement of those purposes,
Taking note with satisfaction of the important Economic Declaration adopted by the Fourth Conference
of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Algiers from 5 to 9 September 1973, 48
Conscious of the importance and urgency of safeguarding the conservation and exploitation of the natural resources shared by two or more States, by means
of an effective system of co-operation, as indicated in
the above-mentioned Economic Declaration of Algiers,
l. Considers that it is necessary to ensure effective
co-operation between countries through the establishment of adequate intemational standards for the conservation and harmonious exploitation of natural resources common to two or more States in the context
of the normal relations existing between them;
2. Considers further that co-operation between
countries sharing such natural resources and interested
in their exploitation must be developed on the basis of
a system of information and prior consultation within
the framework of the normal relations existing between them;
3. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Prograrnme, in keeping with its
function of promoting international co-operation according to the mandate conferred upan it by the General Assembly, to take duly into account the preceding
paragraphs and to report on measures adopted far
their implementation;
4. Urges Member States, within the framework of
their mutual relations, to take fully into account the
provisions of the present resolution.
2199th plenary meeting
13 December 1973

49

Mindful of the aims expresscd in the Prcamblc and
in Articles 55 and 56 of the Chartcr of the Unitcd
Nations concerning the employmcnt of international
machinery for the promotion of thc economic and
social advanccment of all pcoples,
Considering the important role assigncd to housing
as part of the International Development Strategy for
the Second United Nations Devclopment Decadc, 48
Further recalling that in its resolution 2718 (XXV)
the General Assemblv set out broad directions and
measures essential for· the improvcmcnt of human settlements,
Reaffirming in particular recommcndations 1, 15, 16
and 17 of the Action Plan for thc Human Environment49 adopted by the United N ations Confcrencc on
the Human Environment, held at Stockholm frorn 5
to 16 June 1972,
Noting the high priority accorded to human scttlcments and human health, habitat and well-being by
the Governing Counc1, of the United Nations Environment Programme at its first session,
Noting the rapid deterioration of the world-wide
human settlement situation and its effect on the qualitv
of life of vast numbers of people,
·
Recognizing the need for intcrnational efforts to develop new and additional approaches to these problcms,
espccially in thc developing countrics,
Recalling its resolution 2998 (XXVTl) of 15 Dccember 1972,
Noting that the rcport of the Secretary-General 5º
shows no evidence of the identification or establishment
of ncw criteria, as envísaged in General Assembly rcso-lution 2998 (XXVII),
1. l\equests the Secretary-General to undertakc, as
a matter of priority, the comprehensive analytical study
envisaged in General Assembly resolution 2998
(XXVII), which would provide new criteria govcming
lending and interest rates for housing and human
settkmt.:nts by intcrnational institutions;

2. Recommends that any new criteria should also
3130 (XXVIII). Criteria governing multilateral
financing of homiing and human settlements

The General Assembly,
Having considered tbe report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on
the work of its first session, 47
Recalling its resolutions 1393 (XIV) of 20 November 1959, 1508 (XV) of 12 December 1960, 1676
(XVI) of 18 December 1961, 1917 (XVIII) of 5 December 1963, 2036 (XX) of 7 December 1965, 2598
(XXIV) of 16 December 1969, 2626 (XXV) of 24
October 1970, 2718 (XXV) of 15 December 1970 and
2997 (XXVII), 2999 (XXVII), 3000 (XXVII),
3001 (XXVII) and 3002 (XXVII) of 15 December
1972,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 1170 (XLI) of 5 August 1966,

be applicable in principie to any institt1tion or arrangc-

ment emanating from resolution 2999 (XXVH) or
from any other action by the General Assembly re
garding the financing of housing and human settlement~;
3. Requests the collaboration and co-operation uf
the lntemational Bank for Reconstruction and Devclorment, the Goveming Council of the Unitcd Nations
Environment Programme and the Unitcd Nations Dc-velopment Programme with the Secrctary-Gcneral in
undertaking thc abovc-mcntioned study;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to rcport to tlw
General Assembly at its twenty-ninth session on tlw
implernentation of thc present resolution.
2199th plenary meeting
13 December 1973
48 Resolution

2626 (XXV).
Report of thl' Unitcd Nati,ms Conferem e on tite,
Human Envirm:m,,,zt ( United Nations publication, Sa!Ps 1'!<>.
E.73.ILA.14), chap. lL
M A/9163.
49 See

48A/9330 and Corr.1, p. 57.
the General Assembly, Twf'n/y-eighth
Session, Supp/ement No. 25 (A/9025).
41 Ofjicial Records o/
