S/2006/79

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 February 2006
Original: English

Letter dated 2 February 2006 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the decision of the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union adopted at its 40th meeting, held in Addis Ababa on 6 October
2005, and to Security Council resolution 1633 (2005) of 21 October 2005, under
which an International Working Group was created to assist the Government of Côte
d’Ivoire in the implementation of its programme and to consolidate and strengthen
existing follow-up mechanisms. Please find attached the communiqué issued by the
International Working Group following its third meeting, held in Abidjan on
15 January 2006 (see annex). I should be grateful if you would bring the present
letter and its annex to the attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

06-23561 (E)

080206

*0623561*

080206

S/2006/79

Annex
International Working Group meeting of 15 January 2006
[Original: French]

Final communiqué
1.
The third ministerial meeting of the International Working Group was held in
Abidjan on 15 January 2006 under the joint chairmanship of Mr. Oluyemi Adeniji,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Nigeria, and Mr. Pierre Schori, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General of the United Nations for Côte d’Ivoire. It
was attended by Ministers from Ghana, Niger, France, the Republic of South Africa
and the United Kingdom, as well as the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, the Commissioner for Development and Humanitarian Aid of the
European Commission, the Executive Secretary of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and representatives of the United States of America,
Guinea, Benin, the International Organization of la Francophonie, the World Bank
and the Office of the High Representative for Elections.
2.
The Prime Minister briefed the Group on developments since his appointment,
the challenges facing his Government and his strategy for overcoming them.
3.
The Group congratulated the Prime Minister on the formation of the new
Government and the rapid commencement of its work, which set the stage for
ensuring the effective and timely implementation of the road map. In this regard, the
Group affirms its full support for the Prime Minister and requests the Mediation
Group to maintain a close working relationship with the Prime Minister. The Group
also welcomes the commitment by the Prime Minister to work in a spirit of
consensus.
4.
Pursuant to paragraph 11 of Security Council resolution 1633 (2005),
concerning the expiry of the mandate of the National Assembly, the Group held
extensive consultations with the Ivorian parties on the functioning of State
institutions. The Group reached the conclusion that the mandate of the National
Assembly, which ended on 16 December 2005, should not be extended.
5.
During the transitional period, however, the Group recommends that the Prime
Minister, in consultation with the Head of State, and drawing on the experience of
the former parliamentarians, should entrust them with specific tasks, as he deems fit,
with a view to the promotion of peace and national reconciliation.
6.
Concerned about the impasse in the Independent Electoral Commission, the
Group takes note of the intention of the High Representative for Elections to issue
his ruling early enough to ensure that the Commission is operational before the
Group’s next meeting.
7.
The Group strongly condemns the serious incidents at the military camps of
Akouédo which follow a series of similar incidents aimed at disrupting progress in
the peace process. The Group also condemns the gross human rights violations
targeting innocent civilians, including foreign nationals, that resulted from the
Akouédo incidents. The Group encourages the Government and impartial forces to
improve their coordination with a view to creating a secure environment for a

2

06-23561

S/2006/79

smooth implementation of the road map, particularly by guaranteeing freedom of
movement and freedom of political activities throughout the territory.
8.
The Group also notes with deep concern the inflammatory tone which
continues to be used by some political actors and media. Such a negative attitude
not only runs counter to the spirit of the peace and reconciliation process but also
represents a flagrant violation of United Nations resolutions.
9.
In order to assure the implementation of the identification process,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and the holding of elections in an
atmosphere of stability and security, the Group recommends that the United Nations
Security Council review the troop levels of the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire military and police force in conformity with paragraph 22 of Security
Council resolution 1633 (2005).
10.

06-23561

The Group will hold its next meeting on 17 February 2006 in Côte d’Ivoire.

3
