V.

tries during the 1990s in accordance with their
long-term national social and economic objectives;

2. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session on the implementation of the present resolution.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987

(b) To accept the generous otfer made by the Government of France to act as host to the Conference;

(c)
42/177.

133

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Second United Nations Conference on the
Least Developed Countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 40/205 of 17 December 1985, in
which it decided to carry out a global review and appraisal
ofthe implementation ofthe Substantial New Programme
of Action for the 1980s for the Least Developed
Countries 28 at a high level in 1990 and to determine the
precise level, mandate, date and venue for such a review,
as well as the preparatory process, at its forty-second session, in the light ofthe consultations that would take place
under the auspices of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, including those of the seventh
session of the Conference,
Bearing in mindthe Substantial New Programme of Action for the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries, in
which it was recommended that the lntergovernmental
Group on the Least Developed Countries of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development should
meet ata high level to carry out the mid-term global review of progress towards the implementation of the Programme of Action, and consider the possibility of holding
a global review at the end of the decade, which might, inter a/ia, take the form of a second United Nations conference on the least developed countries, 34
Recalling also the Final Act adopted by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development at its seventh
session, held at Geneva from 9 July to 3 August 1987, in
which the Conference recommended that a second United
Nations conference on the least developed countries
should be convened at a high level in 1990 to review and
appraise the implementation of the Substantial New Programme of Action, 35
Taking note of Trade and Develorment Board decision
349 (XXXIV) of 16 October 19873 on the preparations
for the global review and appraisal of the implementation
of the Substantial New Programme of Action,
Expressing deep concern at the continuing deterioration
in the overall socio-economic situation of the least developed countries,
l. Decides:
(a) To convene the Second United Nations Conference
on the Least Developed Countries at a high level in 1990.
The mandate of the Conference should be as follows:
(i) To review progress at the country level thus far in
the decade;
(ii) To review progress in international support measures and particularly in official development assistance;
(iii) In the light of (i) and (ii) above, to consider, formulate, and adopt appropriate national and international policies and measures for accelerating the
development process in the least developed coun-

34 Report of the United Nations Conference on rhe Least Developed
Countries, Paris, 1-14 September 1981 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.82.1.8), part one, sect. A, para. 119.
35 TD/351, para. 153.

To hold the Conference in September 1990;

(d) To convene one session ofthe Meeting ofGovemmental Experts of Donor Countries and Multilateral and
Bilateral Financia! and Technical Assistance Institutions
with Representa ti ves of the Least Developed Countries in
the spring of 1989 followed by one session ofthe Intergovemmental Group on the Least Developed Countries, as
Preparatory Committee for the Second United Nations
Conference on the Least Developed Countries, early in
1990 in order to prepare for the Conference; the duration
of these two meetings will be one and a half weeks and two
weeks respectively; the terms of reference of these meetings are annexed to the present resolution;

2. Decides to designate the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development as the focal point for the
preparations for the Second United Nations Conference
on the Least Developed Countries, and requests the Secretary-General ofthe United Nations to designate the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development to serve as Secretary-General ofthe Second United Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries and, in that capacity, to make ali necessary arrangements for the holding of the Conference;
3. Calls upon ali Governments, intergovernmental and
multilateral institutions and others concemed to take appropriate steps to ensure that adequate preparations are
made for the Conference and to participate effectively in
the two above-mentioned preparatory meetings;
4. Requests ali concerned organs, organizations and
bodies of the United Nations system to submit, before the
first preparatory meeting, reports containing a review of
the implementation ofthe Substantial New Programme of
Action for the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries
within their fields of competence and proposals for further
action as input to the preparations for the Conference;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, with the assistance
of the Director-General for Development and International Economic Co-operation and the Secretary-General
ofthe United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, to ensure the full mobilization and co-ordination of
ali organs, organizations and bodies ofthe United Nations
system in the preparations for the Conference;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to obtain, as has
been the past practice, extrabudgetary resources to ensure
the effective participation of the representatives of the
least developed countries through provision of the resources necessary to finance the travel expenses of at least
two representatives from each least developed country to
attend the preparatory meetings referred to in paragraph 1
above;
7. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit a
report to the General Assembly at its forty-third session
on the state of preparations for the Second U nited N ations
Conference on the Least Developed Countries.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

134
ANNEX
Terms of reference
A.

MEETING 0F ÜOVERNMENTAL ExPERTS 0F DoN0R C0UNTRIES AND
MULTILATERAL AND BILATERAL FINANCIAL ANO TECHNICAL
ASSISTANCE INSTITUTIONS WITH REPRESENTATIVES 0F THE LEAST
DEVEWPED C0UNTRIES

The purpose ofthe Meeting is to provide substantive inputs to the Second United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, to be
held in 1990. Taking into account the Substantial New Programme of
Action, the Meeting will be devoted to:
(a) Assessment of progress in the socio-economic situation of the
least developed countries during the 1980s in the light of ongoing national and international measures;
(b) Consideration of the requirements of the least developed countries that are of particular relevance to their development and that call
for strengthened efforts during the 1990s;
(e) Consideration and identification of appropriate national and international measures for accelerating the development process in the
least developed countries during the 1990s;
The results of the deliberations under (a), (b) and (e) above will be reported to the Conference through the Intergovernmental Group on the
Least Developed Countries of the U nited Nations Conference on Trade
and Development.
B.

INTERGOVERNMENTAL ÜR0UP 0N THE LEAST OEVEL0PED
C0UNTRIES 0F THE UNITED NATI0NS C0NFERENCE 0N TRADE AND
DEVEL0PMENT

(Preparatory Committee for the Second United Nations
Conference on the Least Developed Countries)
The Intergovernmental Group on the Least Developed Countries will
serve as the Preparatory Committee for the Second United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, to be held in 1990. The
Preparatory Committee will consider the following matters:
(a) Substantive preparation for the Conference on the basis of the report of the Meeting of Governmental Experts of Donor Countries and
Multilateral and Bilateral Financial and Technical Assistance Institutions with Representatives of the Least Developed Countries, and of ali
other relevan! inputs;
(b) Provisional agenda for the Second United Nations Conference on
the Least Developed Countries;
(e) Provisional rules of procedure of the Conference;
(d) Organization of work of the Conference.

42/178.

Effective mobilization and integration of
women in development

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the cross-sectoral and multidisciplinary nature ofthe issue ofwomen in development and the need to
consider the issue in its economic as well as social context,
Emphasizing the vital importance of national as well as
world economic growth and development to the effective
mobilization and integration of women in the economy,
Recognizing the central role of the Commission on the
Status of Women in monitoring the implementation ofthe
Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement
ofWomen 36 to the year 2000, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 40/108 of 13 December 1985,
Considering that the United Nations Development Fund
for Women plays a catalytic role in improving access by
women to development co-operation resources,

36 Report of the World Conference to Review and Appraise the
Achievements of the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality,
Development and Peace, Nairobi, 15-26 July 1985 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.85.IV. 10), chap. I, sect. A.

Recognizing the contribution made by the International
Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of
Wornen to increasing the participation of women at ali
levels in the development process,
Also recognizing the various initiatives taken in other
United Nations bodies aimed at improving the integration
of women in the process of development,
Bearing in mind paragraph 9 of the Nairobi Forwardlooking Strategies for the Advancement of Women,
Recognizing that women contribute significantly to the
overall economy, including sectors where the value of
their production is not fully accounted for, and that the
development process should improve and encourage their
greater participation in the labour market and active involvement in ali areas of the economy,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General3 7 on
progress in the preparation of the first regular update of
the World Survey on the Role of Women in Development, 38
1. We/comes Economic and Social Council resolution
1987/24 of 26 May 1987, particularly the agreement that
the Commission on the Status of Women should place appropriate emphasis on issues of women and development,
as addressed in chapter II ofthe Nairobi Forward-looking
Strategies for the Advancement of Women; 36
2. Emphasizes the need for a focused, action-oriented
approach in the preparation of the update of the World
Survey on the Role of Women in Development and, in this
regard, urges the Secretary-General, in preparing the first
draft, to ensure its full conformity with General Assembly
resolution 40/204 of 17 December 1985 and Economic
and Social Council resolution 1986/64 of 23 July 1986, in
particular by concentrating the update on the issues identified therein;
3. Urges the sectoral, fum;tional and regional intergovernmental bodies of the United Nations in the economic
and development fields to contribute actively to the work
of both the Economic and Social Council and the Second
Committee of the General Assembly relating to the integration of women in economic development, in line with
the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies and the systemwide medium-term plan for women and development, as
agreed to by the Council in its resolution 1987/86 of 8 July
1987;
4. Requests the Secretary-Gen·eral, in order to
strengthen further the work ofthe United Nations in integrating women effectively in economic programmes and
operational activities, as outlined in his report, 39 to prepare biennially, as an annex to the report called for in
paragraph 9 (b) of the present resolution:
(a) An update of mandates governing the integration
of women in economic development adopted by the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
Commission on the Status of Women and by world conferences of the United Nations system;40
(b) A list of the titles of ali subprogrammes and programme elements relating to the integration of women in
development, as contained in the proposed programme
budget and in revisions to the medium-term plan;
(e) A compilation of decisions taken by United Nations intergovernmental bodies other than the Commission on the Status of Women, the Economic and Social
Council and the General Assembly relating to the integra37 A/42/508.
38 United Nations publication, Sales No. E.86.IV.3.
39 A/42/273-E/1987/74 and Add. l.
40 See A/42/273/Add.l-E/1987/74/Add.1, annex l.
