UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

2430th

MEETING:

NEW

6 APRIL 1983

YORK

CONTENTS

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2430)

PQW
1
. . . . . . .. . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . .

Expression of thanks to the retiring President ..*...,...,...,....,........

1

Adoption of the agenda ..,........,.*...,...*....,....................

1

Letter dated 16 March 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Chad to the
United Nations addressedto the Resident of the Security Council (S/15643). . . =
l

l

1

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composedof capital letters combincd
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a referenceto a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/...)‘are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Cound. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appearsor in which information about
it is give&
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordancewith a system
adopted in 1964,are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions avrdlkcisiom of #he
Security Council. The new system, which has beenapplied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 196S,became fully operative on that date.

2430th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 6 April 1983, at 11 a.m.
President: Mrs. Jeane J. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America).

Council table: Mr. Soglo (Benin). Mr. Al-Al/ (Democratic Yemen),Mr. Khalil (Egyptl. Mr. Ibrahim (Ethiopia),
Mr. Boule (Gabon), Mr. Hayford(Ghana), Mr. Coumbassa
(Guinea), Mr. Rajaie-Khorassani (Islamic Republic of
Iran), Mr. Essy (Ivory Coast), Mr. Oumorou (Niger.
Mr. Sarre’ (Senegao, Mr. AbdaIla (Sudan), Mr. EIFattal (Syrian Arab Republic) and Mrs. Mairie (United
Republic of Cameroon) took the places reservedfor them
at the side of the Council chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Statesof America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.
Provisional

agenda (WAgenda12430)

1. Adoption of the agenda

The PRESIDENTz
Members of the Council have
before them document S/15672, which contains the text
of a draft resolution submitted by Chad.

2. Letter dated 16 March 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Chad to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council

4. In informal consultations.

3.

members of the Council
by the representative of
Jordan. 1 shall now. following discussions in intormal
consultations and the consensusarrived at therein. make
the following statement on behalf of members of the
have already heard the statement

(S/15643).

The meeting was called to order at I.40 p.m.

Council:
Expression

of thanks

to the retkIng

P&dent

“Following constihations with the members of the
Council, I have been authorized to make the following
statement on their behalf:

1. The PRESIDENT: At this, the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of April, I should like. on
behalf of the Council, to pay a tribute to the Presidentfor
the month of March, Sir John Thomson, Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland to the United Nations, for the
great skill and elegance with which he conducted the
business of the Council during that month.
Adoption

‘The Security Council has heard and taken note
of the statements made by the Foreign Minister of
Chad, and by the representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, in the debate on the letter dated 16
March 1983 from the representative
of Chad.

of the agenda

‘The members of the Council express their concern that the differences between Chad and the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
should not deteriorate
and therefore call on the parties to settle these differences without
undue delay and by peaceful
means, on the basis of the relevant princtples of the
Charter of the United Nations. and the Charter of
the Organitation
of African Unity, which demand
respect for political independence. sovereignty and
territorial integrity.

The agenda was adopted.
Letter
dated 16 March
1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Chad to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/15643)

2. The PRESIDENT: In accordancewith the decisions
taken at previous meetings on this item 12419th2428th
u&2429& meerings], I invite the representativesof Chad
and the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to take places at the
Council table: I invite the representativesof Benin, Democratic Yemen, Egypt, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana.
Guinea. the Islamic Republic of Iran, Ivory Coast, Niger.
Senegal, Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic and the
United Republic of Cameroon to take the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

‘In this connection.

the members

of the Council

have taken note with appreciation of the willingness expressed by both parties to discuss

their dif-

ferences and to resolve them peacefully and urgs
both sides to refrain from any actions which could
aepravate the current situation.

l me members
the Organization

At the invitation of the President,Mr. Barma (Chad) and
Mr. Treiki (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) took places at the
1

of the Council also note that
of African Unity. the donal

organization, is already seizedof this matter. They
appeal to both patties to make the fullest use of the
mechanism available within the regional organization for the peaceful settlement of disputes, including the Good Offices Committee establishedby the
Organization of African Unity and of those provided in Article 33 of the Charter of the United
Nations.’ ”
5, The Council has thus completed this stageof its consideration of the agenda item. The ‘Presidentwill follow
the development of the situation and will be in touch
with interested parties in the following days.
6. Mr. OVINNIKOV (Union of Soviet SocialistRepublics) (interprerafion from Rz&un): Madam President, the
text of the declaration which you have just read out and
which is available to all members of the Council was
agreed upon. The last part of your statement, which was
made after the quotation marks of the text were closed,
was not agreed upon among members of the Council.
Furthermore, it is in fact contrary to the understanding
of most members of the Council. For that reason, this
latter part of your statement, Madam, is the viewpoint of
the United States delegation.
7. The PRESIDENT: I would point out to the representative of the Soviet Union that the last statement was
made in my capacity as President of the Council.
8. The representative of Jordan made the statement in
the consultations as the co-ordinator of the non-aligned
members of the Council for this month.
9. I now call on the representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya.
10. Mr. TREIKI (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (inferpreruArabic): I knew that the United Statesrepresentative would not adhere to moral rules or to the norms by
which the Council has always been guided. First, as
President of the Council, when the United States representative summoned the Chadian representative, she
should have summoned the Libyan representative as
well. However, she did not do so, in disregard of the
most rudimentary rules of objectivity. Secondly,in a conversation with the head of the Jordanian delegation,
rionfiom

Chairman of the Group of Non-Aligned Countries for
this month, I mentioned to him that the United States
representative would not respect the rules of the presidency and would add words of her own, which she actually did. I asked him to contact her to make sure that she
would adhere to the text agreedto. He promised me that
he wou!d convey that to her. However, she did not
accedeto the request. I wish to put on record that Libya
does not recognize what has been stated by the United
States representative beyond the text of the statement.
We shall never deal with her, becauseshe lacks objectivity and impartiality.
I 1. The United States resort to pressure tactics, the
summoning of ambassadorsand the bringing of pressure
to bear in various capitals is a matter well known to ail.
The United States representative should at least have
emulated her predecessor’sefforts and objectivity. I wish
to put on record here my appreciation and thanks to the
representative of the United Kingdom for his objectivity.
I should have liked to see at least the same objectivity
displayed by the United States representative.
12. I reiterate and emphasizethat the last paragraph
read out by the United Statesrepresentative as President
of the Council is not acceptedby my country. My country will never deal with her and will recognizeonly what
has been adopted by the Council.
13. The PRESIDENT: I might say for the record that
the President of the Security Council took no initiative to
convene a meeting with the representative of Chad. The
representative of Chad in fact took an initiative to which
the President responded. The President would of course
make it a practice to respond promptly and eourtcously
to all initiatives of all Members of the United Nations
during our period in the occupancy of this important
OfiCe.

14. As regards the final statement with which I followed the agreed-upon consensus,it conforms with the
provisional rules of procedure of the Council concerning
agenda items and to the practices of the presidency.
Thp meeting rose at 1.50 p.m.
