S/PV.9201

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9201st meeting

Wednesday, 23 November 2022, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Agyeman. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ghana)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Olmedo
Mrs. Onanga
Mrs. Kamboj
Mr. Gallagher
Mr. Ndung’u
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Heimerback
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mr. Abushahab
Ms. Dix
Mr. Kelley

Agenda
Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-70816 (E)
*2270816*

S/PV.9201

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
At the outset, Ambassador Trine Heimerback will
make a joint statement on behalf of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015); 1373 (2001); and 1540 (2004).
Following the joint statement, the Council will hear
briefings by the Chairs of those Committees.
I now give
Trine Heimerback.

the

floor

to

Ambassador

Ms. Heimerback (Norway): On behalf of the
Chairs of the Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities, the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counterterrorism, and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), I have the honour to brief the
Security Council on the work of the three Committees,
including the continuing cooperation among them.
Over the past year, while the coronavirus
disease pandemic continued to affect the work of the
Committees and the experts, especially with regard
to travel, the three subsidiary bodies continued to
cooperate and coordinate their work, in line with
their respective mandates under the relevant Security
Council resolutions, in order to ensure an effective and
efficient approach to counter-terrorism and to prevent
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery by non-State actors.
In February, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) held an open briefing on the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) with Member States from South and SouthEast Asia pursuant to resolution 2395 (2017), with the
participation of experts from the Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team of the 1267 Committee.
The open briefing also called for input from Member
States from those regions so as to highlight their efforts
2/20

in implementing the counter-terrorism
mandated by the Security Council.

23/11/2022

measures

In April, the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the
ISIL and Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee, supported
by CTED and the Monitoring Team, held a joint open
briefing, entitled “ISIL in Africa: nature of threat and
responses”. The briefing was attended by Member States,
analysts, policymakers, civil society organizations and
researchers. The discussions served as an opportunity
to highlight the evolution of the threat posed by ISIL in
Africa. The meeting also focused on Member States’
responses to the emerging threats, progress achieved
and persistent challenges.
The Monitoring Team and CTED further
cooperated during an informal working lunch held
for the Permanent Missions to the United Nations of
eight African States on the theme of “Transitional
justice and the terrorist threat in the context of the Lake
Chad basin: exploring the opportunities and possible
challenges of applying transitional justice approaches
to address the impact of terrorism in the region”.
They also participated in a workshop on terrorism
in the Great Lakes region of Africa, in which CTED
and the Monitoring Team explained the contours of
the international counter-terrorism framework. The
Chair of the CTC also attended and opened the event.
CTED and the Monitoring Team also interacted during
an informal working lunch held for the Permanent
Missions to the United Nations of the countries of the
Pacific region, aimed at discussing challenges that
Member States, in particular small island developing
States, face in the region.
During the reporting period, the Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team and the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate continued
to cooperate closely in the preparation of mandated
reports of the Secretary-General on the global terrorist
threat. Those reports emphasized that the threat posed
by ISIL and its affiliates continued to rise and remained
high in conflict-affected areas, with potential spillover
to non-conflict areas. ISIL and its affiliates continued
to exploit security gaps in order to recruit, organize
and execute complex attacks, despite the group’s
recent leadership losses. The reports further noted that
the potential impact of global food insecurity might
exacerbate existing conditions conducive to terrorism
and increase the current threat posed by ISIL.
Throughout the year, the Acting Executive Director
of CTED, the Coordinators of the 1540 Group of Experts
22-70816

23/11/2022

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

and the Monitoring Team held periodic trilateral
consultations. Members of the three Groups of Experts
also attended the 1267 Coordinator’s quarterly briefings
to CTED. The Monitoring Team and CTED continued
to interact with the Financial Action Task Force (FATF),
including its global network of FATF-style regional
bodies. CTED and the Monitoring Team attended
plenaries and working group meetings of the FATF,
as well as the bodies for the Eurasian, Latin American
and Middle East and North African regions to discuss
the efforts deployed by Member States to monitor and
take action against terrorist financing, in alignment
with FATF recommendations, and contributed to the
relevant FATF projects, including the update on ISIL/
Al-Qaida financing.
In 2022, the Monitoring Team participated in
CTC on-site assessment visits to Estonia, Iraq, Latvia,
Lithuania and Malaysia and will participate in the
upcoming CTC assessment visit to Uzbekistan in late
November. Those visits play a key role in evaluating the
terrorist threat scenario at the national level, identifying
progress, strength and legal gaps and defining tailormade capacity-building priorities for Member States,
as well as useful experience and effective practices to
address new and emerging trends and challenges.
On 28 and 29 October, in Mumbai, India, and
New Delhi, the CTC convened a special meeting on
countering the use of new and emerging technologies
for terrorist purposes. Both the soft opening and the
main meeting were attended at the ministerial level
by member States of the CTC, including India, as
well as high-ranking officials from United Nations
Member States, United Nations entities, international
and regional organizations, the private sector, CTED’s
global research network and civil society organizations.
The CTC adopted the Delhi declaration outcome
document as a key output from the special meeting and
will continue to both prioritize and emphasize its work
on the issues of counter-terrorism in relation to new and
emerging technologies, with the support of CTED and
in collaboration with the Monitoring Team.
The 1540 Group of Experts has continued to
assist the Committee in carrying out its mandate
under relevant resolutions, which, inter alia, address
the threat that non-State actors may develop, acquire,
manufacture, possess, transport, transfer or use nuclear,
chemical or biological weapons for terrorist purposes;
calls upon Member States to establish appropriate
domestic controls over related materials; and reaffirms

S/PV.9201

the need to continue to enhance ongoing cooperation
with the CTC and the 1267 Committee in that regard.
The Monitoring Team also joined CTED to lead
awareness-raising efforts with Member States regarding
the enhanced implementation of travel ban measures,
including the effective usage of the consolidated list.
The three Committees will continue to cooperate
and coordinate their work under their respective
mandates, including through joint visits at the invitation
of States, to ensure an effective and efficient approach
to counter-terrorism and to prevent the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery
by non-State actors. The three Groups of Experts
will also continue to work under the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact
working groups aimed at achieving the objectives of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Furthermore, the Committees reaffirm their continued
commitment to supporting Member States in those
global efforts by providing guidance and direction to
their Groups of Experts to strengthen their collaboration
and cooperation in accordance with the requirements of
relevant Security Council resolutions.
I shall now provide a briefing in my capacity as Chair
of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to Security Council resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011)
and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities. I would like to begin by briefly outlining
how the threat from ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and their
affiliates has evolved over the past year. I will then
report on the activities of the Committee. This briefing
will also satisfy the requirement set out in resolution
2610 (2021) to report to the Security Council at least
once per year on the overall work of the Committee.
Since my previous briefing to the Security
Council in December 2021 (see S/PV.8915), the
United Nations, Member States and international and
regional organizations have continued to implement
sanctions measures to prevent ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and their affiliates from undermining the prospects
for international peace and security. In that regard,
to further promote awareness of the use of the ISIL
(Da’esh) and Al-Qaida sanctions framework, on
17 December 2021, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2610 (2021). The new resolution reaffirmed
the assets freeze, the travel ban and the arms embargo
measures imposed against all designated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities on the ISIL (Da’esh)

22-708163/20

S/PV.9201

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

and Al-Qaida sanctions list and extended the mandates
of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team and the Ombudsperson for 30 months until June
2024. I welcome that development and would like to
take this opportunity to emphasize that the Monitoring
Team and the Ombudsperson play a critical role in the
effective implementation of the 1267 sanctions regime.
It is crucial that Member States engage with and
provide updated information to the Committee and the
Monitoring Team on the evolving nature of the terrorist
threat, listed individuals and entities, and the status
of the implementation of the sanctions measures at
the national level. I would like to draw the attention
of Member States to the requirement of the new
resolution to submit updated reports on assets freezes
and exemptions thereto. The Secretariat, in cooperation
with the Monitoring Team, developed a format for
reporting, which is available online. Pursuant to
resolution 2610 (2021) and as per the note verbale dated
23 September, Member States were called upon to
report to the Committee by 1 November. Nevertheless,
Member States who still have not submitted their
reporting are encouraged to do so.
During the reporting period, the Monitoring
Team has continued to provide regular updates to the
Committee on the global terrorist threat. In particular,
the Team noted that the threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh)
and Al-Qaida remains moderate in non-conflict zones,
but is much higher in areas directly affected by conflict.
The situation in Africa, in particular in Southern
and West Africa, has further deteriorated during
the reporting period. Central and South Asia and the
Levant, all of which include the active presence of both
ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida, as well as the implications
of the Taliban’s takeover of Afghanistan, continue to
represent a major concern for Member States. The
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters remains a
serious problem, and the international community must
continue to do more to address that threat.
The situation in prison and detention facilities
in north-eastern Syria is also a constant concern.
The attack by ISIL (Da’esh) on Al-Sina’a prison in
Al-Hasakah in January led to the escape of between
100 and 300 fighters. Member States consider that more
jailbreak attempts are likely.
Despite the losses of some senior figures, most
notably the ISIL (Da’esh) leader Amir Muhammad Sa’id
Abdal-Rahman Al-Salbi and Al-Qaida’s leader, Aiman
4/20

23/11/2022

Al-Zawahiri, reportedly killed in Kabul, ISIL (Da’esh)
and Al-Qaida continue to take advantage of conflicts
and governance failures to recruit new followers and
attract resources. The global economic slowdown may
increase the potential for a further spread of terrorist
activities by ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida. For a more
detailed analysis, I would refer Member States to the
periodic reports of the Monitoring Team published on
the Committee’s website. The analysis provided by
the Monitoring Team is, to a large extent, based on
field visits.
Although travel limitations imposed by the
COVID-19 pandemic in various parts of the globe have
eased, traveling remains a challenge. Nevertheless,
I would like to highlight that the Monitoring Team
managed to conduct important visits to Africa, Europe,
Central and South Asia and the Middle East, including
Iraq, and convened the Vienna regional meeting of
intelligence and security services of the Middle East
and North Africa.
During the reporting period, the Committee
continued its mandated activities and held nine
in-person meetings, including a joint open briefing with
the Counter-Terrorism Committee on ISIL in Africa,
the nature of the threat and responses. The Committee,
in partnership with the Secretariat, maintains its
sanctions list and ensures that the list is accurate and
promptly updated. In total, there are currently 255
listed individuals and 88 entities.
Since the beginning of the year, the Committee
has agreed to add one entity to its sanctions list and
approved amendments to the existing entries of seven
individuals and one entity. The Committee also
approved the delisting of three individuals following a
review by the Ombudsperson, as well as the delisting
of five individuals and three entities following the
2020 annual review. Proposals to list one entity and 17
individuals remain on hold.
Following the resignation of Mr. Daniel Kipfer
Fasciati, Mr. Richard Malanjum was appointed as the
new Ombudsperson and effectively assumed his duties.
Currently, seven requests for delisting are pending with
the Office of the Ombudsperson.
Mindful of the ongoing global terrorist threat
posed by ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and their affiliates,
evolving trends and emerging challenges, I would like
to stress the need to ensure that the 1267 sanctions
22-70816

23/11/2022

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

regime remain a high priority on the global counterterrorism agenda.
I would like to take this opportunity to call upon
Member States to continue their proactive engagement
with the Committee and the Monitoring Team as that
is essential for keeping the sanctions list up to date
and ensuring the effective operation of the sanctions
regime. As Chair, please allow me to conclude by
thanking all Member States for their cooperation with
the Committee, its Monitoring Team and the Office of
the Ombudsperson.
The President: I thank Ambassador Heimerback
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Kamboj.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): As Chair of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism, I
have the honour to brief the Council on the key aspects
of the work undertaken by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee since the beginning of this year, supported
by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED).
Over the past year, the Committee held several
open and closed meetings with the support of CTED,
addressing a variety of regional and thematic topics that
are relevant to the implementation of Security Council
resolutions. As the terrorist threat continues to persist
and grow, particularly in the Middle East, Central Asia,
South Asia and several parts of Africa, the CounterTerrorism Committee has placed particular focus on
those regions.
The Committee has also focused on other thematic
areas, such as countering terrorist narratives and
preventing and countering the use of the Internet
and new and emerging technologies for terrorist
purposes, inviting the participation of civil society
in the briefings and open meetings of the CTC. That
underscores the importance of protecting human rights,
while countering terrorism, as well as incorporating the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women into
counter-terrorism responses over the past year.
As mentioned earlier by the Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, the CTC
organized an open briefing on 14 February, focusing on

S/PV.9201

the terrorist threat in South and South-East Asia, and the
work of CTED with the Member States in the regions,
pursuant to resolution 2395 (2017). The meeting also
highlighted the serious global security concerns due to
recent developments in Afghanistan and the possibility
of it becoming a safe haven for Al-Qaida and other
terrorist groups.
The Security Council demanded unequivocally
that Afghan territory not be used for sheltering,
training, planning or financing terrorist acts and called
for concerted action against all terrorist groups. While
participating in the high-level international conference
on counter-terrorism in Central Asia, on 3 March, the
Chair of the CTC underlined the high terrorist threat
in Central Asia due to returning foreign terrorist
fighters and developments in Afghanistan, and that the
ties between the Taliban, largely through Haqqanis,
Al-Qaida and foreign terrorist fighters, remained close.
Since the terrorist threat in the region remains high,
the Committee is scheduled to organize an open briefing
on Central Asia next month. The Committee, along with
the ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee,
organized a joint open briefing on 7 April, in which
the representatives of several Member States, as well as
civil society organizations from Africa, expressed their
views on the threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida
affiliates, particularly underlining that terrorist groups
in Africa aim to destabilize existing governance
structures, including democratic institutions, and
take advantage of intercommunal conflict to recruit
fighters and secure resources. The Committee
underlined the need to differentiate political ideologies
in a constitutional framework from the violent, radical
ideologies of terrorist groups.
On thematic issues, the Committee organized
an open meeting on 23 March, in which participants
highlighted the need to counter terrorist narratives and
the use of the Internet for terrorist purposes through
innovative means. Taking a step further, the Committee
organized a special meeting on the overarching theme
of countering the use of new and emerging technologies
for terrorist purposes, held in Mumbai, India, and New
Delhi on 28 and 29 October, with the generous support
of the Government of India.
The discussions were focused on the increased
threat posed by the use for terrorist purposes of three
significant technologies — first, the Internet and
social media; secondly, new payment technologies and
fundraising methods; and, thirdly, unmanned aerial

22-708165/20

S/PV.9201

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

systems, including drones. The Committee members
also paid tribute to all victims of terrorism, including
the victims of the Mumbai terrorist attacks that took
place in India on 26 November 2008.
As an outcome of the special meeting, the
Committee adopted the Delhi declaration on countering
the use of new and emerging technologies for terrorist
purposes. The declaration is a pioneer document, aimed
at enhancing the Council’s approach to addressing that
threat in a comprehensive and holistic manner. Among
the items listed in the declaration is the decision to
continue to work on recommendations on the three
themes of the special meeting and the intention to
develop a set of non-binding guiding principles to
further assist Member States in the implementation of
the relevant Security Council resolutions on countering
the use of new and emerging technologies for terrorist
purposes. As part of its commitment to both prioritize
and emphasize its work on those issues, the Committee
plans to organize an open briefing on the outcome of
the special meeting early next month, during which it
will highlight its achievements.
Regarding other thematic issues, the Committee
paid attention to further enhancing and promoting its
engagement with a broad range of civil society actors,
including women’s organizations, throughout its
activities. The Committee also made efforts to invite
civil society organizations, including from Africa and
Asia, to its meetings, thereby ensuring diversity and
inclusivity of civil society representation. Similarly,
the Committee and CTED continue to ensure that
gender is integrated as a cross-cutting issue through
CTED activities.
The Committee ensured greater participation of
women in the special meeting of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, held in Mumbai and New Delhi. Forty per
cent — I repeat 40 per cent — of the speakers at the
special meeting were women. The information and
communications technology panel had seven women out
of a total of 11 speakers. The Committee also intends
to organize a closed briefing on integrating gender into
counter-terrorism responses next month.
The Chair of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
participated in the Malaga Conference, held on 11 May,
highlighting that the protection of human rights should
be an important aspect of the global fight against
terrorism and that States therefore have a responsibility
to protect their nationals and others against the threat
of terrorist acts by taking positive measures consistent
6/20

23/11/2022

with international law, including human rights law, and
bringing the perpetrators of such acts to justice.
The Committee’s core mandate includes monitoring
and assessing the implementation of relevant Security
Council resolutions, with the assistance of CTED, and
facilitating the delivery of technical assistance for
capacity-building, while paying full attention to relevant
issues in States’ international human rights obligations.
Acting on behalf of the Committee, CTED resumed
on-site assessment visits in April this year, amid the
lingering challenge of the pandemic. During the year,
10 assessment visits were conducted in Africa, the
Americas, Central Asia, Europe, the Middle East,
the Pacific and South-East Asia. CTED, in line with
its mandate, continued to engage with experts in civil
society, academia, think tanks and the private sector
to support the efforts of the CTC to advance the
implementation of various Security Council resolutions.
The Committee, with the support of CTED, also
continued to facilitate the delivery of technical assistance
to Member States. In that regard, the Committee and
CTED have continued to strengthen cooperation
with the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism
(UNOCT) and other implementing partners within the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination
Compact and with international and regional
organizations. The online platform of the Compact now
consists of 27 visit reports, including more than 800
recommendations for technical assistance needs. CTED
is also a key partner in UNOCT’s global programmes,
contributing to the direction of the programmes and
the design of technical assistance and integrating the
Committee’s key recommendations and analyses.
The Committee and CTED continued to raise
awareness of new and emerging terrorism trends and
challenges and to promote the policies of the Council
and the guidelines of the Committee, as well as
international best practices, with a view to assisting
Member States’ implementation efforts. CTED, in
accordance with its mandate and working with the
Global Research Network, also proactively identified
and published new analytical products on those
terrorism trends and challenges.
Together with the United Nations Institute for
Disarmament Research and the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre of the UNOCT, CTED
launched, under the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Coordination Compact’s Working Group
22-70816

23/11/2022

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

on border management and law enforcement, the
technical guidelines to facilitate the implementation
of resolution 2370 (2017) and related international
standards and good practices on preventing terrorists
from acquiring weapons.
Finally, I wish to convey my deep thanks and
appreciation to the members of the Committee, CTED,
the Committee secretariat and my team for their
commitment and dedicated support, which allowed
the Committee to continue to successfully deliver on
its mandate.
The President: I thank Ambassador Kamboj for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador De la
Fuente Ramírez.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): On behalf of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), I have
the honour to report on the progress achieved since our
last joint briefing on 2 December 2021 (see S/PV.8915).
With regard to our mandate, we fully endorse
the joint statement made on behalf of the Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings
and entities, the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism,
and the 1540 Committee.
Resolution 1540 (2004) remains a vital component
of the international non-proliferation architecture to
prevent non-State actors from gaining access to weapons
of mass destruction, particularly those identified on the
United Nations list established and updated by the 1267
Committee and those to which resolution 1373 (2001)
applies.
The devastating and potentially catastrophic
consequences that could result from the use of nuclear,
chemical or biological weapons by such actors remain
of grave concern to the international community.
States have made significant progress towards the
full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Much
remains to be done, however, for the full and effective
implementation of the resolution, which is therefore a
long-term task.
Although the mandate of the 1540 Committee
differs from that of the other two Committees, there are

S/PV.9201

important areas of complementarity. Resolution 2325
(2016) reiterates the need for enhanced cooperation
between the three Committees. In that regard, the 1540
Committee has continued to exchange information,
coordinate visits to States, provide technical assistance
and address other issues of interest to all three
Committees, which have reported jointly to the Security
Council each year, as is the case for today’s meeting.
While the Committee had to postpone a number
of activities planned in 2021 in connection with
the comprehensive review of the status of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) as a result
of the coronavirus disease pandemic, the Committee
continued with the comprehensive review in 2022,
including by holding open consultations from 31 May
to 2 June. In keeping with the inclusive nature of
the comprehensive review process, Member States,
as well as international and regional organizations,
participated in the Committee’s open consultations.
Participants from non-governmental organizations,
academia, professional associations and industry also
made statements in an informal segment.
Following the renewal of the Committee’s mandate
in February, through resolution 2622 (2022), the
1540 Committee continued to undertake activities to
promote the full and effective implementation of the
resolution and to assist States — upon request — with
strengthening their national capacities. In that regard,
the Committee has participated in 19 outreach activities
organized by States and international, regional and
subregional organizations, as well as civil society. As of
today, 185 countries have submitted to the Committee
their initial report with details on the measures taken,
or planned to be taken, to implement resolution 1540
(2004).
It is important to take into account the effectiveness
of the practical measures taken by States to implement
the resolution. One of the measures that States may
consider is the voluntary development of national
implementation action plans, as encouraged in
resolution 2325 (2016). Those plans help to identify
actions to be taken in relation to national regulatory and
control frameworks, foster inter-agency cooperation
and identify areas in which assistance may be required.
Since 2007, 38 States have submitted a total of 46 such
plans to the Committee.
The Committee plays an important role in
facilitating assistance to Member States in fulfilling
their obligations under resolution 1540 (2004) by

22-708167/20

S/PV.9201

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

connecting States requesting assistance with those
offering it, be they States or international, regional or
subregional organisations. In addition to facilitating
requests for assistance, the Committee continued
to work with States — at their invitation — to
discuss national reporting, national action plans, the
Committee’s matrices and assistance in implementing
the resolution. The Committee continues to use its
website as a means of public outreach. I would like
to underline that the 1540 Committee’s cooperative
approach and dialogue with Member States are the
cornerstones of its activities.
In conclusion, I would like to thank everyone,
without exception, for their efforts in support of the
Committee’s work.
The President: I thank Ambassador De la Fuente
Ramírez for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Kelley (United States of America): I thank
Ambassadors Heimerback, Kamboj and De la Fuente
Ramírez for their briefings and leadership in drawing
attention to these pressing and vitally important issues
that demand action.
The Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities, the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) play important and complementary roles in
assessing and countering terrorist threats and support
for terrorism.
Given the diverse global threat terrorists pose
today, it is more important than ever that those three
Committees coordinate their efforts in mutually
reinforcing ways, while avoiding duplication. We
should all be very concerned that a permanent member
of the Council would seek to obstruct the prospect of
cooperation by the 1540 Committee and its Group of
Experts, with the 1267 Committee and its Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and its Executive
Directorate, despite their clear mandates for that kind
of collaboration.
8/20

23/11/2022

Over the past year, the global terrorist threat has
evolved to include, notably, an uptick in attacks by
terrorists worldwide. We urge the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) and the 1267
Monitoring Team to continue to closely monitor the
threat. Likewise, we urge the 1540 Committee and its
Group of Experts to continue to support Member States
in their efforts to control weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery in order to reduce the risk
of terrorist attacks.
We can contribute to peace and security in Africa
and internationally by supporting United Nations
listings of Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham and
Al-Qaida affiliates of their supporters that continue
to pose serious threats to peace and stability in the
region, and indeed, globally. Unfortunately, the 1267
Committee has only agreed to designate one entity
since the beginning of this year. The important work of
that Committee must remain free from politicization,
which only benefits the terrorists.
Turning to the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and CTED, we highlight the critical work of CTED
in assessing Member States’ implementation of their
counter-terrorism obligations. The United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism and the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact
entities use those assessments to prioritize capacitybuilding in order to make the greatest impact and avoid
duplication. The Council has explicitly encouraged
cooperation among the 1267, 1373 and 1540 Committees
in order to advance broad counter-terrorism initiatives.
In particular, resolutions 1810 (2008), 1977 (2011) and
2325 (2016) reiterate the need to enhance ongoing
cooperation between the 1540 Committee and other
subsidiary bodies, including through enhanced
information-sharing, coordination on visits to countries
within their respective mandates, technical assistance
and other issues of relevance to all three Committees.
Increased cooperation, including through more
regular meetings, more frequent joint visits and sharing
of information regarding current and emerging non-State
proliferation trends will help all three Committees more
effectively assess and address those threats. However,
knowledge of those trends should not be exclusive to
current Committee members. The 1540 Committee, in
particular, should make such information available to
all members through briefings to interested Member
States and through the 1540 Committee’s website and
other forms of outreach.
22-70816

23/11/2022

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks the Chairs of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities, the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counterterrorism, and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) for their briefings and thanks
Norway, India and Mexico for their extensive work
as Chairs of the three Committees. In the light of the
briefings, I would like to make the following points.
First, the 1267 Committee is an important counterterrorism sanctions mechanism of the United Nations
and the Security Council. Over the past year, the
Committee has carried out its work in accordance
with the mandate of resolution 2610 (2021), maintained
communication with Member States, strengthened
communication with regional and subregional counterterrorism mechanisms, regularly reviewed its sanctions
lists, selected a new Ombudsperson and achieved
positive results. The Committee’s Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team closely tracks terrorist
threats and issues reports that provide important
references for the Committee’s work and support for
global counter-terrorism cooperation, which China
commends. China highly values the work of the
Committee on listing, exemptions and delisting and
believes that such relevant work should be based on
solid facts and broad consensus in order to maintain
the authority and effectiveness of the sanctions
regime. Committee members should abide by the
principle of confidentiality and prevent the leaking
of internal information that would interfere with the
Committee’s work.
Secondly, the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
continues to help Member States implement counterterrorism resolutions of the Security Council through
various means, including country visits, seminars and
exchanges and, in the light of global counter-terrorism
trends and developments, it is stepping up information
exchanges on cyberterrorism and the misuse of emerging
technologies in terrorism. India, as Chair of the CTC,
hosted a special session in October and adopted the
Delhi declaration, thereby giving impetus to Member
States efforts to better tackle the new counter-terrorism
challenges. The CTC now has a broader mandate, but it
should not deviate from its core mandate of combating
and preventing terrorism. The CTC should optimize the
allocation of resources focused on key issues and direct

S/PV.9201

its efforts and resources towards supporting Africa
and developing countries in strengthening capacitybuilding. The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate should also provide support to the CTC in
those key areas.
Thirdly, resolution 1540 (2004) was the first
Security Council resolution devoted to non-proliferation
and is an important pillar of international
non-proliferation efforts. China firmly opposes the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery, has always fulfilled in good faith
its international non-proliferation obligations and is
continuously improving its non-proliferation export
control mechanism and capacity-building. China is
deeply involved in the comprehensive review of that
resolution and supports using it as an opportunity
to improve and strengthen its implementation
mechanism. China believes that the Committee should
continue to uphold the leadership role of Member
States, support developing countries in strengthening
non-proliferation capacity-building, enhance the
relevance and effectiveness of assistance programmes,
promote communication and cooperation with the
relevant agencies and organizations, and improve the
transparency of the implementation of the resolution
and the work of the Committee.
Last month, the First Committee of the General
Assembly adopted a draft resolution on promoting
international cooperation on peaceful uses in the context
of international security (A/C.1/77/L.56), which clearly
states that the use of science and technology for peaceful
purposes and international cooperation are inalienable
rights for all countries, and that countries should strike
a balance between non-proliferation and peaceful uses.
That draft resolution provides an important reference
for the work of the 1540 Committee.
We hope that, at the next stage, the three Committees
and their subsidiary expert bodies will continue to
step up efforts n information collection, exchanges
and sharing in order to form synergy. Together with
members of the Council, China will continue to actively
participate in the work of the three Committees,
promote international counter-terrorism cooperation,
improve the international non-proliferation system
and make ongoing contributions to the maintenance of
world peace and stability.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We note the timely nature of the convening

22-708169/20

S/PV.9201

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

of today’s joint briefing by the three important
subsidiary bodies.
First of all, we would like to express our gratitude
to the Norwegian chairpersonship of the Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, and to
thank Ambassador Trine Heimeback personally for
her skilful leadership over the past two years and her
willingness to responsibly and constructively address
the various issues.
We note the work of the 1267 Committee and
consider it one of the Council’s most effective
mechanisms in counter-terrorism. The relevance and
importance of the work of the 1267 Committee has
never been in doubt, especially given the threats we
are currently seeing from ISIL, Al-Qaida and other
associated terrorist groups in Syria, Iraq, Afghanistan,
Central and South-East Asia and the African continent.
We note the growing competition between Al-Qaida
and ISIL for sources of funding, supplies of weapons,
media resources and new recruits, including experts in
cutting-edge technologies. The struggle for leadership
has been accompanied by mergers, the absorption
of some groups by others and the emergence of new
groups drawn to one or another international terrorist
organization. Taken together, that has led to increased
terrorist activity and revisions to its tactics, means and
methods of organization. We are ready to continue
to work constructively with all our colleagues on
the Committee on a broad range of issues around
this agenda.
We consider it vital to ensure the effective
implementation of Security Council resolutions on the
counter-terrorism sanctions regime against ISIL and
Al-Qaida. Given the continued active presence of ISIL
in Afghanistan and the prospect of the further expansion
of jihadists in the States of Central Asia, it should still
be a priority to expand the Security Council’s counterterrorism sanctions regime to persons and organizations
belonging to and directly linked to the Afghan branch
of ISIL. We believe it is essential to keep a sharp focus
on foreign terrorist fighters on counter-terrorism
sanctions lists who are actively moving from Syria and
Iraq to their States of origin or third countries if we are
to prevent and suppress their criminal activity.
We support the effective work of the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team of the 1267
10/20

23/11/2022

Committee. We have repeatedly pointed out that its
reports contain detailed, up-to-date information on
current global terrorist threats posed by ISIL, Al-Qaida
and other associated groups, and they are useful for the
work of the Committee. We urge Member States to work
closely with its experts. At the same time, we expect the
Monitoring Team’s reports to be as objective as possible
and based only on reliable sources of information. We
would also like to note the importance of country visits
by the Monitoring Group, especially to areas in crisis.
We understand that against the background of the
coronavirus pandemic, the number of visits has fallen
over the past two years. We hope that in 2023 the Group
will be able to visit countries that are engaged in armed
confrontations with international terrorists and States
that are experiencing terrorism first-hand.
We would also like to express our deep appreciation
to Mrs. Kamboj, the Chair of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, for her highly professional leadership of its
work. This year India has had to address issues that
accumulated during the pandemic. All those accounts
have been settled, and we are glad that the Committee
has returned to its normal working arrangements.
Above all, the Committee managed to continue its
vital function of assessing States’ compliance with
relevant Security Council resolutions. We thank
the Government of India and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) for preparing
and successfully holding a special Counter-Terrorism
Committee meeting in New Delhi on 29 October, on
combating new and emerging technologies for terrorist
purposes. The event was exemplary in terms of its
organization. We note the quality of CTED’s expert
support to the Committee. The role of the Executive
Directorate in ensuring that the Committee and the
Security Council as a whole can meet the multifaceted
challenges of counter-terrorism remains extremely
important. We would like to thank Mr. Weixiong Chen
for his work as Acting Executive Director.
We note the extensive range of tasks to be addressed
this year by the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and its Chair,
Mr. Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez. Resolution
1540 (2004) remains the only universal international
instrument in the area of the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) requiring all
States to establish effective national systems of control
to prevent WMDs and their means of delivery from
falling into the hands of non-State actors. Achieving
the fundamental goal of the document — the successful
22-70816

23/11/2022

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) by all States
and in full — unquestionably requires maintaining the
spirit of cooperation and interaction that is inherent
in the resolution. As a sponsor of the resolution, we
are generally satisfied with its implementation. We
value the continuing recognition by the international
community of its importance, which has been
consistently reinforced by practical steps taken by
Member States in implementing the resolution.
As for the activities of the 1540 Committee,
its priorities should continue to be monitoring
the implementation of the resolution and global
coordination in providing technical assistance to
countries in implementing the resolution’s provisions
when they request it. It is important to remember that
although the 1540 Committee operates under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations, its tasks do
not include coercion or the imposition of its services on
Member States. Attempts to do so can only undermine
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Ensuring
the resolution’s successful implementation demands
coordinated efforts on the part of all Member States.
We believe that is key, given the importance of the
goals set out in the resolution. We would especially
like to emphasize the importance of this particular
moment for the Committee, whose mandate expires on
30 November. Russia would like to see that goal reached
without any glitches or setbacks. We urge our partners
to focus on finding solutions as soon as possible to
ensure the Committee’s effective functioning after that
date. We are open to constructive discussions aimed at
advancing the non-proliferation agenda.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): I would now like to make a very brief
statement in my national capacity.
With respect to the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism, we note the renewal
of the mandate of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) through resolution 2617
(2021), which reiterates that CTED should integrate
gender issues as a cross-cutting issue throughout its
activities. In that regard, my delegation welcomes the
publication by the Executive Directorate, together
with the International Peace Institute, of a report on
masculinities and violent extremism, which we will be
presenting jointly on 30 November. We also welcome
the fact that there will be a joint briefing of the 1373
Committee with the Office of Counter-Terrorism on

S/PV.9201

gender next month, and we reiterate our position that
such meetings should be open. We acknowledge the
work of the Chair of the Committee, as well as the
holding of a special meeting in India at the end of
last month.
With regard to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities, we
thank the Chair for the conduct of the Committee’s
work and regret that agreements have not yet been
reached on updating the guidelines for the work of the
Committee in the light of the renewal of its mandate
through resolution 2611 (2021). We would like to take
this opportunity to congratulate Mr. Richard Malanjum
on his appointment this year as Ombudsperson to the
1267 Committee. We reiterate our support for his work,
which is critical to providing standards of due process
when removing individuals from the sanctions list.
With regard to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), it must be said
that the threat of non-State actors acquiring weapons
of mass destruction has not diminished, and that the
international community should consider the fact that
new technologies have provided innovative ways for
non-State actors to acquire and use such weapons.
The comprehensive review of resolution 1540 (2004)
provided an opportunity for members of the Committee
and the rest of Member States to put forward proposals
that would better equip the Committee to confront
current challenges and do it more effectively. We hope
that the mandate renewal of the Committee in the next
few days will reflect those concerns and proposals.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to begin by thanking Ambassadors de la Fuente
Ramírez, Kamboj and Heimerback for enhancing the
transparency of the work of their respective Committees
through today’s briefing.
The United Arab Emirates commends the three
Chairs for their admirable work in supporting the
Security Council’s mandate to address threats to
international peace and security, including terrorism.
Let me also express our sincere gratitude to India,
current Chair of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001),
for ensuring the Committee’s engagement on a wide
range of regional and thematic issues, including
evolving threats. Last month the Government of India
hosted the CTC for a special meeting that was focused
on the urgent challenges posed by new and emerging

22-7081611/20

S/PV.9201

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

technology falling into the hands of terrorists and the
new possibilities for combating terrorism offered by
technological innovation. As a result, the CTC adopted
the Delhi declaration, which is a crucial contribution to
our collective response to the threats discussed during
the special meeting, including terrorists’ deployment
of unmanned aerial systems. As the incoming Chair
of the CTC, the United Arab Emirates will build on
those vital efforts. We are committed to working
constructively with all Committee members to ensure
the implementation of the Delhi declaration and to
assist Member States in preventing and countering the
terrorist use of new and emerging technologies.
By ensuring the full implementation of sanctions
measures, the Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) and 2253
(2015), concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities, works actively and
diligently to assist Member States in preventing and
countering terrorist acts. However, that effort must be
complemented by a strengthened focus on confronting
the root causes of terrorism and extremism to ensure
the enduring eradication of the threat. That necessarily
includes addressing the development deficits and weak
governance that fuel grievances and marginalization.
The international community must also avoid
inadvertently lending credibility to terrorist narratives
that exploit religion to justify their heinous crimes. For
example, the United Arab Emirates has been vocal in
urging Member States and the United Nations system
to use “Da’esh” instead of “Islamic State”, “ISIL”, or
“ISIS”, as there is nothing Islamic about terrorism. We
should also remember that Da’esh is nothing more than
a depraved and nihilistic terrorist group. It is neither
a State nor a province, and we should not validate
its pretensions.
As the Security Council considers the mandate
renewal of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) and its Group of Experts,
which is due next week, the United Arab Emirates
reaffirms the crucial role that its regime plays in
the global non-proliferation architecture. The most
recent comprehensive review of the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) demonstrates that Member
States remain committed to the resolution’s goals,
which is evident in the significant progress that has
been made in its implementation. We commend that
progress, but we also recognize that the full and
effective implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)
12/20

23/11/2022

remains a long-term task. In the forthcoming renewal,
the 1540 Committee should be mandated to enhance its
engagement with Member States and provide further
assistance with the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). Given the evolving nature of the threats posed
by non-State actors, including terrorists, the future
mandate should also include a provision for an inclusive
review process on the resolution’s implementation
status. The 1540 Committee should continue to work
closely with the Da’esh and Al-Qaida Sanctions
Committee and the CTC, particularly considering the
risk of terrorists exploiting weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery. While they each have
different mandates, the work of the Committees should
be complementary and central to the Council’s overall
objective of countering and eliminating terrorism.
Mr. Ndung’u (Kenya): Kenya welcomes the
briefings on the activities of the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253
(2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities, the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). Kenya
commends the Chairs of the three Committees, as well
as their teams, for their excellent work and outstanding
leadership in conducting the work of the Committees
during the reporting period. Their work and that of their
expert bodies is indispensable. However, their success
depends on us — all the States Members of the United
Nations. We must take responsibility for fulfilling the
commitments prescribed by the resolutions. Terrorism
and the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons of mass destruction continue to present a
grave threat to international peace and security. We
welcome the acknowledgement of that interlinkage and
the collaborative activities of the three Committees.
The ability of terrorists and non-State actors
to acquire materials that could be used for nuclear,
chemical or biological weapons or their means of
delivery continues to be deeply worrying and should be
prevented in every possible way. As Member States, we
must implement our commitments and continue to work
collaboratively and be ready when asked to provide the
necessary technical assistance and capacity-building
support to countries in need. The work of the 1540
Committee is therefore critical in that regard. We
welcome the fact that Member States continue to adopt
measures that incorporate the resolution’s provisions
into their national legislation, which helps to ensure
22-70816

23/11/2022

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

that these materials do not fall into the wrong hands.
Kenya also welcomes the continued collaboration and
cooperation between the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism, which goes a long way to enhancing
Members’ implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).
New and emerging technologies have consistently
been exploited for planning, financing and executing
terrorist attacks. Terrorists exploit drones, social media
platforms and crowdfunding to conduct attacks, as well
as to advance their cause. The evolving nature of the
threat posed by terrorists and other non-State actors
requires us to be ahead of the curve. We must constantly
consider the rapidly emerging advances in science and
technology to forestall potential risks. Applying those
new technologies in the fight against terrorism remains
key to combating the scourge. Furthermore, illicit
financial flows among terrorist operatives remain a
great obstacle to combating terrorism, while the ease
with which terrorist suspects can travel has posed a
threat to effectively engaging legal action against their
activities. Member States must also strive to implement
asset-freeze and travel-ban provisions against the
individuals, groups and entities on the consolidated
sanctions list so as to curb the movement, planning
and execution of terrorist attacks, as well as illicit
financial flows.
In conclusion, I reiterate Kenya’s dedication to
continuing collaborative efforts to fulfil our collective
commitments in combating terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I offer my sincere
thanks to the Chairs of the Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1373 (2001),
respectively, for their briefings today.
Since terrorism is a global threat, a multilateral
strategy is key to a successful response. As the only
global forum to coordinate, monitor and evaluate
our collective efforts, the United Nations plays an
indispensable role in this regard. Each component of
the United Nations counter-terrorism architecture is
meant to fulfil a distinct yet complementary function
in this work.
We should purposefully leverage each entity’s
comparative advantage to create synergies, while
avoiding a duplication of efforts. The goal is a
coordinated “One United Nations” approach to counterterrorism that forms part of a broader political strategy,

S/PV.9201

one that is conflict-sensitive, pursues the Sustainable
Development Goals and protects and promotes
human rights.
In that regard, I would like to highlight one
particular issue that illustrates both the importance
and the value of cohesion across the United Nations
counter-terrorism architecture: the unintended impact
of counter-terrorism measures on humanitarian
activities. Earlier this year, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate published a report
on this issue, finding that counter-terrorism measures
have a significant impact on humanitarian activities
in conflicts where designated terrorist organizations
are present.
Norway strongly supports the establishment of
a standing humanitarian exemption for all United
Nations sanctions regimes. In order for it to be effective,
such an exemption, we believe, must apply to all
regimes, including those authorized by the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), and we
believe that clarifying the scope of the 1267 regime to
address a pressing issue substantiated by data would
serve as an example of the coherence we call for in
United Nations counter-terrorism efforts.
We also support the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) as a vital component
of the global non-proliferation architecture. The work
of the Committee remains as important as ever, as
advances in science, technology and international
commerce affect the risks of proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction to non-State actors. Norway looks
forward to concluding the Committee’s work on the
comprehensive review process in a way that also reflects
the inputs of Member States expressed during the open
consultations. This process is key to ensuring that the
1540 Committee continues to fulfil its obligations and
takes stock of progress moving forward. Norway will
continue to engage constructively in the negotiations
for the Committee’s new mandate.
Norway values the opportunity to review the
effectiveness and coherence of the Council’s counterterrorism architecture, and it supports all efforts
aimed at creating a more coordinated and coherent
architecture, delivering as One United Nations, in
pursuit of peace and security, sustainable development
and human rights.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): At the outset, I wish to
thank the delegations of Norway and Mexico for

22-7081613/20

S/PV.9201

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

their work as the Chairs of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) 1989 (2001) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida, and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities, and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) on the non-proliferation of all weapons
of mass destruction, respectively, and their briefings
to the Council. These Committees, along with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001) (CTC), are the pillars of the
Security Council’s counter-terrorism architecture.
In the past two decades, this counter-terrorism
architecture has contributed to curbing the activities of
terrorist groups and individuals by limiting their access
to funds and weapons, disrupting their movements and
putting in place a monitoring mechanism to ensure that
Member States implement the decisions of the Security
Council aimed at countering terrorism. The Council
has adopted several landmark counter-terrorismrelated resolutions, such as resolutions 2178 (2014),
2462 (2019) and 2482 (2019), as well as resolution
2593 (2021), during India’s presidency of the Council
in August last year, to ensure that Afghan territory is
not used for sheltering, training, planning or financing
terrorist acts.
However, and as we all know, terrorism continues to
pose a grave threat to international peace and security,
as terrorist groups affiliated with and inspired by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Al-Qaida,
particularly in Asia and Africa, continue to operate,
targeting civilians and security forces. Lest we forget,
in November 2008, 10 terrorists entered the city of
Mumbai by sea from Pakistan, ravaging the city for
four days, killing 166 people, including 26 foreign
nationals. Our efforts to sanction the perpetrators and
facilitators of these terror attacks were blocked in the
past for political reasons. These actors continue to walk
free and have been organizing further cross-border
attacks against my country.
The work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) relies on that of the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team, which in its
recent report to the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011) highlighted the continued threat
posed by Lashkar-e-Tayyiba and Jaish-e-Mohammad.
We thank the Team for its reports and hope that the
Team will continue to report on the activities of these
groups, including in its periodic reports to 1267
14/20

23/11/2022

Committee. While these entities were listed under the
1267 sanctions regime more than a decade back, we
must keep monitoring their activities as they have been
allowed to operate under various aliases and with Statesponsored hospitality.
In that context, I would like to draw the Council’s
attention to the clarion call of our External Affairs
Minister to the Security Council last year, whose eightpoint action plan highlighted the need for reform of the
working methods of the Security Council sanctions
committees in order to ensure greater transparency,
accountability and effectiveness in the workings of
these Committees (see S/2021/48). He called for ending
the practice of placing blocks and holds on listing
requests without any rhyme or reason and ensuring
that the listing and delisting of individuals and entities
under the United Nations sanctions regimes is done
objectively, based on evidence and not on political
considerations. The Council needs to pay attention to
these action points; otherwise, the credibility of these
committees and our collective faith in them will only
be gradually eroded.
As the Chair of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
for 2022, India has made every effort to ensure that the
Committee is able to deliver on its mandate effectively.
I have highlighted the activities and the achievements
of the CTC in the past one year in my statements as the
Chair in briefings before the Security Council. In the
past year, the CTC was able to underscore the risk posed
by the existing and expanding terrorist threats in Asia
and Africa, and the need for providing capacity-building
assistance to risk-prone Member States. It has also been
able to ensure effective actions by Member States to
curb the activities of terrorist groups operating from
the territories under their control. It is important that
terror-risk-prone jurisdictions bring their frameworks
for combating the financing of terrorism and for
anti-money-laundering to par with the international
standards, including those set by the Financial Action
Task Force (FATF). We commend the CTC and CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate for their
efforts to involve FATF and other such international
financial watchdogs in their activities.
I would add that the Government of India had the
honour to host a special meeting of the CTC in Mumbai
and New Delhi last month. In Mumbai, CTC members
paid tribute to the victims of terrorist attacks, including
the Mumbai terror attacks, and had the opportunity to
listen to the victims’ experiences of the attacks, stories
22-70816

23/11/2022

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

of their resilience and their expectations from the
international community, including from the Security
Council. The meeting in Delhi highlighted the threat
posed by terrorist groups’ use of new and emerging
technologies, such as social media, encryption
messaging services, virtual currencies, blockchain
technologies, mobile money wallets, drones and so
on, and the urgent need for the Council to address this
threat in a comprehensive and holistic manner. The
Delhi declaration embodies the Council’s collective
determination to pay attention to that threat and further
develop guidance for Member States to address it. We
are confident that the United Arab Emirates, as the
incoming Chair of the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
will continue to build on those initiatives. I would
like to thank the CTED team for its cooperation and
contribution in the substantive work of the Committee
and in facilitating the effective functioning of the Chair.
Turning to the 1540 Committee, this is an important
component of the global non-proliferation architecture,
aimed at curbing the threat posed by the proliferation
of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, as well as
their means of delivery, and related materials, equipment
and technology by non-State actors, including terrorist
groups. The Committee should also take into account
the rapid evolution of proliferation risks due to new
and emerging technologies, increasing the risks of
access to weapons of mass destruction by terrorist
groups and other non-State actors. Let me reaffirm that
my delegation accords high importance to resolution
1540 (2004), the work of the 1540 Committee and its
ongoing negotiations for the renewal of the mandate of
the Committee.
I would like to conclude by reiterating our fullest
support for the work of the three Committees in
their collective pursuit to address the threat posed by
terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, as well as their means of delivery.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Let me start by
emphatically thanking the Chairs of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253
(2015), concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities; the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counterterrorism; and the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) for their comprehensive
and informative briefings. We commend the ongoing
cooperation among those Committees, which play an

S/PV.9201

important role in the broad counter-terrorism efforts
of the United Nations. I also congratulate India on the
successful organization of the special meeting of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) on the pressing
topic of the use of new and emerging technologies for
terrorist purposes.
The 1267 sanctions regime can target individuals
or groups anywhere in the world. Listing criteria are
necessary to limit an otherwise entirely discretionary
power. It is of the utmost importance that we ensure
that those criteria are applied using evidence-based
standards. When listing requests are submitted to
the 1267 Committee, they are presented only with
allegations that any given individual or entity fulfils
the criteria of association with Da’esh or Al-Qaida, not
with proper evidence. Except for the backchannel of
bilateral interagency communications between select
partners, there is no sharing with the Committee of the
actual evidence justifying or supporting the allegations.
As we continue to discuss ways to improve our
working methods, Brazil reiterates that listing requests
should be submitted together with the evidence that
supports them so that all Committee members are in
a position to judge every request on its own merit.
That would also help to prevent the politization of
listing requests.
We also emphasize the importance of aligning
listing standards with those applied by the
Ombudsperson for the purposes of the listing. It is our
view that the Ombudsperson should recommend the
retention of listings only in the case that there is proper
evidence to substantiate allegations of association
with Da’esh or Al-Qaida. Given the persistence of due
process concerns relating to the delisting process, the
Ombudsperson should not take for granted previous
allegations, statements or narratives associated with
existing listings simply because the Committee had
previously approved the respective entries.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee was established
to ensure the implementation by Member States
of Security Council resolutions on the matter. The
establishment of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) in 2004 and the renewal
of its mandate last year were important steps taken to
provide the CTC with the means to fulfil its mandate.
The discussions on CTED’s interim review by the end
of next year will give us an opportunity to further
streamline its work.

22-7081615/20

S/PV.9201

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

That process should not be decoupled from the
lessons to be learned during the eighth review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
in mid-2023. Without prejudice to the broad scope
of resolution 2617 (1999) and other Security Council
resolutions, the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
is, and should remain, the main guidance for the
international community in its fight against terrorism.
The Strategy emanates from the most representative
organ of the United Nations, the General Assembly,
thereby encompassing a wider range of views and needs.
Capacity-building features prominently in the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and must be a
priority for the United Nations in its support to Member
States. The country visits and assessments by CTED
and the implementation of demand-driven technical
assistance by the Office of Counter-Terrorism and other
bodies of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Coordination Compact bring a significant contribution
to the strengthening of national institutions, which are
the mainstay for resilience against terrorism. Brazil
also reiterates its view that the lack of an internationally
agreed definition of international terrorism affects our
ability to counter it in a coherent manner, and it may
lead to the perception of double standards when the
Security Council sets its priorities and takes actions
against it.
The 1540 Committee remains a relevant
mechanism for the international disarmament and
non-proliferation architecture. Through a sui generis
cooperative approach, it assists States in preventing the
acquisition of weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery by non-State actors, while preserving
international cooperation in materials, equipment and
technology for peaceful purposes. Brazil recognizes
Mexico’s crucial role in chairing the 1540 Committee
during its comprehensive review process and supports
the renewal of its mandate. Brazil is working closely
with the Chair and other Committee members to adopt
a substantive draft resolution that strengthens the role
of the Committee in addressing old and new challenges.
Member States must bear in mind that, in order to
be truly effective, the implementation of sanctions and
counter-terrorism measures must be consistent with
international law, including the Charter of the United
Nations, international humanitarian law, international
human rights law and international refugee law. Brazil
encourages the Council to continue its work to adjust the
sanctions framework so that they effectively minimize
16/20

23/11/2022

the suffering of the civilian population. Sanctions can
be legitimate and effective when they are multilaterally
agreed, strategically targeted and designed to have a
minimal impact on the civilian population.
In that regard, we commend the initiative of
the United States and Ireland to uphold the right to
humanitarian assistance by promoting negotiations on
a future Security Council draft resolution concerning
a much-needed cross-cutting humanitarian carveout. It
has the potential to bring forth a more predictable legal
environment for neutral, impartial and independent
humanitarian providers to undertake their essential
activities under all circumstances, including in
areas where designated terrorist individuals and
entities operate.
Brazil has enshrined in its Constitution the
repudiation of terrorism as a guiding principle for
the conduction of its internal relations, and in its
legislation, the direct and immediate applicability of
Security Council sanctions. However, we are aware that
the maintenance of international peace and security
needs more than sanctions. Although sanctions are
important tools, the fight against terrorism and violent
extremism conducive to terrorism can succeed only
if the international community tackles its drivers. In
our struggle for a safer world, we must therefore not
neglect the importance of advocating for economic
development and opportunities for youth; of adopting
balanced multilateral sanctions regimes that do not
exacerbate social exclusion, food insecurity and the
situation of vulnerable populations; and of combating
racism, xenophobia and other forms of intolerance,
which fuel resentment and radicalization.
Mrs. Onanga (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Chairs of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities; the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counterterrorism; and the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) — Ms. Trine Heimerback
of Norway, Mrs. Ruchira Kamboj of India and
Mr. Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez of Mexico,
respectively — for their very useful briefings.
This joint meeting shows us the importance of
maintaining a global and concerted approach in the fight
against these scourges. Gabon reaffirms its support for
all the Security Council Committees against terrorism
22-70816

23/11/2022

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

and nuclear proliferation and appreciates the work done
throughout the year within those three Committees.
Whether in the working lunches, the meetings among
the Monitoring Teams, stakeholders and Member
States or the thematic meetings that we believe are an
essential framework for the exchange of information,
the sustained commitment of all has been equal to the
existential threat. All those joint efforts demonstrate
the importance of cooperation in strengthening our
action in the face of the serious threats of terrorism and
nuclear proliferation. Gabon is pleased to have made a
modest contribution to those efforts, which will enable
us to overcome this threat.
With regard to the 1267 Committee, we appreciate
the work done by Norway as Chair of the Committee.
Furthermore, we would like to stress that, in view of
the global terrorist threat posed by Da’esh, Al-Qaida
and their affiliates, including through support for
organizations or individuals who commit terrorist acts,
it is important to ensure that the 1267 sanctions regime
remains a key element of the Security Council’s agenda.
We therefore welcome the extension, through resolution
2610 (2021), of the mandates of the Monitoring Team
and the Office of the Ombudsperson, which plays a key
role in the implementation of the 1267 sanctions regime.
With regard to the 1373 Committee, we would
like to stress the importance of establishing, in the
forthcoming evaluation, a substantial follow-up on the
threat posed by the use of emerging technologies and
the Internet for terrorist purposes. The final declaration
adopted in New Delhi in October, which allowed
us to identify the recent dangers of this threat, must
continue. We would like to reiterate our appreciation
to Mrs. Ruchira Kamboj, Chair of the 1373 Committee,
for the work her country has conducted in efforts to
respond to the terrorist threat.
With regard to the 1540 Committee, we would like
to reiterate the need for the concerns of developing
countries to be taken into account in the activities of
the Committee. We support the relevant approach of the
Chair of the Committee, from her country of Mexico,
to promote the full involvement of women experts in
the awareness and implementation of resolution 1540
(2004).
Let me conclude by saying that our joint action
against terrorism and nuclear proliferation must be in
line with our commitment to respect human rights and
combat poverty.

S/PV.9201

Mr. Olmedo (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to join others in thanking Norway, India and Mexico
for their chairmanships, respectively, of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) 1989 (2011) and 2253
(2015), concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities; the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counterterrorism; and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004). I would like to briefly touch
upon the activities of each of those Committees.
First, I would like to say a few words about the
1267 Committee, which has a key role in our fight
against jihadism. The terrorism of Al-Qaida, Da’esh
and their affiliates remains the most acute terrorist
threat. Unfortunately, that threat continues to evolve
and expand, particularly in Africa, reaching the Gulf of
Guinea, but also in the Levant region, in Afghanistan,
in Europe, as well as in South Asia and the Pacific.
France attaches great importance to the 1267
Committee continuing to fulfil its essential missions
of threat analysis and the rigorous implementation and
monitoring of the sanctions list. We also highly value
the independent and impartial work of the Ombudsman.
As members of the Council, we must make full use of
the sanctions provided for in the 1267 regime and must
preserve their integrity and effectiveness.
Secondly, the 1373 Committee, also known as
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), performs
essential functions and, after the years of the pandemic,
has been particularly active this year. France would
like to pay tribute to the thorough work of the CounterTerrorism Executive Directorate (CTED), which is
a valuable source of expertise for all institutions
responsible for tackling counter-terrorism. CTED must
continue to have access to all countries and all actors,
including civil society, and must be able to continue
to carry out all its tasks, which help consolidate the
rigorous framework established for respecting human
rights and fundamental freedoms in the fight against
terrorism. We hope that CTED can quickly return to
normal operations.
The CTC allows us to reflect on the evolving
terrorist threat. As Chair, India organized a special
meeting in New Delhi, to great success. We once again
congratulate India for that meeting, which gave us an
opportunity to reflect collectively on the new methods
of financing terrorism, a priority subject for France,
particularly since the adoption of resolution 2462 (2019)

22-7081617/20

S/PV.9201

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

and the adoption of the Paris Agenda in 2018 on the
occasion of the No Money for Terror Conference, the
latest session of which was held in India last week. We
were also pleased to discuss together in New Delhi the
challenges of combating online terrorist propaganda, a
subject that we are also promoting, with many partners,
through the Christchurch Call. The CTC’s exchanges
with all digital actors, particularly private ones, were
particularly productive and helpful.
Finally, let us recall that resolution 1540 (2004)
is a pillar of our collective security system. The risk
of radiological, biological, chemical and nuclear
materials and delivery systems falling into the hands of
terrorists remains high, and proliferation channels are
becoming more diverse. We need to do more in the area
of assistance, whether in terms of securing sensitive
materials and goods, strengthening border controls
or establishing export-control mechanisms. The 1540
Committee and its Group of Experts play an essential
role that we believe deserves to be better defined, and
we hope that will be the case in the context of the
negotiations under way for the renewal of its mandate
by the end of the month.
Ms. Dix (United Kingdom): I thank the Chairs of
the Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015); 1373 (2001); and
1540 (2004) for their comprehensive briefings and for
their able leadership of the Committees. Although each
of the Committees has a distinct mandate, they share a
common purpose — tackling the threat to international
peace and security posed by terrorist groups and
non-State actors. The United Kingdom encourages
their closer cooperation, as in this meeting today.
I thank the Chair of the 1540 Committee for his
hard work in support of the comprehensive review,
including the successful open-ended consultations held
this year. That important process raises Member States’
awareness of obligations under resolution 1540 (2004)
and informs the Committee’s deliberations on its future.
The United Kingdom has continued its advocacy of
addressing the issue of proliferation finance. We hope
that the 1540 Committee will do more to support
Member States in addressing that challenge in future
and we look forward to adopting a forward-looking
mandate for the Committee in the coming days. Let
me underscore my country’s commitment to preventing
the proliferation of chemical, biological and nuclear
weapons and their means of delivery. If non-State
actors used those weapons, the consequences could be
18/20

23/11/2022

devastating, with global effects. We therefore call on all
States to implement their obligations under resolution
1540 (2004) in full.
The United Kingdom appreciates the focus of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) on emerging
technologies, including at the recent CTC meeting in
New Delhi, where the Committee benefited from a
wide range of briefers. For our work to be effective, the
perspectives of technical experts, civil society, human
rights defenders, the private sector and academia
are invaluable.
We commend the work of the 1267 Committee. The
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team’s
analysis of the evolving threat and the effectiveness of
sanctions remains a crucial resource for Member States,
and we welcome the work by the Chair, the Secretariat
and the Ombudsperson to uphold transparency and
due process.
Terrorism remains a significant threat to
international peace and security. Only through
the effective and coordinated implementation of
the mandates of the three Committees can it be
meaningfully addressed.
Mr. Gallagher (Ireland): At the outset, I want
to thank the Chairs of the Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015); 1373 (2001); and 1540 (2004) for their
informative briefings this morning, and to express
Ireland’s sincere gratitude to all three Chairs for their
excellent stewardship of their respective Committees
in 2022.
Today’s briefings underline the unfortunate reality
that terrorism remains a grave threat to international
peace and security. Terrorist groups — in particular
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and
Al-Qaida and their affiliates — are growing in strength
throughout Africa. ISIL-Khorasan continues to pose a
severe threat in Afghanistan, while Al-Qaida is finding
safe haven there under Taliban rule. ISIL also retains
the capacity to mount high-profile attacks in Syria and
Iraq. For Ireland, those negative developments highlight
the need to correct our course and readjust our counterterrorism responses. The Council must place a greater
focus on tackling the underlying drivers of terrorism
and violent extremism. Instead of focusing solely on
containing terrorism, the Council must seek ways to
prevent it. Doing that effectively requires whole-of22-70816

23/11/2022

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

S/PV.9201

society approaches that are inclusive of civil society
and are gender-responsive.

United Nations membership, on a key part of the
non-proliferation architecture.

Throughout Ireland’s Council tenure, we have
consistently stressed the importance of placing human
rights at the heart of all counter-terrorism responses.
Too often, however, human rights are either sidelined
or actively undermined. In that regard, we recently
hosted an event that spotlighted the ways in which
counter-terrorism financing measures are misused to
target civil society, humanitarian actors and human
rights defenders. Such measures are counterproductive
where efforts to counter terrorism are concerned and
can constitute violations of international human rights
law. That is why Ireland believes that the Council must
work harder to ensure that counter-terrorism measures,
including sanctions, do not impede humanitarian action.
In that regard, Ireland, together with our colleagues
from the United States, has introduced a draft resolution
providing for a humanitarian exemption across all
sanctions regimes. We urge all Council members to
support that initiative, thereby allowing aid to reach
populations at risk.

In conclusion, Ireland looks forward to the renewal
of the mandate of the 1540 Committee and its Group of
Experts later this month.

In a challenging global security environment, the
risk that non-State actors, including terrorists, may
acquire, develop, traffic in or use nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons and their means of delivery
remains deeply concerning. Nor are we dealing in
hypotheticals. The investigative work of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/ISIL (UNITAD)
reveals evidence of chemical-weapon attacks by ISIL in
Iraq and the incentivization of the use of such weapons
by ISIL’s senior leadership.
UNITAD’s work reaffirms the importance of
maintaining and expanding cooperation between the
1540, 1267 and 1373 Committees, as well as their expert
groups. Such cooperation includes regular meetings,
the sharing of relevant information and engagement
on issues of mutual concern. Ireland also underscores
the importance and value of joint visits, including
the participation of the 1267 Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team and 1540 Group of Experts
on relevant Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate
country visits.
We would also like to take this opportunity to
commend the Chair of the 1540 Committee for the
conduct of the comprehensive review, which has
provided an important opportunity to review the
work of the Committee, including with the broader

Mr. Spasse (Albania): Let me begin by expressing
my delegation’s appreciation for the briefings delivered
by the outgoing Chairs of the Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015); 1373 (2001); and 1540 (2004) and thanking
them for the work done in their respective Committees.
The joint briefing demonstrates the ways in which the
Council can become more transparent about the work
it does before the entire membership, and we strongly
support the expansion of that practice to other areas,
because we believe transparency is critical to increasing
the Council’s credibility and effectiveness.
The outgoing Chairs provided us with rich
information about the work that has been done and
remains to be completed. We commend Mexico for
its good stewardship of the 1540 Committee and
appreciate the inclusion of various stakeholders in
consultations, including civil society. In our opinion,
that is something we should build on and further
strengthen. Likewise, we congratulate Norway on its
chairship of the Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015).
We strongly support the sanctions regime until basic,
internationally guaranteed rights are respected by the
de facto authorities in Afghanistan.
We condemn terrorist violence and ideology in the
strongest terms and support all efforts to hold their
perpetrators to account. In the same vein, we appreciate
the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee under
India’s stewardship and support efforts to expose
terrorist ties and hold those responsible to account. We
remain deeply concerned about the dire humanitarian
situation in Al-Hol and other camps, which provide
fertile ground for recruitment by Da’esh, Al-Qaida and
other groups. We call on all in positions of power to
help protect the most vulnerable, especially women and
children. That includes their dignified repatriation to
their countries of citizenship and their reintegration
into them.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ghana.
I thank Ambassador Trine Heimerback for the
joint statement delivered on behalf of the Committees

22-7081619/20

S/PV.9201

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), 1373 (2001) and 1540
(2004), as well as for her important work as Chair of the
1267 Committee and her briefing on the work of that
Committee. I also thank the Permanent Representatives
of India and Mexico, Ambassadors Kamboj and De la
Fuente Ramírez, for their leadership of their respective
Committees and for their briefings.
Since the beginning of the year, and as was noted
in the briefings we have had today, there have been
many encouraging global initiatives and developments
to counter terrorism. Through concerted efforts, we
have demonstrated a willingness to work together and
improve our ability to fight the menace of terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations. Terrorist groups
cannot be allowed to triumph. We must therefore
deepen the coordinated work of the three Committees
and the collaboration among their experts if we
are to stop terrorists from purveying their untold
misery to humankind, destroying nations, societies
and economies and extinguishing the lives of many
innocent people. We therefore hope that within the
context of the 1267 Committee, the stalled review of
the Committee’s work and guidelines will be overcome
and a consensus will be found. We also hope to see a
renewal of the travel-ban exemption for an additional
90 days for listed individuals and entities under the
sanctions regime. We urge flexibility and constructive
engagement in that regard.
The 1373 Committee continues to be an important
counter-terrorism platform. Ghana endorses the further
engagement of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
its Executive Directorate in addressing the growing
threats of terrorism in the Middle East, Central and
South Asia and parts of Africa. We thank the Chair of the
Committee and the Government of India for hosting the
Committee’s special meeting in October, with a focus
on countering new and emerging technologies used
for terrorist purposes. We welcome the adoption of the
forward-looking Delhi declaration and appreciate that
it will serve as a non-binding benchmark for countering
the new narratives of terrorists.

20/20

23/11/2022

With respect to the 1540 Committee, we
acknowledge the hard work of its Chair and the open
and inclusive manner in which he has carried out
consultations and negotiations on the entire review
process. Ghana recognizes resolution 1540 (2004) as
an essential component of the global non-proliferation
architecture for preventing non-State actors from
gaining access to weapons of mass destruction. We
believe that given the resolution’s preventive nature, it
is vital that Member States accept and implement it.
While we are encouraged by the progress being made by
States towards the full implementation of the resolution,
its effective implementation, as has been indicated here
before, remains a daunting task, especially given the
evolving nature of the activities of non-State actors,
as well as advances in science and technology. In that
regard, we believe that the Committee should maintain
and further deepen its engagement with Member States
through its outreach events in order to encourage
States and civil-society actors to continue to fulfil their
obligations under the resolution.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that as
Member States, we should always endeavour to stay
a step ahead of terrorists and their nefarious agendas.
Reacting to the threat they pose may be too late.
It is in that regard that we continue to work with all
other regional and international actors to deepen the
implementation of the Accra Initiative as a preventive
mechanism against the threat posed by terrorist groups
to the Initiative’s participating countries in West Africa
and the Sahel. The transnational links of terror groups
must be broken, and all of us as Member States can
play a useful role in that regard. We are grateful for the
reports of the three Committees and encourage their
further efforts.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

22-70816
