A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/205
9 March 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 99 (b)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/52/630)]
52/205. Economic and technical cooperation among developing countries
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolutions 33/134 of 19 December 1978, in which it endorsed the Buenos Aires Plan
of Action for Promoting and Implementing Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries,1 46/159 of
19 December 1991 on technical cooperation among developing countries, 49/96 of 19 December 1994 on
a United Nations conference on South-South cooperation and 50/119 of 20 December 1995 on economic and
technical cooperation among developing countries and a United Nations conference on South-South
cooperation, as well as other relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council on economic and technical cooperation among developing countries,
Reaffirming also that South-South cooperation constitutes an important element of international
cooperation for development and is an essential basis for national and collective self-reliance as well as a
means of ensuring the effective integration and participation of developing countries in the world economy
and that it is not a substitute for, but rather complementary to, North-South cooperation,
Recognizing the fact that developing countries have the primary responsibility for promoting and
implementing economic and technical cooperation among themselves, and reiterating the need for the
international community to support the efforts of the developing countries to expand South-South cooperation
through the modality of economic and technical cooperation among developing countries,

1

Report of the United Nations Conference on Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries, Buenos
Aires, 30 August-12 September 1978 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.78.II.A.11 and corrigendum),
chap. I.

98-77161

/...

A/RES/52/205
Page 2

Taking note of the decisions and recommendations contained in the Final Document of the Eleventh
Conference of Heads of State or Government of the Non-Aligned Countries,2 held at Cartagena de Indias,
Colombia, from 18 to 20 October 1995, and in this context welcoming the operationalization of the
Non-Aligned Movement Centre for South-South Technical Cooperation, in Jakarta in 1998, and inviting all
development partners to make use of and give support, as appropriate, to the Centre,
Taking note also of the Declaration adopted by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Group of 77 at
their twenty-first annual meeting,3 held in New York on 26 September 1997, in which the Ministers
emphasized the increasing importance and complementarity of economic and technical cooperation among
developing countries as a means of supporting and broadening the global partnership in international
development cooperation,
Welcoming the San José Declaration and Plan of Action4 adopted by the Group of 77 at the South-South
Conference on Trade, Investment and Finance, held at San José, Costa Rica, from 13 to 15 January 1997,
which outlined concrete modalities on sectoral issues relating to trade, finance, investment and enterprise
cooperation,
Also welcoming the outcome of the Second Asia-Africa Forum,5 held at Bangkok from 11 to 13
June 1997, as a mechanism to strengthen South-South cooperation, as well as the convening of the Second
Tokyo International Conference on African Development in Japan in October 1998,6 and calling upon the
international community to reaffirm its commitment in supporting Africa’s development efforts,
1. Endorses the report of the High-level Committee on the Review of Technical Cooperation among
Developing Countries on its tenth session7 and the decisions adopted by the High-level Committee at that
session;8
2. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the state of South-South cooperation,9 which
provides a comprehensive and systematic overview and analysis of economic cooperation among developing
countries in the context of South-South cooperation worldwide and of United Nations system support for such
cooperation;
3. Also takes note of the draft revised Guidelines for the Review of Policies and Procedures concerning
Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries,10 submitted by the Administrative Committee on
Coordination, and recommends that the draft revised Guidelines be submitted through the Economic and

2

A/50/752-S/1995/1035, annex III; see Official Records of the Security Council, Fiftieth Year, Supplement
for October, November and December 1995, document S/1995/1035.
3

A/52/460, annex.

4

A/C.2/52/8, annex.

5

See A/52/572.

6

See A/C.2/52/9.

7

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 39 (A/52/39).

8

Ibid., annex I.

9

A/52/402.

10

E/1997/110, annex.
/...

A/RES/52/205
Page 3

Social Council to the General Assembly at its fifty-third session in the context of the triennial policy review
of operational activities for development of the United Nations system;
4. Invites the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and the Special Unit for
Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries of the United Nations Development Programme, as well
as other relevant organizations, taking into account their agreed mandates, work programmes and priorities,
to undertake jointly further work on formulating concrete recommendations on the implementation of and
follow-up to the San José Declaration and Plan of Action4 adopted by the Group of 77 at the South-South
Conference on Trade, Investment and Finance;
5. Stresses the need to intensify the process of strengthening the various interregional dialogues and
the exchange of experiences among subregional and regional economic groupings for the purposes of
expanding South-South cooperation through integrating the modalities of economic and technical cooperation
among developing countries;
6. Calls upon all Governments and relevant United Nations organizations, including the multilateral
financial institutions, to consider increasing allocations for economic and technical cooperation among
developing countries and to identify new funding modalities to promote South-South cooperation, such as
triangular cooperation and private sector funding;
7. Welcomes the contribution made by some countries to the Voluntary Trust Fund for the Promotion
of South-South Cooperation, and invites all countries, including developed countries, to contribute to the
Trust Fund;
8. Urges the organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, and invites other relevant
intergovernmental organizations involved in international development cooperation, to make concerted and
vigorous efforts to mainstream the implementation of modalities of economic and technical cooperation
among developing countries by giving them full consideration in the design, formulation, implementation and
evaluation of programmes and projects in their operational activities;
9. Decides to hold a one-day commemorative meeting at the beginning of the fifty-third session of the
General Assembly, in accordance with the relevant paragraphs of the first report of the General Committee,11
to mark the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Buenos Aires Plan of Action for
Promoting and Implementing Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries,1 and to that effect requests
the Special Unit for Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries, in its capacity as substantive
secretariat of the High-level Committee on the Review of Technical Cooperation among Developing
Countries and system-wide coordinator on technical cooperation among developing countries, to be
responsible for the preparation and organization of the commemorative meeting, including the provision of
adequate documentation, in consultation with Member States and relevant organizations and agencies of the
United Nations system;
10. Also decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-third session an item entitled
"Commemorative meeting of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Buenos Aires Plan of Action
for Promoting and Implementing Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries";
11. Requests the Secretary-General, in cooperation with the Special Unit for Technical Cooperation
among Developing Countries and in consultation with Member States and relevant organizations and agencies
of the United Nations system, to incorporate into his report for the triennial policy review of operational
activities for development, for consideration at the fifty-third session of the General Assembly, an assessment
and recommendations aimed at further strengthening the integration of the modalities of economic and

11

A/52/250.
/...

A/RES/52/205
Page 4

technical cooperation among developing countries into the operational activities of the United Nations system,
with a view to enhancing the global partnership in international development cooperation;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fourth session the sub-item entitled
"Economic and technical cooperation among developing countries", and in that context requests the SecretaryGeneral to report to it at that session on the implementation of the present resolution.
77th plenary meeting
18 December 1997
