United Nations

A/RES/62/164

General Assembly

Distr.: General
13 March 2008

Sixty-second session
Agenda item 70 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2007
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/62/439/Add.2)]

62/164. The right to food
The General Assembly,
Recalling all its previous resolutions on the issue of the right to food, in
particular resolution 61/163 of 19 December 2006, and Human Rights Council
resolution 6/2 of 27 September 2007, 1 as well as all resolutions of the Commission
on Human Rights in this regard,
0F

Recalling also the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 2 which provides
that everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for her or his health and
well-being, including food, the Universal Declaration on the Eradication of Hunger
and Malnutrition 3 and the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 4
1F

2F

3F

Recalling further the provisions of the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, 5 in which the fundamental right of every person to be
free from hunger is recognized,
4F

Bearing in mind the Rome Declaration on World Food Security and the World
Food Summit Plan of Action 6 and the Declaration of the World Food Summit: five
years later, adopted in Rome on 13 June 2002, 7
5F

6F

Reaffirming the concrete recommendations contained in the Voluntary
Guidelines to Support the Progressive Realization of the Right to Adequate Food in
the Context of National Food Security, adopted by the Council of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in November 2004, 8
7F

_______________
1

See A/HRC/6/L.11. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session,
Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53).
2
Resolution 217 A (III).
3
Report of the World Food Conference, Rome, 5–16 November 1974 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.75.II.A.3), chap. I.
4
See resolution 55/2.
5
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
6
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Report of the World Food Summit,
13–17 November 1996 (WFS 96/REP), part one, appendix.
7
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Report of the World Food Summit: five years
later, 10–13 June 2002, part one, appendix; see also A/57/499, annex.
8
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Report of the Council of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, One Hundred and Twenty-seventh Session, Rome,
22–27 November 2004 (CL 127/REP), appendix D; see also E/CN.4/2005/131, annex.

07-47361

A/RES/62/164

Bearing in mind paragraph 6 of its resolution 60/251 of 15 March 2006,
Reaffirming that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent and
interrelated, and that they must be treated globally, in a fair and equal manner, on
the same footing and with the same emphasis,
Reaffirming also that a peaceful, stable and enabling political, social and
economic environment, at both the national and the international levels, is the
essential foundation that will enable States to give adequate priority to food security
and poverty eradication,
Reiterating, as in the Rome Declaration on World Food Security and the
Declaration of the World Food Summit: five years later, that food should not be
used as an instrument of political or economic pressure, and reaffirming in this
regard the importance of international cooperation and solidarity, as well as the
necessity of refraining from unilateral measures that are not in accordance with
international law and the Charter of the United Nations and that endanger food
security,
Convinced that each State must adopt a strategy consistent with its resources
and capacities to achieve its individual goals in implementing the recommendations
contained in the Rome Declaration on World Food Security and the World Food
Summit Plan of Action and, at the same time, cooperate regionally and
internationally in order to organize collective solutions to global issues of food
security in a world of increasingly interlinked institutions, societies and economies
where coordinated efforts and shared responsibilities are essential,
Recognizing that the problems of hunger and food insecurity have global
dimensions and that there has been virtually no progress made on reducing hunger
and that it could increase dramatically in some regions unless urgent, determined
and concerted action is taken, given the anticipated increase in the world’s
population and the stress on natural resources, 9
8F

Noting that environmental degradation, desertification and global climate
change are exacerbating destitution and desperation, causing a negative impact on
the realization of the right to food, in particular in developing countries,
Expressing its deep concern at the number and scale of natural disasters,
diseases and pests and their increasing impact in recent years, which have resulted
in massive loss of life and livelihood and threatened agricultural production and
food security, in particular in developing countries,
Stressing the importance of reversing the continuing decline of official
development assistance devoted to agriculture, both in real terms and as a share of
total official development assistance,
Welcoming the theme “The right to food”, chosen by the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations to mark World Food Day on 16 October 2007,
Taking note of the final Declaration adopted at the International Conference on
Agrarian Reform and Rural Development of the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations in Porto Alegre, Brazil, on 10 March 2006, 10
9F

_______________
9

See Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, The State of Food Insecurity in the World
2006 (Rome, 2006).
10
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Report of the International Conference on
Agrarian Reform and Rural Development, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 7–10 March 2006 (C 2006/REP),
appendix G.

2

A/RES/62/164

1.
Reaffirms that hunger constitutes an outrage and a violation of human
dignity and therefore requires the adoption of urgent measures at the national,
regional and international levels for its elimination;
Also reaffirms the right of everyone to have access to safe and nutritious
2.
food, consistent with the right to adequate food and the fundamental right of
everyone to be free from hunger, so as to be able to fully develop and maintain his
or her physical and mental capacities;
Considers it intolerable that more than 6 million children still die every
3.
year from hunger-related illness before their fifth birthday, that there are about
854 million undernourished people in the world and that, while the prevalence of
hunger has diminished, the absolute number of undernourished people has been
increasing in recent years when, according to the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, the planet could produce enough food to feed 12 billion
people, twice the world’s present population;
Expresses its concern that women and girls are disproportionately
4.
affected by hunger, food insecurity and poverty, in part as a result of gender
inequality and discrimination, that in many countries, girls are twice as likely as
boys to die from malnutrition and preventable childhood diseases, and that it is
estimated that almost twice as many women as men suffer from malnutrition;
Encourages all States to take action to address gender inequality and
5.
discrimination against women, in particular where it contributes to the malnutrition
of women and girls, including measures to ensure the full and equal realization of
the right to food and ensuring that women have equal access to resources, including
income, land and water, to enable them to feed themselves and their families;
Encourages the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the
6.
right to food to continue mainstreaming a gender perspective in the fulfilment of his
mandate, and encourages the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and all other United Nations bodies and mechanisms addressing the right to
food and food insecurity to integrate a gender perspective into their relevant
policies, programmes and activities;
Reaffirms the need to ensure that programmes delivering safe and
7.
nutritious food are inclusive and accessible to persons with disabilities;
Encourages all States to take steps with a view to achieving
8.
progressively the full realization of the right to food, including steps to promote the
conditions for everyone to be free from hunger and, as soon as possible, to enjoy
fully the right to food, and to create and adopt national plans to combat hunger, and
recognizes in this regard the great efforts and positive developments with respect to
the right to food in some developing countries and regions, including those
highlighted in the interim report of the Special Rapporteur; 11
10F

9.
Stresses that improving access to productive resources and public
investment in rural development is essential for eradicating hunger and poverty, in
particular in developing countries, including through the promotion of investments
in appropriate, small-scale irrigation and water management technologies in order to
reduce vulnerability to droughts;

_______________
11

See A/62/289.

3

A/RES/62/164

10. Recognizes that 80 per cent of hungry people live in rural areas and
50 per cent are small-scale farm-holders, and that these people are especially
vulnerable to food insecurity, given the increasing cost of inputs and the fall in farm
incomes; that access to land, water, seeds and other natural resources is an
increasing challenge for poor producers; and that support by States for small
farmers, fishing communities and local enterprises is an element key to food
security and provision of the right to food;
11. Stresses the importance of fighting hunger in rural areas, including
through national efforts supported by international partnerships to stop
desertification and land degradation and through investments and public policies
that are specifically appropriate to the risk of drylands, and in this regard calls for
the full implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification,
Particularly in Africa; 12
1F

12. Stresses also its commitments to promote and protect, without
discrimination, the economic, social and cultural rights of indigenous peoples, in
accordance with international human rights obligations and taking into account, as
appropriate, the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, 13
acknowledges that many indigenous organizations and representatives of indigenous
communities have expressed in different forums their deep concerns over the
obstacles and challenges they face for the full enjoyment of the right to food, and
calls upon States to take special actions to combat the root causes of the
disproportionately high level of hunger and malnutrition among indigenous peoples
and the continuous discrimination against them;
12F

13. Requests all States and private actors, as well as international
organizations within their respective mandates, to take fully into account the need to
promote the effective realization of the right to food for all, including in the ongoing
negotiations in different fields;
14. Recognizes the need to strengthen national commitment as well as
international assistance, upon request and in cooperation with affected countries,
towards a better realization and protection of the right to food, and in particular to
develop national protection mechanisms for people forced to leave their homes and
land because of hunger or natural or man-made disasters affecting the enjoyment of
the right to food;
15. Stresses the need to make efforts to mobilize and optimize the allocation
and utilization of technical and financial resources from all sources, including
external debt relief for developing countries, and to reinforce national actions to
implement sustainable food security policies;
16. Recognizes the need for a successful conclusion of the Doha
Development Round negotiations of the World Trade Organization as a
contribution to creating international conditions that permit the realization of the
right to food;
17. Stresses that all States should make all efforts to ensure that their
international policies of a political and economic nature, including international
trade agreements, do not have a negative impact on the right to food in other
countries;
_______________
12
13

4

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1954, No. 33480.
Resolution 61/295, annex.

A/RES/62/164

18. Recalls the importance of the New York Declaration on Action against
Hunger and Poverty, and recommends the continuation of efforts aimed at
identifying additional sources of financing for the fight against hunger and poverty;
19. Recognizes that the promises made at the World Food Summit in 1996 to
halve the number of persons who are undernourished are not being fulfilled, and
invites once again all international financial and development institutions, as well as
the relevant United Nations agencies and funds, to give priority to and provide the
necessary funding to realize the aim of halving by 2015 the proportion of people
who suffer from hunger, as well as the right to food as set out in the Rome
Declaration on World Food Security6 and the United Nations Millennium
Declaration;4
0H

1H

20. Reaffirms that integrating food and nutritional support, with the goal that
all people at all times will have access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food to meet
their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life, is part of a
comprehensive response to the spread of HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and other
communicable diseases;
21. Urges States to give adequate priority in their development strategies and
expenditures to the realization of the right to food;
22. Stresses the importance of international development cooperation and
assistance, in particular in activities related to disaster risk reduction and in
emergency situations such as natural and man-made disasters, diseases and pests,
for the realization of the right to food and the achievement of sustainable food
security, while recognizing that each country has the primary responsibility for
ensuring the implementation of national programmes and strategies in this regard;
23. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations system and other relevant
stakeholders to support national efforts aimed at responding rapidly to the food
crises currently occurring across Africa, and expresses its deep concern that funding
shortfalls are forcing the World Food Programme to cut operations across different
regions, including Southern Africa;
24. Invites all relevant international organizations, including the World Bank
and the International Monetary Fund, to promote policies and projects that have a
positive impact on the right to food, to ensure that partners respect the right to food
in the implementation of common projects, to support strategies of Member States
aimed at the fulfilment of the right to food and to avoid any actions that could have
a negative impact on the realization of the right to food;
25. Takes note of the interim report of the Special Rapporteur on the right to
food,11 and expresses its appreciation for the work and commitment of the first
mandate-holder to achieving the realization of the right to food;
2H

26. Supports the realization of the mandate of the Special Rapporteur as
extended for a period of three years by the Human Rights Council in its resolution
6/2;1
3H

27. Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to provide all the necessary human and financial
resources for the effective fulfilment of the mandate of the Special Rapporteur;
28. Welcomes the work already done by the Committee on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights in promoting the right to adequate food, in particular its
General Comment No. 12 (1999) on the right to adequate food (article 11 of the

5

A/RES/62/164

International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights), 14 in which the
Committee affirmed, inter alia, that the right to adequate food is indivisibly linked
to the inherent dignity of the human person and is indispensable for the fulfilment
of other human rights enshrined in the International Bill of Human Rights, and is
also inseparable from social justice, requiring the adoption of appropriate
economic, environmental and social policies, at both the national and the
international levels, oriented to the eradication of poverty and the fulfilment of all
human rights for all;
13F

29. Recalls General Comment No. 15 (2002) of the Committee on the right
to water (articles 11 and 12 of the Covenant), 15 in which the Committee noted, inter
alia, the importance of ensuring sustainable water resources for human consumption
and agriculture in realization of the right to adequate food;
14F

30. Reaffirms that the Voluntary Guidelines to Support the Progressive
Realization of the Right to Adequate Food in the Context of National Food
Security, adopted by the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations in November 2004,8 represent a practical tool to promote the
realization of the right to food for all, contribute to the achievement of food
security and thus provide an additional instrument in the attainment of
internationally agreed development goals, including those contained in the
Millennium Declaration;
4H

31. Welcomes the continued cooperation of the High Commissioner, the
Committee and the Special Rapporteur, and encourages them to continue their
cooperation in this regard;
32. Calls upon all Governments to cooperate with and assist the Special
Rapporteur in his task, to supply all necessary information requested by him and to
give serious consideration to responding favourably to the requests of the Special
Rapporteur to visit their countries to enable him to fulfil his mandate more
effectively;
33. Requests the Special Rapporteur to submit an interim report to the
General Assembly at its sixty-third session on the implementation of the present
resolution and to continue his work, including by examining the emerging issues
with regard to the realization of the right to food within his existing mandate;
34. Invites Governments, relevant United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes, treaty bodies and civil society actors, including non-governmental
organizations, as well as the private sector, to cooperate fully with the Special
Rapporteur in the fulfilment of his mandate, inter alia, through the submission of
comments and suggestions on ways and means of realizing the right to food;
35. Decides to continue the consideration of the question at its sixty-third
session under the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”.
76th plenary meeting
18 December 2007

_______________
14
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2000, Supplement No. 2 and corrigendum
(E/2000/22 and Corr.1), annex V.
15
Ibid., 2003, Supplement No. 2 (E/2003/22), annex IV.

6
