A /75/PV.93

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

93rd plenary meeting

Friday, 23 July 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Konfourou
(Mali), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President (spoke in French): Members
will recall that the General Assembly concluded its
consideration of agenda item 24 at its 62nd plenary
meeting, on 28 April 2021. In order for the Assembly to
take action on the draft resolution before it today, it will
be necessary to reopen consideration of agenda item 24.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly
to reopen its consideration of agenda item 24?
It was so decided (decision 75/504 B).
Agenda item 24 (continued)
Eradication of poverty and other development
issues
Draft resolution (A/75/L.108)
The Acting President (spoke in French): I now
give the floor to the representative of Bangladesh to
introduce draft resolution A/75/L.108.
Ms. Fatima (Bangladesh): On behalf of Antigua and
Barbuda, Ireland, my own delegation, Bangladesh, and
101 co-sponsors, as of the last count, I have the honour to
introduce the first-ever United Nations draft resolution

on vision, entitled “Vision for Everyone: accelerating
action to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals”.
This draft resolution is proposed under agenda item 24,
“Eradication of poverty and other development issues”,
and is contained in document A/75/L.108.
Ambassador Walton Alfonso Webson, Ambassador
Geraldine Byrne Nason and I thank all delegations for
their valuable contribution and support in finalizing the
draft resolution for adoption today. This important task
could not have been accomplished without the visionary
leadership of my fellow co-Chair of the Group of
Friends of Vision, Ambassador Webson of Antigua and
Barbuda. He could not be here today, as he has to attend
to some pressing national priorities back home. I pay
special tribute to him for his invaluable contribution
to generating awareness and action on this highly
important issue. I would also like to thank the members
of the Group of Friends, who provided key support to
advance this cause over the past years. We are grateful
to the World Health Organization, other United Nations
colleagues and our friends in civil society for their
steadfast support and contribution to our efforts. Our
special thanks go to our experts for their tireless efforts
to reach consensus on this landmark draft resolution.
Allow me to take this opportunity to thank the 101
co-sponsors. We sincerely hope that more States will
join this important draft resolution before its adoption
this morning.
It is critical to convey a strong message from the
General Assembly of our unequivocal commitment
to ensuring proper eye-care facilities for everyone,

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-20267 (E)

*2120267*

A/75/PV.93

23/07/2021

everywhere, in order to prevent conditions that can
lead to serious and permanent damage. We must take
this opportunity to change the lives of millions who are
living in blindness or with impaired vision.

issues in a holistic manner. There must be a paradigm
shift in our approach to addressing such vicious cycles
of poverty and inequality, which are closely linked with
vision loss.

This draft resolution is a long-overdue recognition
of the central role that healthy vision plays in human
life and for sustainable development. Millions of people
globally lose their vision needlessly. That phenomenon
largely impedes their ability to contribute to their
full potentials to the socioeconomic development of
their societies. The draft resolution before us has the
potential to reverse such a situation.

However, it is not only poverty and inequality.
Vision loss can also be linked to other Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs), such as Goal 2, on hunger,
Goal 3, on health, Goal 4, on education, Goal 5, on
gender inequality, Goal 8, on decent jobs, and so on.

For those living with sight loss, the cost to them
and their societies is enormous. Loss of learning and
loss of earning deny them the opportunities to live in
dignity and prosperity. On average, sight loss costs the
global economy the staggering amount of $411 billion
in productivity each year. Access to eye-care services
can increase household per capita expenditure by 88 per
cent and the odds of obtaining paid employment by
10 per cent. Therefore, the imperative to act on vision
is not simply moral or ethical; the economic cost is
equally untenable.
We cannot achieve our overarching vision of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development of leaving
no one behind without urgent actions in this area. We
must harness the economic potentials of those who
suffer from blindness or impaired vision by enhancing
their economic potentials, employment prospects and
workplace productivity.
Eye health is becoming one of the fastest growing
areas of public health concerns of our time, and we
cannot deny its strong interlinkages with the poverty
and inequality that exist both within and among nations.
More than 90 per cent of the 1.1 billion people worldwide
who have vision loss live in low- or middle-income
countries. They share a common challenge. They do not
have access to the most basic eye care, and that leads
many of them to life-long visual impairment and even
blindness. In turn, families and communities become
trapped into the cycle of poverty and inequality.
The gender dimension of vision impairment
is another phenomenon of great concern. It is no
coincidence that 55 per cent of blind people are women
and girls. They are 8 per cent more likely to be blind
than men are and 15 per cent more likely to have
moderate to severe vision impairment. It is imperative
to adopt a whole-of-society approach to tackling these
2/6

The recently published Lancet Global Health
Commission on Global Eye Health: vision beyond 2020
revealed that, in low- and middle-income countries,
children with vision impairment were two to five times
less likely to be in formal education. The provision of
glasses was found to be one of the most effective health
interventions for children’s educational attainment,
reducing the odds of failing a class by 44 per cent.
Eye care can be transformative. An eye test for
a child can be the difference between getting an
education and not getting one. A pair of prescription
glasses can make the difference between going to work
and not going to work. Corrective eye treatment can
be the difference between improved eyesight and total
loss of sight. Vision care and eye health for all can be
the difference between the fulfilment of the aspirations
of the 2030 Agenda and not achieving such aspirations.
The draft resolution before us encourages
Governments to take a whole-of-Government approach
to eye health, linking vision to advancing other
development priorities. It invites international financial
institutions and donors to provide appropriate and
targeted finances. It calls on the relevant United Nations
institutions to support the global efforts to achieve
vision for everyone in order to achieve the SDGs.
The adoption of today’s draft resolution on vision
would be a watershed moment in the global efforts
for vision care. Preventable sight loss is a global
challenge that needs a global solution. We cannot hope
to end poverty, end hunger and end illiteracy without
making eye care central to our global efforts. The draft
resolution that we have before us can make a world of
difference to the lives of billions and their families
and communities. We may not be able to restore the
eyesight of the millions who have already lost their
vision, but our timely actions can prevent millions more
from falling into the same trap and ensure a life of hope
and aspirations for the visually impaired.
21-20267

23/07/2021

A/75/PV.93

Let me conclude by calling on the Assembly to adopt
this draft resolution with a strong mandate and thus
send a strong message of hope to the millions of visually
impaired. That can be our solemn pledge from this
historic seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly.
The Acting President (spoke in French): We shall
now proceed to consider draft resolution A/75/L.108.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/75/L.108, entitled “Vision for Everyone:
accelerating action to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals”. For the Assembly’s information,
the draft resolution has closed for e-sponsorship.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (General Assembly Affairs
Branch): I should like to announce that, since the
submission of the draft resolution and in addition to
the delegations listed on the document, the following
countries have also become sponsors of draft resolution
A/75/L.108: Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
the Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Chile, China, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Denmark,
Dominica, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Fiji,
France, the Gambia, Georgia, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Israel,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Lesotho, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Micronesia (Federated States of), Mongolia,
Morocco, Namibia, Nauru, the Netherlands, Nicaragua,
the Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines,
Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of Korea, the Republic of
Moldova, Romania, the Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San
Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Singapore, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Suriname, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam and Zambia.
The Acting President (spoke in French): May
I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/75/L.108?

Draft resolution A/75/L.108 was adopted (resolution
75/310).
The Acting President (spoke in French): Before
giving the floor to speakers for explanations of vote after
the voting, may I remind delegations that explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Leiby (United States of America): The United
States is pleased to join the consensus on resolution
75/310 and reaffirms its position on the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development as detailed in its explanation
of position delivered on 1 September 2015.
We are pleased that the resolution includes rightsbased language related to persons with disabilities,
including those with vision impairments.
Ms. Zalanyi (Hungary): Hungary would like to
extend its appreciation to the co-facilitators for their
tireless work and commitment in the elaboration of
resolution 75/310. Hungary is firmly committed to
ending vision impairment and blindness globally by
2030. Putting an end to that scourge requires effective
action by Governments in terms of prevention, the
provision of adequate, affordable and inclusive health
services, and comprehensive socioeconomic support
for those marginalized and those most left behind.
We emphasize the centrality of evidence-based
interventions at the national and local levels, identifying
and focusing on populations that are at highest risk of
vision impairment and those who face inequalities, and
ensuring their access to the services that they need.
For Hungary, leaving no one behind is a universal
term, and therefore we are concerned that singling
out different actors and marginalized groups such as
migrants in the seventeenth preambular paragraph
of the present resolution might have an implication
of excluding others who are equally in vulnerable
situations. We believe that ending vision impairment
and blindness requires action by all Governments, with
the support of the international community, in ensuring
the health and well-being of their own populations, thus
enabling them to prosper and thrive in their homeland
and preventing the need for displacement, which puts
such populations in an even more precarious situation.
Hungary remains a committed global partner in the
fight against vision impairment and blindness.

21-202673/6

A/75/PV.93

The Acting President (spoke in French): We have
heard the last speaker in explanation of vote after
the voting.
We will now hear those delegations wishing to
make statements after the adoption of the resolution.
Mr. Konstantinopolskiy (Russian Federation)
(spoke in Russian): At the outset, we wish to thank the
authors of resolution 75/310, on “Vision for Everyone:
accelerating action to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals” — Bangladesh, Ireland and
Antigua and Barbuda — for this beneficial initiative.
We also value their leadership in establishing the
informal Friends of Vision Group in New York.

23/07/2021

A pioneer in Soviet and Russian eye microsurgery was
Dr. Fyodorov.
We continue to work at the national level. For
example, for the past five years, the number of people
with blindness or vision impairment per 100,000
Russian adults has decreased by more than 20 per cent
and 29 per cent among children.
We are prepared to cooperate with interested
partners within the United Nations system on issues
related to maintaining eye health, and we fully support
the beneficial initiative being discussed today.
The Acting President (spoke in French): We have
heard the last speaker under this agenda item.

In a context where almost one quarter of people
globally have a vision impairment, a document on the
contributions of ophthalmology services to sustainable
development is much needed. Although the leading
role in international cooperation for eye health belongs
to the World Health Organization, the resolution
demonstrates the link between vision and issues such
as poverty eradication, economic growth, employment
and healthy workplaces, education, safe roadway travel
and so on. It allows the General Assembly, within its
competencies, to contribute to global efforts in this
area. Against the backdrop of the coronavirus disease
pandemic, this is even more relevant, not only due to
setbacks in the provision of eye-care services but also
in the context of the symptoms of this new disease and
its possible effects on a person’s eyesight.

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 24?

The General Assembly’s attention to the
socioeconomic aspects of vision impairment is also
crucial in the context of the recently concluded 20year global programme Vision 2020, which, according
to experts, has decreased preventable blindness by
more than 15 per cent worldwide. Further action
here would be to address such issues as increasing
awareness and education among the population on the
importance of vision, to provide preventive care for
these illnesses and their early diagnosis, the integration
of ophthalmology into primary medical care assistance,
and the implementation of modern medical technology
as well as the sharing of expertise.

Mr. Sautter (Germany): It is with great pleasure
that I hereby introduce draft resolution A/75/L.116, on
“Tackling illicit trafficking in wildlife”, on behalf of
Gabon and my own country, Germany.

Ophthalmology in our country, Russia, has had
a long tradition, beginning in the nineteenth century,
when the first specialized eye-care hospital was
established in Moscow and the second ophthalmology
department in the world was opened in Saint Petersburg.
4/6

It was so decided.
Agenda item 14 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/75/L.116)
The Acting President (spoke in French): I now
give the floor to the representative of Germany to
introduce draft resolution A/75/L.116.

The draft resolution that is before the General
Assembly this morning is the fifth resolution on this
important issue. Since the General Assembly adopted
its first resolution on poaching and illicit wildlife
trafficking, in 2015 (resolution 69/314), substantial
progress has been made. But let me be clear: illicit
wildlife trafficking continues to be one of the most
profitable forms of organized crime and poses grave
threats to biodiversity, to sustainable development, and
in some cases, to stability and even to our own health.
We hope that today we can once again adopt
this draft resolution by consensus to underscore our
common continued commitment to jointly addressing
the challenges posed by illicit wildlife trafficking. This
21-20267

23/07/2021

resolution has always stood out as a strong example
of all States Members of the United Nations working
together to address an issue of truly global concern. I
hope that it will do so once again today.
I am very happy that well over 50 delegations from
all regions of the world have already joined Gabon and
Germany in sponsoring this draft resolution, and I hope
that even more will do so this morning.
Allow me to express our sincere gratitude to all
those who have crucially contributed to this draft.
First, let me thank my dear colleague from Gabon
and his excellent team for their tireless work on this
draft resolution and once again to commend Gabon’s
leading role in combating poaching and illegal wildlife
trafficking. For Germany, it is an honour to co-chair
the United Nations Group of Friends on Poaching and
Illicit Wildlife Trafficking together with Gabon and
to work together as co-facilitators of this important
draft resolution.
We would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his highly insightful report on the global status of illicit
trafficking in wildlife, which informs our deliberations
and our work on the draft resolution.
We are furthermore very grateful to the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) experts
on wildlife crime in Vienna as well as to their colleagues
at the UNODC liaison office here in New York, for their
important work.
The draft resolution was possible only thanks to
the constructive engagement of so many delegations,
from within the Group of Friends and beyond. Our
gratitude goes to all of them for their support and their
efforts. Negotiations were intense, not always easy, so
I am very happy that in the end we all could agree on a
strong text.
The draft resolution renews our joint commitment
to effectively combating illicit wildlife trafficking at
all levels. It draws attention to new developments and
challenges that require our joint efforts, including those
posed by the current circumstances of the coronavirus
disease pandemic. Let me highlight just three of many
new points now reflected in the draft resolution.
First, for the first time the draft resolution now
recognizes that poaching and the illicit wildlife trade,
and the ecosystem degradation and habitat loss that
are their consequences, increase the risk of zoonotic

A/75/PV.93

diseases emerging and spreading, leading in some case
to epidemics and even pandemics.
Building on an understanding of the fact that
human, animal, plant and ecosystem health are in fact
inseparable, a One Health approach is recognized as an
integral part of both the rationale for combating illicit
wildlife trafficking as well as informing efforts to
do so.
In that context, the draft resolution underlines
the importance of Tripartite Plus, the cooperation
between the World Health Organization, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the
World Organisation for Animal Health and the United
Nations Environment Programme in order to ensure
coordinated, intersectoral action at the global level.
Secondly, the draft resolution underscores the link
between wildlife crime and financial crime and calls
on Member States to strengthen the capacity of their
relevant agencies to address this effectively. Illicit
wildlife trafficking remains highly lucrative, thereby
fuelling corruption, which not only exacerbates the
damage done to habitats and ecosystems but can also
undermine the stability of States.
Thirdly, as have so many things in the past year,
illicit wildlife trafficking has moved online. The draft
resolution therefore now also emphasizes the importance
of developing strategies and technical tools to confront
the increased use of online intermediaries. We need to
be able to effectively deal with online marketplaces and
social media forums that fuel illicit wildlife trafficking.
The draft resolution therefore recognizes the need for
increased technical and digital capacity-building.
We encourage all members to fully implement the
commitments set out in the draft resolution without
delay and further encourage them to work closely with
the United Nations specialized agencies, the various
Conventions and all other stakeholders that share
our ambition to effectively tackle illicit trafficking
in wildlife.
For our common fight against illicit wildlife
trafficking to be successful, it is crucial that we as
States Members of the United Nations keep on working
together closely. I believe that the work leading to the
draft resolution was a great example of this spirit across
all regional groups. On behalf of Gabon, Germany and
the Group of Friends, I would like to thank all colleagues
very much once again for this great cooperation.

21-202675/6

A/75/PV.93

The Acting President (spoke in French): The
Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/75/L.116, entitled “Tackling illicit trafficking
in wildlife”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of draft
resolution A/75/L.116 and in addition to the delegations
listed in that document, the following countries
have also become sponsors of the draft resolution:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, the Plurinational
State of Bolivia, Botswana, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde,
Canada, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominica, the Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland,

6/6

23/07/2021

France, Georgia, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
Hungary, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan,
Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mali, Malta, Mexico, Monaco,
Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia, the Netherlands,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, the
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea,
Romania, the Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, San
Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Thailand,
the United Kingdom, the United Republic of Tanzania
and the United States.
The Acting President (spoke in French): May I
take it that the General Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/75/L.116?
Draft resolution A/75/L.116 was adopted (resolution
75/311).
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

21-20267
