United Nations

S/PV.6772

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6772nd meeting
Wednesday, 16 May 2012, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mehdiyev . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Azerbaijan)

Members:

China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Eick
Mr. Morales
Mr. Kumar
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Karev
Mr. Mashabane
Mr. Menan
Mr. Tatham
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-34157 (E)

*1234157*

S/PV.6772

The meeting was called to order at 11.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Luis
Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Moreno-Ocampo.
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo: It is my honour to present
my third briefing to the Security Council on the
activities of the Office of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court on the situation in Libya
in furtherance of resolution 1970 (2011).
At the meeting when I first briefed the Council
(see S/PV.6528), I emphasized the importance of the
Council’s consensus adoption of resolution 1970
(2011) and announced that we would request arrest
warrants in subsequent weeks. That significant
consensus greatly enhanced the cooperation my Office
has received and allowed it to present a first case in the
space of a few months.
When I briefed the Council for the second time
(see S/PV.6647), we explained that the arrest warrants
issued by the judges on 27 June detailed the crimes
committed against civilians in Tripoli and other areas
under the control of Al-Qadhafi. The judges concluded
that in order to stop the crimes and protect civilians it
was necessary to arrest the three individuals identified
as the most responsible: Muammar Al-Qadhafi, Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi. The
Office informed the Libyan authorities that, should
they decide to prosecute the same individuals for the
same crimes under investigation by the International
Criminal Court (ICC), they should submit an
admissibility challenge that would be decided by the
ICC judges.
Today, I inform the Council that the Libyan
authorities have arrested Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and

2

presented such a challenge. The application was filed
on 1 May and notes that, on 8 January 2012, the Libyan
Prosecutor-General commenced an investigation of
serious crimes, which include murder and rape,
allegedly committed by Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
during the 2011 revolution, including in the period
between 15 and 28 February 2011. The filing also states
that the Libyan Government is committed to attaining
the highest international standards both for the conduct
of its investigations and any eventual trials.
Libyan authorities also said that Saif Al-Islam has
been kept in adequate conditions of detention, provided
with sufficient and good quality food, and given access
to the ICC and the option of retaining a domestic
lawyer of his choosing. He has also received visits
from the International Committee of the Red Cross,
non-governmental organizations and family members,
been provided with proper medical and dental care, and
not been subject to physical abuse. That is what the
Libyan Government presented to the judges.
Following the submission of the Libyan
admissibility challenge, the Pre-Trial Chamber
requested observations from different parties to the
proceedings, as well as from the Security Council.
Rule 59 of the ICC rules of procedure and evidence
provides that those who have referred a situation, in
this case the Security Council, must be notified of the
challenge and may in response make representation on
the jurisdictional challenges. The Registry has
transmitted the notification through a note verbale to
the Secretary-General.
This is the first time in the brief history of the
International Criminal Court that a State has requested
jurisdiction to conduct a national investigation against
the same individual and for the same incidents under
investigation by the International Criminal Court. The
challenge goes to the heart of the system of justice
established in 1998 by the Rome Statute. National
States have the primary obligation to conduct
proceedings and the International Criminal Court
intervention shall be complementary. The Prosecution
will present its observations on this admissibility
challenge, as requested by the Pre-Trial Chamber, on
4 June.
Let me be clear. There are no doubts on the legal
principles. The Rome Statute is based on the primacy
of national proceedings. As mentioned on numerous
occasions in relation to Darfur and other situations, the

12-34157

S/PV.6772

Office will not evaluate the Libyan judicial system as a
whole. The Office will check the factual situation in
accordance with the Statute’s requirements, which
include the intervention of an independent and
impartial judiciary. The Security Council may decide to
present observations, but this is a judicial issue that
will be decided by the judges of the Pre-Trial Chamber.
Abdullah Al-Senussi was also arrested on
17 March 2012 by Mauritanian authorities. He is
subject to extradition requests from France and Libya,
as well as a request for surrender from the International
Criminal Court. Mauritania shall decide.
My Office continues to collect evidence in
relation to a second case in Libya on gender crimes
committed against men and women alike. The United
Nations Commission of Inquiry’s findings confirmed
the commission of those crimes. My Office is mindful
of the sensitivity surrounding rape in Libya and has
adopted a strategy to limit the exposure of victims by
focusing on obtaining evidence from doctors and
soldiers. The investigation is progressing.
The report of the Commission of Inquiry issued
on 2 March 2012 (A/HRC/17/44) presents a
comprehensive view of the crimes committed in Libya.
There are thousands of allegations of crimes committed
by Al-Qadhafi forces and thousands of individuals
allegedly involved in such crimes who are in detention.
Many of them are still not under the jurisdiction of the
national authorities and allegedly subjected to
mistreatment or torture by rebel forces. There are also
allegations of crimes committed against civilians in
Tawergha, and questions remain to be answered about
the circumstances of the death of Muammar
Al-Qadhafi.
Additionally, the United Nations Commission of
Inquiry found that NATO did not deliberately target
civilians in Libya. Of a total of 25,944 air strikes and
7,642
air-to-surface
weapons
employed,
the
Commission cited evidence with respect to five air
strikes that reportedly produced civilian casualties. The
Office of the Prosecutor takes due note of the
Commission of Inquiry’s findings. The Office has no
jurisdiction to evaluate the proper scope of the NATO
mandate in relation with resolution 1973 (2011), but
the Office is requesting further information about those
five incidents identified by the Commission of Inquiry.
The Government of Libya has committed to a
comprehensive strategy to address all crimes and end

12-34157

impunity in Libya. While the Government faces
challenges on many fronts, that comprehensive strategy
must remain a priority if the Government is to show
that impunity will no longer be tolerated. The strategy
must address as a priority the transfer to the central
authorities and the screening of thousands of detainees,
the investigation of whether allegations of crimes by
those detainees where warranted, measures to ensure
justice for the victims and the release of those against
whom there is no basis for investigation.
Allow me to share with the Council a personal
experience I had when I visited Tripoli. I was in the
lobby of my hotel and a man approached me and
showed me his nine-year-old son. He said that he had
been exposed on television holding a flag of the
rebellion, and then the Al-Qadhafi forces targeted him,
captured him and raped him in a tank. He was able to
trace the perpetrator, who was arrested. That is why I
find it relevant to tell this story. It was one of the many
thousands of cases that the authorities had to deal with.
But the authorities released the man, because there was
no evidence and no witnesses against him. The father
asked me what he should do. He had weapons; should
he kill the man? But he said he did not want to be a
killer. He only wanted justice for his son. This was just
one example of the thousands of similar problems that
Libya will have to face in the coming months.
At the same time, all unofficial and
unacknowledged detention centres should be
dismantled and all possible steps taken to curb
mistreatment or torture. The Government of Libya has
expressed its commitment to conducting investigations
and prosecutions to address the most serious crimes
committed by all sides. The Government of Libya has
adopted a transitional justice law creating a factfinding and a reconciliation commission that could
contribute to strengthening the rule of law in the
country.
My Office will fulfil its mandate to investigate
those who bear the greatest responsibility for the most
serious crimes under the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court, while respecting genuine
national proceedings. The Office will monitor Libya’s
national proceedings closely. My Office is also
gathering information about the activities outside
Libya of high-level Al-Qadhafi officials who were
allegedly involved in Rome Statute crimes and who
reportedly continue to seek to destabilize the situation
in Libya.

3

S/PV.6772

I would like to conclude by emphasizing again
the importance of the adoption by consensus of
resolution 1970 (2011), which defined the need to do
justice in Libya to ensure peace and security. Such
consensus was also expressed during my previous
briefings and in the recently adopted resolution 2040
(2012), which states that the Council is
“[l]ooking forward to a future for Libya based on
national reconciliation, justice, respect for human
rights and the rule of law” (resolution 2040
(2012), fourth preambular paragraph).
This commitment to justice and the rule of law
plays a crucial role in the current post-conflict
situation; it provides a framework for the national
authorities to act. Recently, during my April visit to
Tripoli and Misrata, members of the National
Transitional Council and of the Libyan public
expressed their deep appreciation for the decisive
intervention of the Security Council and the
International Criminal Court. They started the
rebellion, requesting justice for the crimes committed
in Abu Salim prison on 29 June 1996, because they
believed that, under the Al-Qadhafi regime, there
would be no justice in Libya. Now, the Government
has expressed both its gratitude and its conviction that
it should seize this historical moment to provide justice
for all Libyan victims. They believe in that possibility.
My Office remains committed to working with
the Government of Libya and with the Council to
maintain this common effort and to ensure that justice
for all of the victims of Libya is achieved.
The President: I thank Mr. Moreno-Ocampo for
his briefing.

The situation has evolved in recent months. The
two remaining individuals for whom the Court had
issued warrants of arrest have been apprehended. We
have also noted the admissibility challenge filed by the
Government of Libya regarding one case under
article 19.2(b) of the Rome Statute. We take note of the
desire of the Libyan authorities that the two individuals
should be tried by Libyan courts.
The Pakistan delegation has also noted that the
Prosecutor has implemented article 19.7 of the Rome
Statute by suspending the investigation into Mr. Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi activities until such time as the
Court makes a determination on the issue of
admissibility. We also take note of the fact that, in
accordance with the principle of complementarity, the
Rome Statute clearly establishes that the International
Criminal Court is meant to be complementary to
national jurisdictions and that primacy is to be given to
national action. That point was also made by the
Prosecutor in his briefing today.
We therefore hope that the request of the Libyan
authorities to investigate and try these individuals will
be considered positively. We look forward to a decision
of the judges of the Pre-Trial Chamber on the
admissibility of the case before the ICC. In case the
trials of these individuals are conducted in Libya, the
Libyan authorities must guarantee that their legal rights
will be protected and that due process of law will be
respected. As regards investigations initiated by the
Court concerning other alleged crimes committed in
Libya, we expect that the Prosecutor will conduct
thorough and impartial investigations.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

Let me conclude by recalling that the overall
objective of the Council and the international
community is to promote durable peace and stability in
Libya in the best interests of the Libyan people.

Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): Let me begin by thanking
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo for his briefing today. We have
taken note of his third report to the Security Council,
submitted pursuant to paragraph 7 of resolution 1970
(2011).

Ms. Rice (United States of America): We would
like to thank the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) for his briefing on the work of
his Office and actions taken pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011).

At the outset, I should like to mention that
Pakistan is not a signatory to the Rome Statute or a
member of the International Criminal Court (ICC).
However, we acknowledge the rights and obligations of
the States members of the ICC.

As we have consistently noted, resolution 1970
(2011) and its referral of the situation in Libya to the
International Criminal Court represented an historic
milestone in the fight against impunity. The Security
Council’s unanimous decision to refer the situation
underscored the importance of the role of justice and
accountability in the resolution of conflicts and

4

12-34157

S/PV.6772

maintenance of international peace and security. The
referral has served to keep accountability and the rule
of law as key elements of Libya’s transition to a
peaceful and democratic future.
We are pleased with the Prosecutor’s report that
his Office has received a high degree of cooperation
from a variety of States and other actors in response to
requests for assistance from the ICC. As the Prosecutor
described in his briefing, Libya recently filed an
admissibility challenge with the Court on the grounds
that it is actively investigating Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi for the same and different crimes as the
ICC. Libya has also detailed the steps it has taken to
conduct that investigation and has stated its
commitment to adhering to international standards in
the process.
This is an important moment, both for Libya and
for the Court. The Rome Statute of the ICC is
predicated on a system of complementary justice and
contains provisions to deal with situations in which a
State with jurisdiction wishes to pursue charges itself.
In this regard, we are encouraged by the Prosecutor’s
report of the ongoing cooperation his Office has
received from Libya. That having been said, as the
Prosecutor notes, ultimately it will be for the judges to
decide whether to defer to Libyan proceedings.
As the ICC proceedings move forward, we will
continue to encourage the Government of Libya to
maintain its cooperation with the Court and to adhere
to its international obligations, including under
resolution 1970 (2011). In addition, we continue to
emphasize that it is critical that Libya take all
necessary steps to ensure that the detention of and any
further domestic proceedings against Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi fully comply with Libya’s international
obligations.
Moreover, there is much work to be done
domestically in Libya not only to account for the grave
crimes committed in the past, but also to ensure a
functioning justice system for the future. It is vital that
Libya build a fair and credible criminal justice system
that guarantees humane treatment and due process and
conforms to Libya’s international human rights
obligations.
We agree with the Prosecutor that the
Government of Libya faces critical challenges in
assuming custody over the thousands of detainees that
continue to be held by militias or local authorities, and

12-34157

in arranging for their expeditious release or the
adjudication of their cases. The international
community should respond to the needs of the Libyan
Government as it approaches that significant
administrative, logistical and judicial task.
We are deeply concerned by the patterns of rape
documented by the International Commission of
Inquiry, as highlighted in the Prosecutor’s report. For
the sake of the individual victims and in order to
achieve a lasting and inclusive peace in Libya, sexual
and gender-based violent crimes must not go
unpunished. It will be important to ensure that there is
accountability for violations and abuses of applicable
laws committed in Libya by all sides, including for
alleged attacks committed against civilians for their
perceived loyalties to the Al-Qadhafi regime. Impunity
for such crimes cannot be reconciled with respect for
human rights and the rule of law.
Independent and impartial investigations of all
alleged crimes will be a critical part of the effort to
create an inclusive, democratic State in which all
Libyans, of all backgrounds, have a future and an
opportunity to participate in the rebuilding of their
country. We are pleased to hear that the Government is
working on a comprehensive strategy to address those
issues, and we support the Ministry of Justice’s
expressed commitment to justice-sector reforms. We
welcome the Government of Libya’s statements in its
submission to the ICC that it is receptive to assistance
and support from the international community in that
important work. We are working with the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya and the international
community to assist the Libyan authorities in
addressing those justice-sector reform goals.
Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Moreno-Ocampo
for his briefing and his third report on the situation in
Libya pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).
We support the efforts of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) to investigate all those who
participated in illegal acts during the events in Libya.
There is sufficient information to show that crimes
were committed both by persons from the Al-Qadhafi
regime and by rebels. However, we have not yet heard
of any prosecutions of Al-Qadhafi opponents,
including those involved in exacting revenge against
the former Libyan leader. Questions also remain with
regard to possible crimes committed by senior officials

5

S/PV.6772

of States involved in the NATO-led operation. All cases
of disproportionate or indiscriminate use of force
during the conflict leading to civilian casualties should
be investigated.
The Prosecutor’s remit includes determining
whether any crimes were committed by any of the
parties to the conflict, so as to ascertain whether there
are indications of criminal acts such as crimes against
humanity and war crimes. In that context, we deem it
important to continue to evaluate the data received
from the Human Rights Council’s Commission of
Inquiry, non-governmental organizations and other
quarters so as to look into the future work of the
International Criminal Court based on resolution 1970
(2011).
We take note of the expressed desire of Libyan
authorities to prosecute Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi,
including assurances of the commitment of Libya’s
Government to the highest standards of justice. We
believe that prosecuting the most serious crimes under
international law is first and foremost the responsibility
of the particular State concerned. The jurisdiction of
the ICC complements, but does not replace, national
jurisdiction.
It is also clear that Governments are not always
in a position to tackle this on their own. One particular
obstacle to doing so could be the absence in a country
of a viable judicial system functioning in line with
international standards. In this case, however, the
primary issue is whether Libyan authorities are taking
real steps to investigate the crimes committed. We are
seriously concerned about reports from the country of
the aftershocks of the conflict resulting in violence and
additional crimes being committed.
We once again underscore the importance of
upholding the appropriate legal guarantees when
meting out justice in the post-conflict stage. In our
opinion, the ICC must facilitate the implementation of
that. We are closely following the work of the ICC in
that area.
Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I also wish to thank
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) for his report and for
comprehensive briefing today. I want also to commend
him for the work under way and for the efforts that his
Office is undertaking to establish the truth and
investigate all facts and evidence relevant to assessing
criminal responsibility under the Rome Statute.

6

In that regard, we welcome the close cooperation
that the Prosecutor’s Office continues to benefit from
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, as well as the synergy between the
Office and the United Nations Commission of Inquiry,
as stressed in the Prosecutor’s report. We also welcome
the contacts that the Office continues to maintain with
Libyan authorities, the Government’s expressed
support to the Court and the acknowledgement of the
positive role that the ICC plays in preventing further
violence in the country.
Portugal stresses the importance of accountability
and the need to fight impunity for serious violations of
human rights. Those are universal goals that guide the
United Nations and are at the core of the international
community’s concerns.
We thank the Prosecutor for his update on the
cases of Muammar Al-Qadhafi, Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi. The information
provided highlights the procedural steps undertaken to
bring to justice the last two accused and the various
contacts between the Office and Libyan authorities, as
well as with other relevant entities, to ensure that they
will be brought to trial. We shall follow closely future
developments on those procedures, bearing in mind the
important role that the Statute confers upon the Court
in deciding the admissibility of the case against Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi following the procedural
challenge filed by the Libyan Government. We fully
trust the Court in its evaluation of the situation in order
to make sure that the trial is undertaken in full
compliance with international standards. Likewise, we
have the same expectation concerning the case against
the other accused and the need for his prompt
presentation for trial.
We also thank the Prosecutor for the information
provided on the ongoing investigations. We look
forward to further developments concerning the
investigation of gender crimes and the two patterns of
rape identified in the report (A/HRC/17/44) of the
Commission of Inquiry. In that respect, we appreciate
the concern of the Office in ensuring the protection of
victims during its investigative efforts, thus preventing
situations where victims could be further victimized
through exposure and retaliation.
The report gives us a disturbing account of other
serious violations identified in the Commission of
Inquiry’s report as having been committed in Libya,

12-34157

S/PV.6772

during and after conflict, which are now under the
scrutiny of the Prosecutor’s investigation. Violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law are
violations irrespective of whoever may be found
responsible for them. Acts of retaliation are
inadmissible, and every person has the right to a fair
trial. Cases of arbitrary arrests and enforced
disappearances must stop and be accounted for. The
same applies with regard to acts of retaliation against
civilians believed to be Al-Qadhafi loyalists, such as
suggested by the actions against Tawerghan civilians
identified in the report. Those are serious findings that,
if proven, must be accounted for. Under the ICC’s
jurisdiction, no amnesty is possible for war crimes and
crimes against humanity.
In conclusion, we look forward to a full and
complete investigation of allegations of all serious
crimes committed in Libya. We encourage the
Prosecutor and his Office to continue their efforts, in
cooperation with Libyan authorities, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and all relevant entities in order to identify those
responsible for such crimes and make sure that they are
brought to trial, as we believe that justice is the
cornerstone of peaceful and democratic societies and,
thus, a fundamental element of Libya’s institutionbuilding.
Mr. Morales (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for introducing his
third report to the Council.
We welcome the progress made in the transitional
process in Libya, despite its vulnerability, and we trust
that with the passage of time its progress will be
consolidated and become more perceptible. We
therefore trust that the upcoming elections will provide
a sound basis for the reconstruction of a State that
guarantees human rights, the rule of law and an end to
impunity.
At the same time, we believe that it is of the
greatest importance to continue our cooperation with
the ICC and the Office of the Prosecutor. It is crucial
that these bodies carry out their mandate with the
necessary support and assistance that all States,
including those that are not yet parties to the Rome
Statute, must provide.
In all things, as Security Council members we
must tread carefully. Our support must not turn into

12-34157

interference in the Court’s decisions or into pressure.
Guatemala is of the opinion that we must be careful in
making any observation on the challenge of the Libyan
Government regarding the admissibility of the case
against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi. In that regard,
although we appreciate the work done by the Office of
the Prosecutor of the ICC in the case against that
individual, we must view as positive the involvement
of the Libyan authorities in the proceedings. We
believe that it is a good sign that the Libyan authorities
wish to demonstrate that their judicial system can meet
this unique challenge.
In short, we believe that the Pre-Trial Chamber
must take the decision on the challenge brought by the
Government of Libya. However, whatever decision the
Chamber reaches, we believe that the Office of the
Prosecutor must remain informed on all steps and
decisions taken in this matter.
Lastly, in regard to other crimes committed in
Libya, our position is that investigations of violations
of human rights and crimes against humanity in Libya
must be pursued, regardless of their perpetrators. We
are also concerned about the situation regarding gender
crimes committed during the conflict, and we trust that
the investigations of these will continue.
We also believe it essential, in order to support
the rule of law in Libya, that all detention centres come
under the control of the national security forces. It is
unconscionable that these detention centres should
remain under the control of groups not representing the
Government of Libya and could be used by them as
tools to violate human rights. We trust that such
violations will be investigated and that the efforts to
put an end to this situation will be supported. For its
part, the Government of Libya must take specific
actions to avoid cataloguing ethnic groups in order to
violate their rights.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like at the outset to express my deepest
appreciation to Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for his
comprehensive and clear briefing on developments in
the implementation of resolution 1970 (2011),
concerning the prosecution of crimes committed in
Libya since 15 February 2011.
The Libyan Transitional National Council has
repeatedly expressed its commitment to establishing a
democratic State that responds to the aspirations of all

7

S/PV.6772

segments of the brotherly Libyan people, enforces the
rule of law and justice, and guarantees the rights of all.
The Transition National Council has also expressed its
commitment to investigating without discrimination all
violations that have affected all Libyan citizens.
In this respect, from the outset the Transitional
National Council contacted the ICC and has since
cooperated with it. This cooperation was extended to
the United Nations Commission of Inquiry sent to
Libya and to the Prosecutor of the ICC during his visit
in April, when he also met with high-level officials in
Libya. The Libyan authorities have also repeatedly
confirmed their support for the ICC and their readiness
to continue their cooperation with it in order to
guarantee justice for the victims. This is correctly
reflected in the most recent report of the Prosecutor.
The Libyan authorities have also reaffirmed that
the national justice system in Libya is capable of
providing fair trials for all the accused. These trials
would respect all international standards and allow the
accused the right to self-defence, while at the same
time allowing the Libyan people the right to know the
truth and overcome the tensions of the past. Based on
the principle of complementarity as established in the
Rome Statute, in this case the priority of the Libyan
national judicial system is established over the
jurisdiction of the ICC.
The Libyan authorities have, as reaffirmed in the
report of the Prosecutor, repeatedly stated that they will
not protect or allow impunity for individuals who are
shown to have committed crimes against humanity, and
that they are in the process of carrying out effective
and real investigations and of preparing for fair trials.
Therefore, the announcement of the Libyan
authorities that they have fulfilled the requirements for
admissibility, pursuant to the Rome Statute, and their
willingness and desire to carry out fair and just
national investigations and prosecutions fulfil
international standards for preventing impunity. These
requirements include respect for Libyan sovereignty
and the achievement of justice by the Libyan national
judicial authorities in respect for international
standards; the holding of fair trials of those accused of
widespread violations of human rights and providing
remedies for the victims and their families; addressing
the accumulated suffering of the past, including
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, and establishing a comprehensive

8

strategy to deal with all crimes and to end impunity;
and encouraging transitional justice to achieve national
reconciliation to overcome the suffering of the past and
build a better future.
In this context, we appreciate and commend the
recent adoption of a transitional justice law in Libya
and the formation of a fact-finding and reconciliation
commission. We express our readiness to share with
our brothers in Libya the experience of the fact-finding
and reconciliation commission in Morocco and to help
them avoid the recurrence of human rights violations.
The brotherly Libyan people have suffered for
many decades from the suppression of their basic
rights to a decent life and the exploitation of their
national resources. Over these decades they have
shown great patience and courage, as well as hope in a
new dawn of liberty and dignity and rights. We are
certain that the new Libya will be able to meet the
aspirations of all segments of the Libyan nation and
contribute thereby to the security and stability of the
entire Maghreb region.
Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): At the outset, we
would like to express our sincere gratitude to Mr. Luis
Moreno-Ocampo for his progress report. In the same
vein, we support the work of the Office of the
Prosecutor and have a deep appreciation for the efforts
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) to deliver
justice to the victims of atrocities committed in Libya.
These efforts are in line with our commitment to the
fight against impunity for serious crimes.
South Africa supported resolution 1970 (2011),
referring the situation in Libya to the International
Criminal Court. We did so on the basis of our longstanding commitment to the fight against impunity for
serious crimes. We do not support any effort or action
that creates a perception of the Court being used for
political expediency or as a tool for the furtherance of
political objectives. It is for that reason that we
continue to call for the Council to be principled on all
cases in Libya that were referred to the International
Criminal Court. We are mindful of the primacy of
national jurisdiction, even in the case of the Libyan
situation. In this regard, we have taken note of the
formal submission presented by the Libyan authorities
to the ICC. We look forward to the decision of the
Court and we hope that there will be cooperation with
whatever decision the Court reaches.

12-34157

S/PV.6772

We reiterate our call for the investigation of
crimes across the board, not focused only on the proQadhafi forces, since that would perpetuate the
perception of a victor’s justice. We remain concerned
about the political and security situation in Libya.
However, we commend the Libyans for the steady
progress they are making in their quest to build a
democratic Libya based on equality, freedom and
respect for human rights.
We urge the Libyan authorities to address the
situation of detainees, in particular African migrants
and black Africans suspected of having supported the
regime of Muammar Al-Qadhafi. Their continued
arbitrary detention and reports of torture do not bode
well for efforts to build a society based on respect for
human rights and dignity.
Mr. Eick (Germany): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Prosecutor for his briefing and for his
report to the Council. We are grateful for the continued
efforts exerted by both the Prosecutor and the
International Criminal Court (ICC) as a whole towards
the implementation of resolution 1970 (2011). We
continue to attach great importance to ensuring that
atrocities committed in Libya do not remain
unpunished. To that end, perpetrators must be
identified and brought to justice.
That this objective is shared throughout the
international community is evidenced by the
impressive rate of cooperation by States with ICC
requests for assistance that the Prosecutor has
highlighted in his report. I would like to reassure the
Prosecutor of Germany’s readiness to support the
ongoing investigations and to comply with any request
for assistance.
Please allow me to comment briefly on a number
of developments highlighted by the Prosecutor in his
report.
First, Germany is pleased to note that
Mr. Abdullah Al-Senussi has finally been apprehended
and can now be held accountable for crimes against
humanity under article 7 of the Rome Statute. While
we note that several requests for his rendition are
pending, we call on all concerned to ensure that
Mr. Al-Senussi faces comprehensive proceedings
covering all crimes allegedly committed by him during
his many years as one of the most notorious strongmen
of the Al-Qadhafi regime.

12-34157

Secondly, Germany has been closely following
developments regarding the situation of Mr. Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, as well as the question of
jurisdiction in his case. We commend the Court’s
efforts to shed light on the legal and factual
circumstances of Mr. Al-Qadhafi’s detention. At the
same time, we retain our great concerns regarding the
fact that Mr. Al-Qadhafi remains in custody in Zintan
and that his transfer to custody under the full authority
of the Libyan authorities is still outstanding.
The other loose end in this matter concerns the
issue of jurisdiction and the correct steps to be taken
by the Libyan authorities in order to enable the Court
to review the relevant Libyan submissions properly. We
note that the Government of Libya has now filed a
formal admissibility challenge under article 19.2 of the
ICC Statute. Germany is fully confident that the
Pre-Trial Chamber will examine this submission in a
thorough and comprehensive manner, taking into
account all relevant aspects, as well as the overall
objective of ensuring that the principles of justice and
due process are upheld.
Thirdly, I would like to highlight the importance
of ensuring transitional justice and national
reconciliation in Libya. We recognize the enormous
challenges faced by the National Transitional Council
in this regard, and we acknowledge the efforts
undertaken so far. These include, inter alia, the
continuing transfer of detainees to national control, the
establishment of a fact-finding and reconciliation
commission following the adoption of a transitional
justice law, and the preparations for a comprehensive
strategy to address all crimes and end impunity in
Libya.
At the same time, we share the concerns
expressed by the Prosecutor in his report. This applies
specifically to the slow pace of arranging the transfer
of control of detainees from militias and local
authorities to the national authorities, and the screening
of these detainees to determine as quickly as possible
who must be released and who should be the subject of
criminal investigations.
As the Prosecutor has noted in his report, the
United Nations Commission of Inquiry, in March 2012,
recorded the occurrence of enforced disappearances
and torture in centres under the control of local
military councils, and the collective targeting and
punishment of whole communities for their perceived

9

S/PV.6772

allegiance to the Al-Qadhafi regime. We thus call on all
those exerting factual power in Libya to adhere to
applicable human rights standards and to refrain from
all acts that reflect the dark sides of Libya’s past, rather
than its present and future as a fully accepted member
of the international community.
Finally, I would like to thank the Prosecutor for
the unambiguous findings in his report regarding
NATO actions in Libya. These remarks are fully in line
with what is well known: that NATO did not
deliberately target civilians but rather took extensive
precautions to ensure that no civilians were killed.
Furthermore, NATO fully cooperated with the
International Commission of Inquiry on Libya and
provided a significant amount of information, much of
which had to be declassified, to assist the Commission
in its work.
Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland): Let me, too, thank the
Prosecutor for his report on the situation in Libya.
Libya is getting back on its feet. Civil society is
flourishing and the economy is restarting with the
approval of a national budget and the reopening of the
stock
market.
Registration
programmes
for
revolutionary fighters are being rolled out. The
determination and sacrifice of the Libyan people have
brought the prospect of the first democratic elections in
more than a generation. The international community
continues to play a role supporting the political
transition, providing technical assistance to meet
Libya’s needs.
The Transitional Government and the National
Transitional Council are leading the process of
building a new, peaceful and prosperous Libya. Libya’s
leaders have consistently made clear their commitment
to upholding the rule of law and human rights as part
of a peaceful Libya, the wealth of which is shared
among its people. We urge the Libyan authorities to
ensure that they meet those public commitments.
In that regard, we welcome their close
cooperation with the Commission of Inquiry of the
United Nations Human Rights Council and the
progress towards bringing detention facilities under
Government control. To make further progress, the
Libyan authorities should continue to screen all
detainees and release those who are held without due
cause. They should investigate and hold to account all
those guilty of abuses and press forward with the

10

implementation of the Commission of Inquiry’s
recommendations.
The international community recognizes the
constraints on Libyan Government action after
42 years during which Al-Qadhafi hollowed out State
institutions. We stand ready to provide assistance,
including through the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya.
As we have said before, the developments in
Libya should give all Governments reason to pause
before using violence against their own people. The
international community will ensure that responsible
individuals within such Governments are held to
account, either in their own courts or international
courts such as the International Criminal Court (ICC).
Impunity is no longer tolerable.
The United Kingdom is a strong supporter of the
ICC. We note the detailed work of the Prosecutor and
his Office during visits to Libya over the past six
months and thank him and his staff. Their efforts have
played an important part in challenging impunity and
bringing accountability to a country where it has been
sadly lacking for some time.
We welcome Libya’s continued cooperation with
the ICC in relation to the arrest warrant issued against
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi for suspected crimes against
humanity. We note that the Libyan authorities have
submitted an admissibility challenge setting out the
ongoing Libyan investigations into his alleged crimes.
We note with interest, as set out in the Prosecutor’s
report, the Libyan actions taken to investigate Saif’s
case. He must face justice before an independent court
of law.
With regard to NATO, we emphasize the
demonstrable lengths that NATO went to in order
minimize the risk of civilian casualties, as recognized
by both the Prosecutor’s report and the report
(A/HRC/19/68) of the Commission of Inquiry of
8 March. All NATO airstrikes were meticulously
planned, including using precision guided munitions
and intelligence surveillance and reconnaissance to
strike legitimate military targets. NATO cooperated
fully with the Commission of Inquiry report and has
looked into each credible allegation of harm against
civilians that has been brought to its attention.
The authorities of the United Kingdom have
played a part in the ICC’s investigation so far by

12-34157

S/PV.6772

providing the fullest support to the Prosecutor and his
team of investigators, as and when requested. We
would encourage Libya’s neighbours to continue to
cooperate with the ICC, including with regard to
Abdullah Al-Senussi, who is being held in Mauritania.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by extending my thanks to the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
Mr. Louis Moreno-Ocampo, for his third report on the
implementation of the relevant part of resolution 1970
(2011) and for the additional information that he has
provided the Council today. I would also like to take
advantage of the opportunity to commend him for his
dedication and untiring work for justice.
This report is a valuable updating on the state of
the prosecution and proceedings, which started by
means of the Council’s referral to the Court pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011). We also appreciate the
information that we have received on ongoing
investigations that might lead to the opening of a
second case with charges of gender crimes.
My delegation believes that a fundamental aspect
at this stage is the provision of the necessary
cooperation with the International Criminal Court by
all actors involved, in compliance with the relevant
provisions of resolution 1970 (2011). The Prosecutor’s
third report makes encouraging references to the
positive attitude taken in that regard by States, be they
parties or not to the Rome Statute, and by certain
international bodies, such as INTERPOL and the
United Nations Commission of Inquiry.
We note specifically that, with regard to the two
sets of legal proceedings for crimes of murder and
persecution on political grounds — the case against
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and the one against Abdullah
Al-Senussi — the Libyan Government has acted to
show its resolve to cooperate with the Court.
Moreover, on several occasions, it has emphasized its
intention to pursue fair and impartial national
investigations and proceedings that meet the
admissibility requirements of the Rome Statute.
The Government of Libya has also shown special
diligence in the difficult task of the preservation of
evidence, which is of vital importance at the trial stage,
be that for national courts or the International Criminal
Court. We commend that attitude. It is also our belief
that the support of the international community and the
provision of cooperation are essential for the Libyan

12-34157

authorities to remain on the established course, which
would ensure that the serious crimes committed in
Libya will not go unpunished.
With regard to the case against Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi, we are following with great interest the
development of the admissibility challenge that has
been brought before the Court, which should be
decided upon soon by a chamber of the Court. It is for
that chamber to decide if the Libyan authorities are
indeed investigating with due process and diligence the
crimes against humanity of which Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi stands accused. Regardless of the decision
taken by the Court, in handing down its decision the
Court will be acting in compliance with the principle of
complementarity, which is the backbone of the criminal
justice system embodied in the Rome Statute.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
listened very attentively to the briefing by Mr. MorenoOcampo.
At the moment, the political transition process in
Libya has entered a critical phase. We hope that the
Libyan people will maintain ethnic harmony and
safeguard national unity, actively respond to all
challenges and achieve at an early date its social
stability and political and economic reconstruction.
Parliamentary elections will be held in Libya in
June. That is of great significance in furthering the
Libyan political transition process. China hopes that
Libya’s interim Government will, in accordance with
the road map for its political process and timetable,
steadily push forward the preparatory work on the
elections.
The international community should continue to
render support and assistance to the national
reconstruction efforts in Libya. China’s position on the
International Criminal Court (ICC) question remains
unchanged. We hope that the ICC’s actions in
implementing the relevant resolutions will be
conducive to the reconstruction efforts in Libya. The
resolution should be strictly implemented.
The reports of the International Commission of
Inquiry on Libya established by the Human Rights
Council and those of the International Criminal Court
both indicate that NATO’s activities in Libya resulted
in civilian casualties. China is concerned about this.
The Security Council has the right and obligation to
know the truth.

11

S/PV.6772

Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo for his third
report and for his presentation today. I would like to
make four comments.
First, France was one of the sponsors of
resolution 1970 (2011), which remains an example of
the Council’s capacity for unity and swift action and,
more generally, that of the international community.
Since mid-February 2011, given the atrocities
committed by Libyan leaders, the League of Arab
States, the African Union and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation have condemned the acts of
violence committed by the Al-Qadhafi regime. On
26 February, resolution 1970 (2011) referred the
situation in Libya to the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC). That started a process that, by
showing unambiguously and without hesitation the
total isolation of the criminals, whatever their rank,
allowed for thousands of lives to be saved. At a time
when the Syrian authorities are pursuing violence
against civilian populations, often including children,
the Council must reiterate its message about the
primacy of the rule of law and combating impunity in
all circumstances.
Secondly, with regard to the work of the
International Criminal Court, following the adoption of
resolution 1970 (2011), the Prosecutor carried out his
inquiry in a three-month period. On 16 May 2011, he
submitted three requests for arrest warrants. On
27 June, the judges issued the warrants.
The International Criminal Court thereby showed
its ability to act swiftly and to exert pressure on those
who organized and committed atrocities. It also
enabled us to understand the machinery of the violence
in Libya. In that respect, the judicial decisions are
edifying: the arrest warrants for crimes against
humanity describe planned, systematic attacks against
civilians and the methods — forced disappearances,
arbitrary detention and torture — that were used to
crush all forms of opposition to Muammar Al-Qadhafi.
We have noticed that, more than a year after those
events, the international community sometimes tends
to forget history. Sometimes people tell us that
Muammar Al-Qadhafi was apparently ready to
negotiate and that the price paid to put an end to his
crimes was too high. But the arrest warrants and the
clarity with which they expose the orders given to
torment civilians are there to prevent such a rewriting
of history.

12

Given the atrocities, the international community
and the Security Council are able to turn to an
impartial, independent and permanent judicial body —
and therefore immediately operational — in order to
identify the main perpetrators of the crimes. In the
light of the Libyan example, inaction is more
inexcusable than ever.
Thirdly, on the follow-up of the process, in
November 2011, the Prosecutor promised us an overall
accounting of his activities. We have received it and we
thank him for it. Muammar Al-Qadhafi was killed and
two arrest warrants remain outstanding, one against
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and the other against
Abdullah Al-Senussi. The Libyan authorities have
asked to try Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi themselves. It is
a great tribute to that post-conflict country to want to
shoulder its responsibilities in that way. It is even a
lesson for other countries, such as the Sudan, which
has never expressed the will to itself try the three
people indicted by the ICC.
We welcome the fact that the Libyan Government
has chosen to submit its admissibility challenge in full
line with the Rome Statute. As the Prosecutor said, the
final decision on Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi will be up
to the ICC’s judges, whose decisions must be enforced.
Libya’s respect for its international obligations, in
particular under the terms of resolution of 1970 (2011),
is a key indicator of its commitment to the rule of law.
With regard to Al-Senussi, the Court has asked
for his transfer, and France and Libya have asked for
his extradition. We are awaiting a response from
Mauritania.
The Prosecutor has also said that he would pursue
his inquiry into allegations of gender-based crimes
committed in Libya by Al-Qadhafi forces. We welcome
the attention paid to the dignity of victims.
With regard to persons detained by militias, the
Prosecutor referred to the report of the International
Commission of Inquiry on Libya (A/HRC/19/68) and
noted abuses that were committed. Like him, we
encourage the efforts by Libyan authorities to transfer
the detainees under their control. The Prosecutor also
talked about Tawarghan civilians who were the target
of violence in Misrata. We welcome discussions held
with the Government on preparing a global strategy to
bring an end to crimes and impunity in Libya.

12-34157

S/PV.6772

With regard to crimes allegedly committed by
NATO, the Prosecutor’s report underscored that there
was neither proof nor elements suggesting that NATO
command intentionally planned or committed crimes
against the civilian population.
With regard to the five cases of airstrikes
identified by the Commission of Inquiry as having led
to civilian losses, the Libyan Prime Minister
undertook, here, before the Security Council, to carry
out his own inquiry. NATO has said that it would offer
its full support.
The process initiated by resolution 1970 (2011)
must continue. Combating impunity is essential for a
country like Libya that has embarked upon the path of
the rule of law. Incidentally, the Council has just
reaffirmed that proposition in resolution 2040 (2012),
to which the Prosecutor made reference. Pursuing that
process requires both the full cooperation of Libya
with the Office of the Prosecutor and the full support
of the Council, the Secretariat and the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya for the work of the ICC.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): First of all,
I would like to thank the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), Mr. Luis MorenoOcampo, for presenting his interim report pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011).
Togo welcomes the presentation of the report,
which takes stock of the actions taken, in particular
regarding the arrest and trial of those suspected of
having committed crimes against humanity on Libyan
territory from 15 February 2011 until the supposed end
of the conflict. We welcome the cooperation that has
been established between the Office of the Prosecutor
and the Libyan Government to that end. The meetings
held from 18 to 20 April between the Office of the
Prosecutor and certain Libyan authorities are a tangible
expression of that cooperation, the main objective of
which is to gather sufficient evidence to establish the
truth with a view to defending the rights of the victims
of the crimes alleged.
To that end, we note the commitment of the
Libyan authorities to carry out fair and impartial
investigations and prosecutions in line with
international standards in cases against Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi. The former is
still being detained in Zintan by members of the militia
that arrested him, and the former is still being detained
in Mauritania, where he was apprehended.

12-34157

We hope that the discussions between the Libyan
authorities and the Office of the Prosecutor will
provide a unique opportunity for the judicious
implementation of the principle of complementarity in
order to ensure fair trials in those cases. Togo hopes
that after the 4 June deadline, the Court will have
appropriate information to rule on the admissibility
challenge that has been brought before it by the Libyan
authorities.
My country is still concerned by the allegations
of gender-based crimes, inter alia, wide-scale rape
committed even in detention centres and hospitals
during the conflict. It is clear that those crimes and
gross violations of human rights were not solely
committed by forces loyal to Al-Qadhafi. The
successive reports of the International Commission of
Inquiry on Libya impute those acts to militias and
revolutionary groups as well, as was underscored, once
again, by High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi
Pillay during her briefing to Council on 25 January
(see S/PV. 6707). We hope that the Libyan authorities
and the Court will shed all possible light on those
violations and identify the perpetrators so that they
may account for their actions and justice may be
rendered to the numerous battered victims.
On 10 May, during consultations on Libya, Togo,
like many other countries before it, expressed its
concern regarding the existence of numerous secret
detention centres run by revolutionary brigades where
acts of torture are apparently being committed against
detainees. That information, which was already
included in the report of the Commission of Inquiry
(A/HRC/19/68), must prompt the competent Libyan
authorities to take urgent action to find and dismantle
those illegal centres. We would once again urge the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya to assist the
Libyan authorities in efforts along those lines.
Togo would like to take the opportunity afforded
by today’s meeting to welcome the cooperation that
exists between the Court and the State parties and
non-State parties to the Rome Statute, as well as with
international organizations and non-governmental
organizations, as part of the investigations of alleged
crimes. With regard to the crucial question of
cooperation between the ICC and African States, we
hope that the recent visit from 8 to 11 May of
Ambassador Tiina Intelmann, President of the
Assembly of States Parties, to Addis Ababa, where she
met senior officials of the African Union, will enable a

13

S/PV.6772

strengthening of ties so that the shared goal of
combating the impunity of the perpetrators of heinous
crime can be met.
Quality cooperation between the ICC and African
States will allow for ambiguities regarding the
principle of complementarity to be clarified.
Discussions under way in order to possibly grant
criminal jurisdiction to the African Court of Human
and People’s Rights can only be enriched by this.
Mr. Kumar (India): At the outset, I would like to
thank the Prosecutor, Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo, for
his briefing today. We have also taken note of his third
report to the Security Council pursuant to paragraph 7
of resolution 1970 (2011).
India is not a signatory to the Rome Statute, and
we have stated our views on the International Criminal
Court (ICC) on several occasions. I will not repeat
those well-known views.
The situation in Libya has changed significantly
since the Prosecutor’s previous report and briefing (see
S/PV.6647) to the Security Council. The Libyan people
are engaged in addressing the consequences of the
conflict and building new institutions to meet their
democratic aspirations. Meanwhile, the proliferation of
weapons has emerged as a major problem posing a
threat to stability in Libya and the larger region. The
international community, including the Security
Council and the ICC, should fully assist the Libyan
people and authorities in this process. An inclusive,
broad-based political process anchored in State
sovereignty is the only way to achieve national
reconciliation and overcome the multitude of problems
that Libya is facing in the post-conflict phase.
Under these circumstances, we expect that the
ICC Prosecutor will carry out a thorough and impartial
investigation into all alleged crimes by all parties to the
conflict in Libya. The Prosecutor must not be
influenced by non-judicial considerations and must
focus his attention solely on prosecution, without
diversions due to extraneous considerations. All those
responsible for committing crimes covered under the
Rome Statute should be held accountable, irrespective
of which side of the conflict they may belong to.
Political or other non-judicial considerations should
not exonerate anybody from prosecution for the crimes
committed.

14

Last but not least, it is also important to ensure
that all actions by the ICC Prosecutor fall strictly
within the ambit of resolution 1970 (2011), particularly
paragraph 6, which concerns States that are not parties
to the Rome Statute.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Azerbaijan.
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. MorenoOcampo, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for his briefing and for presenting his
third report to the Security Council.
Azerbaijan is not a party to the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court. Nevertheless, we
proceed from the strong understanding that the
protection of civilians, respect for international human
rights and humanitarian law and the fight against
impunity for the most serious crimes are the
responsibility of the international community as a
whole. Azerbaijan supports increased attention to these
issues at the international level and underlines the
importance of steps taken to protect civilians, vindicate
rights and bring to justice those responsible for such
crimes, regardless of their official status.
It is clear that the International Criminal Court’s
intervention in Libya at the height of the violence
strengthened the people’s resolve to stop crimes and
ensure justice for victims. We welcome the ongoing
fruitful cooperation of the ICC with the Libyan
authorities and commend the Government’s willingness
to render all the necessary assistance to the Court in
the course of its investigation.
Azerbaijan
fully
supports
the
National
Transitional Council of Libya and its efforts towards
restoring peace and stability in the country. We believe
that, despite the challenges that Libya is facing in the
complex post-conflict environment, the Government is
capable of overcoming inherited problems, promoting
national reconciliation and guaranteeing, within the
national legal and judicial system, the effective
protection and promotion of human rights and
fundamental freedoms.
We note that the Government of Libya is
investigating individuals for the same crimes, as well
as additional ones, and for the same underlying
conduct as the Office of the ICC Prosecutor. We also
note that it committed to ensuring an effective and
genuine investigation and fair trials consistent with the

12-34157

S/PV.6772

highest international standards. We also welcome
complementary efforts by the Government to address
justice, including the adoption of a transitional justice
law, and steps taken to address concerns expressed by
the United Nations and both national and international
non-governmental organizations.

were subjected to, including its issuance of arrest
warrants. Those efforts have strengthened the Libyan
people’s resolve to put an end to the crimes committed
by the tyrant Al-Qadhafi and have served as an
important step towards upholding the right to
protection by combating impunity.

Needless to say, due process for those detained
must be ensured. It is therefore important that the
Government managed to make progress towards
extending its control over the known detention
facilities across the country and over a number of
detainees, and that it reiterated its commitment to close
all unofficial and unacknowledged detention centres as
quickly as possible and to take steps to curb
maltreatment.

On 17 February 2011, the Libyan people rose up
against the Al-Qadhafi regime in order to restore their
rights and dignity and to achieve justice for all citizens
after long decades of injustice, human rights violations
and infringements of fundamental freedoms. Following
the success of the revolution, Libyan authorities are
aware of the importance of achieving justice and of
building a new and democratic State. Moreover, they
are aware of the close links among justice, human
rights,
national
reconciliation,
security
and
development. They therefore count justice among the
top priorities and have undertaken the necessary
judicial reforms, including adopting a law on the
separation of powers between the executive and
judicial branches, in accordance with the Constitutional
Declaration and the principle of the independence of
the judiciary. In addition, special courts were abolished
and the judicial system was freed of corrupt judges. We
can now safely say that the legal system is based on
new foundations and is now ready to carry out fair and
impartial trials that meet international standards.

In conclusion, we commend the Libyan
authorities for their commitment to investigate the
incidents identified by the International Commission of
Inquiry of the Human Rights Council. At the same
time, we also look forward to the assessment by the
Office of the ICC Prosecutor as to whether it should
conduct its own investigation.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Libya.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like, at the outset, to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I am confident that your wisdom will
serve to steer the Council towards achieving the best
possible results.
Allow me to also thank Mr. Moreno-Ocampo,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for his important briefing. I would like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute to the efforts he and his team
have made as part of the ICC’s mandate to achieve
justice and put an end to human rights violations and
impunity. I would also like to commend his
professionalism, which has helped Libyan authorities
to make progress towards achieving justice and putting
an end to impunity, which are the overarching goals
that our authorities are striving to achieve,
notwithstanding the grave challenges they face.
Furthermore, I would like to commend the
intervention of the ICC in Libya at the height of the
acts of suppression and murder that the Libyan people

12-34157

The Libyan authorities have cooperated with the
ICC and have provided it with witnesses and evidence,
on the basis of which it issued arrest warrants against
Muammar Al-Qadhafi, Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and
Abdullah Al-Senussi. Both the Libyan Government and
people appreciate the significant role that the Court can
play in the absence of an effective national judiciary.
Libya has not taken any negative stand with
regard to the Court, at either the official or the public
level. However, the status quo on the ground has
changed. It is therefore incumbent upon the Libyan
Government to take that into account, in particular with
regard to the following.
First, Libya’s national judicial system has been
reformed and is now ready to conduct transparent and
fair trials that meet all safeguards provided for in
international law, including the provision of defence
counsel and the presence of international monitors and
observers. Secondly, the internal situation in Libya is
highly sensitive, and there is unanimous agreement
among the Libyan people on prosecuting senior

15

S/PV.6772

officials of the former Libyan regime. Thirdly, Libya is
not a party to the Rome Statute. The primary
responsibility for addressing major crimes therefore
falls to the national judiciary. In accordance with the
Rome Statute, the role of the ICC is only
complementary to that of the national judiciary.
Fourthly, the ultimate purpose of trials is to achieve
justice in accordance with internationally agreed
principles and standards, irrespective of the venue of
the trials or of who the judges are. Fifthly, on
8 January, the Libyan Prosecutor examined the serious
crimes allegedly committed by Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi. Moreover, the Military Prosecutor in
Libya will further investigate the charges against
Abdullah Al-Senussi.
In line with the points that I have just
enumerated, on 1 May, the Libyan Government issued
a request to the ICC contesting its hearing of the case
of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, in accordance with
paragraph 2(b) of article 19 of the Rome Statute. The
request asserted that the case was inadmissible owing
to the fact that the Libyan judiciary was actively
investigating the case and attempting to further clarify
the criminal responsibility regarding the accusations
against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah
Al-Senussi. The charges pertained to crimes against
humanity committed through large-scale attacks on
Libyan civilians, including crimes committed before
and after 15 February 2011.
Such a request only serves to underscore the fact
that Libya’s judicial authorities are adamant that the
trials should be carried out in Libya. The trial
documents, as well as the defendant and witness
statements, are part of Libya’s history. All Libyans are
therefore eager that the trials should take place in
Libya. The Libyan authorities look forward to
receiving further support and cooperation from the
Security Council and the ICC in order to hold the trials
in Libya in accordance with international standards.
In that regard, I would also point out the concern
expressed by some representatives with regard to Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi not having a defence lawyer. I
would like to assure the Council and others that Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi will have a lawyer, since Libyan
law does not permit the trial of any defendant in a
criminal case without the presence of one. That issue is
primarily up to Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, who, to date,
has refused to appoint a lawyer to defend him. The
matter is therefore in the hands not of the Libyan

16

authorities, but of the defendant himself. However,
there are no impediments to employing a lawyer to
defend him.
With regard to the high number of detainees
suspected of having committed crimes and the
difficulty of trying all cases simultaneously, the Libyan
judicial authorities decided to follow the provisions of
the policy paper issued by the Office of the Prosecutor
of the ICC, which stipulates the following:
“As a general rule, the Office of the Prosecutor
shall focus its resources of its investigative and
prosecutorial efforts and resources on those who
bear the greatest responsibility, such as the
leaders of the State or organization allegedly
responsible for those crimes.”
In the first phase the investigations and trials will focus
on Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi,
as well as a number of political and security leaders,
for example, Baghdadi Ali Al-Mahmoudi and
Al-Tuhami Khaled, given the high level of the
planning, organization and instigation associated with
the crimes. As for the other cases, they will be dealt
with through an integrated plan for transitional justice
in a manner that will ensure that justice is served,
impunity ended and national reconciliation, stability
and social peace established.
The Libyan judicial authorities are aware of the
importance of investigating the allegations that rebel
forces committed torture and crimes against detainees,
and will deal with them appropriately, bearing in mind
the circumstances that prevailed at the time and their
responsibility to respect human rights and avoid the
practices of the former regime of the tyrant Al-Qadhafi,
under which crimes committed by his forces and
security people were allowed to occur with impunity.
As for the allegations about crimes committed
against civilians by NATO forces in Libya, the Libyan
authorities are firmly convinced that the strategies
employed by the NATO leaders were designed merely
to protect civilians from the violence aimed at them by
the tyrant Al-Qadhafi’s forces. Nevertheless,
preliminary investigations have shown that some
mistakes were made, as a result of which some
civilians were killed. These, however, were the kind of
errors that happen in all wars. According to statements
and accounts by our military experts, there were fewer
such errors than was expected, considering that in the
last month of the revolution the tyrant Al-Qadhafi was

12-34157

S/PV.6772

anxious to defend his leadership strongholds,
especially in civilian areas and residential
communities.
In all such cases, the Libyan authorities will
further investigate individual incidents, which may rely
on the cooperation of the NATO member States
concerned if the need arises. When the investigations
are completed, the Libyan authorities will take all
necessary measures, including possibly providing
compensation for those harmed. Overall, the Libyan
national and local authorities intend to account for all
who were killed or adversely affected during the
revolution in order to learn more about the
circumstances of their deaths or injuries and their
whereabouts, irrespective of the side they were fighting
on or whether they were civilians who had nothing to
do with the fighting. Ultimately, the fate of all sons and
daughters of Libya is an integral part of the country’s
history. The authorities and civil society organizations

12-34157

are therefore eager to record that history accurately and
to address its consequences in a way that will secure
the unity of the Libyan people and encourage them to
overcome the past and focus on the future.
In conclusion, I would like to affirm that the
Libyan authorities continue to make progress in
controlling and monitoring the detention centres. They
intend to transfer authority over all the detention
centres to the central Government by the end of the
year, the same deadline as that for dissolving all armed
forces, so that the national army and police will take
over the duties that the rebels are still currently
carrying out.
The President: There are no more speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

17
