S/2021/517

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 June 2021
Original: English

The situation in Central Africa and the activities of the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to the statement of the President of the
Security Council dated 10 August 2018 (S/PRST/2018/17), in which the Council
requested the Secretary-General to keep it informed about the activities of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) every six months. It provides
an assessment of the major political and security trends in Central Africa since the
report dated 1 December 2020 (S/2020/1154). The report also provides an update on
the situation in the Lake Chad basin region, pursuant to Council resolution 2349
(2017).

II. Major developments in the Central Africa subregion
A.

Political, peace and security developments and trends
2.
The Central Africa subregion continued to face several political, peace and
security challenges. The period under review was marked by the passing of the
President of Chad, Idriss Déby Itno and the establishment of a transitional
administration in the country; continued violence in Cameroon, the Central African
Republic and the Lake Chad basin; and elections in the Central African Republic,
Chad and the Congo. Countries of the subregion continued to bolster efforts towards
addressing the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, including
by maintaining some restrictive measures and launching immunization plans. The
subregion has demonstrated some resilience to COVID-19 by keeping the levels of
infections and deaths relatively low, but at a high socioeconomic cost. The Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) advanced its institutional reform and
mandate in the area of peace and security.
Political developments and trends
3.
Several regional initiatives were taken to address the situation in the Central
African Republic. On 26 December, the President of the Congo, Denis Sassou
Nguesso, in his capacity as Chair of ECCAS, hosted the tenth extraordinary session
of the Conference of ECCAS Heads of State and Government to review the situation

21-06345 (E)

030621

*2106345*

S/2021/517

in the country and mobilize regional support ahead of the presidential and legislative
elections on 27 December. On 29 January, Angola convened in Luanda a mini-summit
of the outgoing, current and incoming Chairs of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region on the situation in the Central African Republic. On 20 April, a
follow-up summit was convened in Luanda. Both meetings were attended by the
Presidents of the Central African Republic, Chad, the Congo and Rwanda.
4.
In Angola, on 15 January, the leader of the main opposition party, União
Nacional para a Independência Total de Angola, called for the holding of municipal
elections in 2021. The elections had been initially announced for 2020 before being
postponed owing to COVID-19 and the need to put in place the required legal
framework. On 18 March, the National Assembly adopted a revised Constitution
intended to strengthen the rule of law in the country. The opposition expressed
concern that the revision could contribute to postponing the local and general elections.
On 12 April, the Supreme Court sentenced Manuel Rabelais, a former communication
minister under the former President of Angola, José Eduardo dos Santos, to 14 years ’
imprisonment for money-laundering and embezzlement.
5.
In Cameroon, the Government took steps towards decentralization in line with
the recommendations of the major national dialogue, including by holding regional
elections on 6 December. The ruling Cameroon People’s Democratic Movement won
those elections, controlling 9 of 10 regions. The elections were key to the
implementation of the “special status” for the North-West and South-West Regions.
The opposition Cameroon Renaissance Movement and Social Democratic Front
boycotted the elections. On 9 December, the authorities lifted the security measures
taken around the residence of the leader of the Cameroon Renaissance Movement,
Maurice Kamto, which had been in place since 22 September 2020, and, on
5 February, released from detention the party’s first Vice-President, following his
arrest on 1 June 2019. On 18 March, the Presidents of the National Assembly and the
Senate of Cameroon were re-elected to their positions.
6.
Notwithstanding several initiatives, no progress was made on conti nuing
political dialogue to achieve a durable solution to the unrest in the North -West and
South-West Regions of Cameroon. From 28 January to 2 February, the Secretary of
State of the Holy See visited Cameroon, where he met the President, Paul Biya, in
Yaoundé to discuss the crisis in the two Regions and the role of the Catholic Church
in addressing it. On 31 January, he called for inclusive dialogue, peace and
reconciliation during a mass held in Bamenda, North-West Region. On 9 April, the
National Assembly announced the holding of a debate on the crisis in the two Regions
during its June session, the first parliamentary debate on the crisis since its onset.
7.
In Chad, on 14 December, President Déby promulgated a new Constitution,
endorsing recommendations from the “second national inclusive forum”, held in
2020. Changes included the establishment of the position of Vice -President and an
upper chamber of parliament and the reduction in the minimum age for the presidency
from 45 to 40 years.
8.
Restrictions on democratic space and political tensions increased in Chad in the
lead-up to the presidential election on 11 April. On 28 February, Chadian security
forces raided the residence of a declared presidential candidate and former rebel, Yaya
Dillo. During the operation, Mr. Dillo’s mother was killed. On 3 March, the Supreme
Court validated 10 of 17 presidential candidatures, including of the first female
presidential candidate. Three validated candidates, including former opposition
leader Saleh Kebzabo, announced their withdrawal from the presidential race and
campaigned for a boycott of the election. During the weeks leading up to the poll,
opposition entities and civil society groups organized weekly protests against
President Déby’s candidature. Dozens of protestors took to the streets in N´Djamena.
2/16

21-06345

S/2021/517

Authorities banned and dispersed those gatherings, citing public health and security
reasons.
9.
On 19 April, the electoral commission of Chad announced that President Déby
had won the presidential election with 79.32 per cent of the votes cast. On 20 April,
a military spokesperson announced that the President had succumbed to injuries
reportedly sustained in the context of fighting between the army and rebels from the
Front pour l’alternance et la concorde au Tchad that had entered Chad on election day.
The State funeral for the late President was held in N’Djamena on 23 April and
attended by various Heads of State and Government.
10. A 15-member transitional military council, led by the head of the presidential
guard, General Mahamat Idriss Déby, took power and vowed to organize a new
presidential election within 18 months. The transitional military council issued a
transitional charter, which superseded the Constitution. On 26 April, the former Prime
Minister, Albert Pahimi Padacké, who had placed second in the presidential election,
was appointed transitional Prime Minister. On 2 May, the leader of the transitional
military council and the transitional Prime Minister established a transitional
Government comprising 31 ministers and 9 secretaries of State. On 27 April and
8 May, civil society groups and opposition political parties organized demonstrations
in N’Djamena and other cities to protest against the takeover by the transitional
military council. On 7 May, the new Minister of Justice and Human Rights ordered
the release of all demonstrators detained after past protests, except those who had
committed proven criminal acts against persons or property. The same day, the
Minister for Public Security and Migration issued a decree by which peaceful
demonstrations that met specific conditions would be authorized. On 3 May, the party
of opposition leader Saleh Kebzabo joined the transitional Government and withdrew
from the Coordination des actions citoyennes.
11. The Peace and Security Council of the African Union issued a communiqué on
23 April, in which it expressed “grave concern” with respect to the establishment of
the transitional military council and urged “the Chadian defence and security forces
and all national stakeholders to respect the constitutional mandate and order, and to
expeditiously embark on a process of restoration of constitutional order and handing
over of political power to the civilian authorities, in accordance with the Constitutio n
of the Republic of Chad”. It also called for national dialogue and deployed a factfinding mission, from 29 April to 9 May, to N’Djamena. On 20 May, the Peace and
Security Council, informed by the recommendations of the fact-finding mission,
issued another communiqué, in which it requested, among others, an urgent review
of the transition charter to ensure it met Chadians’ aspirations “for civilian -led
democratic governance”; the completion of the transition to democratic rule within
an 18-month period (from 20 April 2021); assurances that members of the transitional
military council would not run in the election; and the establishment of a national
transition council to serve as an interim legislative body, mandated to draft a new
constitution. The Peace and Security Council also requested that the transitional
Government organize an inclusive national dialogue within three months and restore
civic and political rights immediately. On 24 May, the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission appointed Basile Ikouébé of the Congo as his Special
Representative in Chad to support the transition process in the country. On 20 May,
the head of the transitional military council and its members made statements in which
they committed themselves not to running in the u pcoming elections, as requested by
the Peace and Security Council.
12. In the Congo, President Nguesso won the presidential election on 21 March. On
6 April, the Constitutional Court confirmed that the incumbent had received 88.4 per
cent of the votes cast. The main opposition candidate, who, according to official
reports, succumbed to COVID-19 after the election, received 7.76 per cent of the vote.
21-06345

3/16

S/2021/517

Voter turnout was announced at 67 per cent. The President faced six male candidates,
while the main parliamentary opposition party and others boycotted the election. The
Episcopal Conference of the Congo voiced serious reservations over the electoral
process. The African Union, ECCAS and International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, all of which had sent observers, welcomed what they deemed was a peaceful
and orderly election. They provided recommendations to further improve the political
and electoral processes. On 16 April, the President was sworn in for a fifth term in
office. On 16 May, President Nguesso appointed a new cabinet of 36 members,
including 8 women.
13. In Equatorial Guinea, the strategic context remained marked by an economic
crisis resulting from the fall in oil prices aggravated by the COVID-19 pandemic. On
11 December, the International Court of Justice ruled in favour of France over the
confiscation in 2012 of a mansion in Paris belonging to the Vice -President, Teodoro
Nguema Obiang Mangue, as part of a corruption probe. On 22 February, the Third
Deputy Prime Minister in charge of human rights addressed the forty-sixth session of
the Human Rights Council and reported on an ongoing process in Parliament to
abolish the death penalty. He called upon the United Nations to support ongoing
national efforts in promoting the human rights agenda. O n 28 April, the Senate
approved a bill on the prevention of and efforts to combat corruption.
14. In Gabon, authorities focused on governance and economic recovery in the
context of the economic and health crises facing the country. On 29 December,
Parliament adopted a new Constitution, which was promulgated on 8 January.
According to the new Constitution, a triumvirate of the Presidents of the National
Assembly and Senate and the Minister of Defence would collectively assume
presidential powers during an interim period of a vacancy or temporary incapacity at
the presidency. Moreover, a former Head of State would have stronger immunity from
judicial proceedings for crimes committed during his or her tenure. Segments of the
opposition and civil society criticized the absence of consultations during the process.
In line with the new Constitution, on 27 February, the President, Ali Bongo Ondimba,
appointed 15 senators, including 7 women. In senatorial elections on 6 February, the
ruling Parti démocratique gabonais, won 46 of the 52 remaining seats. On 1 March,
the President of the Senate was re-elected for a second term.
15. In Sao Tome and Principe, authorities made progress towards modernizing the
justice system, but persisting divisions in the political class regarding an electoral law
reform delayed the preparations for the presidential election scheduled for 18 July.
On 11 December, the President, Evaristo Carvalho, hosted the second high -level
dialogue on justice reform, which approved the country’s justice modernization
programme. On 30 December, he vetoed an electoral reform bill adopted by the
National Assembly on 15 December, citing the ill-timing of and lack of consensus on
the reform. Nevertheless, on 12 February, he promulgated it, after the National
Assembly had removed contentious provisions. This paved the way for the installation
of the National Electoral Commission on 16 February and for preparations to
commence for the presidential election. On 29 April, the Government and the
European Union held their annual political dialogue.
16. On 5 March, proceedings before the International Court of Justice were jointly
instituted by Equatorial Guinea and Gabon concerning the delimitation of their
common maritime and land boundaries and sovereignty over several islands. The
proceedings were instituted by way of a special agreement, which was signed by the
two countries in 2016 and entered into force in March 2020.

4/16

21-06345

S/2021/517

Security developments and trends
17. Violence persisted in the Far North, North-West and South-West Regions of
Cameroon. In the latter two regions, attacks by separatist armed groups against
government officials, traditional leaders and school personnel increased in the run -up
to the regional elections and have since continued, also featuring the use of
improvised explosive devices.
18. On 8 December, the house of the Mayor of Bamenda, North -West Region of
Cameroon, was set ablaze. On 13 December, non-State armed groups invaded the
palaces of three traditional rulers in the South-West Region and took them hostage.
One traditional ruler reportedly died in captivity while the other two were released
the following day. On 5 January, non-State armed groups attacked the convoy of the
Senior Divisional Officer of Momo Division, North-West Region, killing five
members of his delegation. On 9 January, armed secessionists attacked a military
checkpoint in Matazem, North-West Region, killing four military personnel and two
civilians. On 9 January, armed separatists allegedly killed the pr incipal of a public
high school in Ossing, South-West Region. On 23 January, government forces
disabled two improvised explosive devices in Limbe, South-West Region, while one
device exploded near a stadium, with no injuries reported.
19. On 10 February, government forces launched a military operation against
separatist armed groups suspected of fomenting attacks on Kumba, South -West
Region of Cameroon. According to the authorities, the operation resulted in the killing
of five militants, including the leader of a group that had staged a deadly attack
against a school in Kumba last October. On 15 February, the Cameroonian army
announced the arrest of two gendarmes, two soldiers and four police officers accused
of torturing a separatist fighter in the North-West Region. Between 22 and
26 February, suspected armed men attacked civilians in at least seven villages in Nwa
subdivision, North-West Region. At least 8 people were killed, more than 14 injured,
some 100 houses and 3 churches looted and burned and approximately 4,200 civilians
displaced.
20. In Chad, on 11 April, election day, the Chadian rebel group Front pour
l’alternance et la concorde au Tchad launched an incursion from south -western Libya
into Tibesti Province, advancing into west-central Chad within a week, with the
declared intention of marching to N’Djamena. On 25 April, the transitional military
council rejected the offer of a ceasefire made by the Front to allow for a political
resolution of the conflict through dialogue. Following confrontation s with the
Chadian army, the operational capability of the Front was reportedly reduced and
some of its fighters withdrew into the Niger. Renewed fighting was reported in Kanem
Province on 29 April. On 9 May, the minister of defence declared victory over t he
Front, stating that the national territory was secure. Meanwhile, in the south, recurrent
but intensified clashes between nomadic herders and local agricultural communities
resulted in the deaths of at least 170 people during the reporting period.
Boko Haram/Lake Chad basin
21. The reporting period witnessed an increase in reported Boko Haram -related
incidents in Cameroon and Chad. Between 1 December 2020 and 30 April 2021, there
were 423 reported Boko Haram-related security incidents in Cameroon, with 145
civilian fatalities, and 62 incidents in Chad, with 199 civilian fatalities.
22. In the Far North Region of Cameroon, attacks launched by Boko Haram factions
against civilians continued to predominantly affect areas in the Mayo -Tsanaga and
Mayo-Sava departments, close to the border with Nigeria. On 4 December, Boko
Haram militants attacked the locality of Assighassia, killing three civilians and

21-06345

5/16

S/2021/517

injuring three more, and on 10 December, they attacked the locality of Gakara,
burning down 14 houses and injuring a member of a local vigilante group. On
8 January, a female suicide bomber detonated an improvised explosive device in
Mozogo, killing 17 civilians, including 5 children, and wounding 12 others. On
21 March, Boko Haram militants attacked Bla-Gossi Tourou, reportedly killing three
civilians.
23. On 20 March, two Cameroonian soldiers were killed in an attack by a Boko
Haram faction in north-eastern Borno State, Nigeria, while lending support to their
Nigerian counterparts who were attacked by Boko Haram elements outside the
Nigerian town of Wulgo. The Cameroonian support was within the framework of the
Multinational Joint Task Force. In December, Boko Haram factions undertook five
attacks in Lac Province of Chad, killing 7 civilians and kidnapping 3 3, including at
least 7 women. On 8 April, Boko Haram elements ambushed Chadian soldiers in the
Ngouboua area, bordering Nigeria, killing 2 soldiers and injuring 11 others, including
4 civilians. On 27 April, a suspected Boko Haram faction attacked an army position
in Litri, killing at least 12 Chadian soldiers. According to the Governor of Lac
Province, more than 40 of the faction’s fighters were also killed.
Lord’s Resistance Army
24. According to the non-governmental organization (NGO) Invisible Children, on
22 January, the Lord’s Resistance Army splinter faction led by Achaye Doctor
abducted 11 civilians, including 3 women and 2 children, from Biro, east of Zemio,
Central African Republic. Subsequently, on 24 January, the armed group released 8
of the 11 civilians, retaining 1 woman and 2 children.
25. According to Invisible Children, attacks by suspected Lord’s Resistance Army
groups in the Democratic Republic of the Congo also increased in late February as
the Owila faction looted and abducted civilians in Haut-Ulélé. Between February and
April, at least 23 people were abducted, including 8 children. The surge in attacks
mirrors trends in 2019 and 2020, in which Lord’s Resistance Army violence in
Haut-Ulélé and Bas-Ulélé Provinces spiked between March and May, coinciding with
the last few months of the dry season, during which movement is less arduous. Since
January 2021, 60 people have escaped or defected from Lord’s Resistance Army
splinter factions. On 25 February, 21 people, including 2 Congolese combatants,
escaped from the Achaye faction and surrendered to Congolese security forces.
26. On 6 May, the International Criminal Court sentenced Dominic Ongwen, a
Lord’s Resistance Army commander who surrendered in 2015 to 25 years in prison
after he had been found guilty of 61 counts of crimes against humanity and war crimes
that had taken place in Northern Uganda between July 2002 and December 2005.
Mr. Ongwen was the first member of the Lord’s Resistance Army to be tried by the
Court and the first person to be convicted by the Court for the crime of forced
pregnancy. The sentencing also marked the first time that the crime of forced marriage
had been considered by the Court.
Maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea
27. According to the International Maritime Bureau, in 2020, the Gulf of Guinea
accounted for 95 per cent of maritime crew members kidnapped worldwide, with an
increasing number in the Central Africa maritime domain. The Interregional
Coordination Centre for Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea reported
20 security incidents at sea, including 11 in the ECCAS maritime space, between
January and March 2021, a decrease compared with the 45 incidents, including 9 in
the ECCAS maritime space, reported in the fourth quarter of 2020.

6/16

21-06345

S/2021/517

28. On 4 May, the Government of the Congo convened a virtual ministerial meeting
of the Council for Peace and Security in Central Africa on maritime security in Central
Africa. Ministers agreed to promote the use of existing protocols on maritime security
and improve interministerial coordination at the State level. They called upon the
ECCAS Commission to mobilize adequate resources to strengthen existing
mechanisms in the effort to combat maritime insecurity.
Effects of climate change, ecological changes and natural disasters on the
stability of Central Africa
29. Some countries in the subregion, including Angola, Burundi and Rwanda,
experienced severe drought and renewed cycles of flooding owing to excessive
rainfall, which affected more than 1 million people in 2020. The resulting destruction
of houses, goods, crops and fields threatened the livelihoods of many communities
reliant on rain-fed agriculture, further contributing to food insecurity, forced
displacement, natural resource scarcity and intensified land conflicts and accentuating
farmer-herder conflicts. Women were often among those hit hardest, given that
structural inequalities in income, ownership and access to land, and decision -making
power impaired their options to cope with and adapt to the effects of climate change.

B.

Humanitarian developments
30. Conflicts, floods and epidemics in various parts of Central Africa, aggravated
by COVID-19, continued to have serious consequences for the humanitarian situation
in the subregion.
31. There continues to be a highly complex humanitarian context in Cameroon
owing to widespread insecurity, epidemics and floods. In 2021, 4.4 million people in
Cameroon will need humanitarian assistance. Humanitarian partners planned to target
3 million of the most vulnerable in 2021. The crises in the Far North, North -West and
South-West Regions led to the internal displacement of more than 1 million people,
along with the return of 466,000 persons. The humanitarian response p lan for 2021
requires $362 million, 18 per cent of which had been funded by mid -May.
32. As at 30 April, Cameroon hosted almost 447,000 refugees and asylum seekers,
including almost 322,000 refugees from the Central African Republic and almost
117,000 from Nigeria. As a result of mounting tension and hostilities surrounding the
presidential election in the Central African Republic, more than 6,500 new refugees
from the Central African Republic arrived in Cameroon as at 30 April, according to
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
33. Pervasive insecurity in the North-West and South-West Regions of Cameroon
resulted in further abuses committed against civilians and forced displacements and
hampered humanitarian access and access to basic services. As at 30 April, more than
67,000 Cameroonians had sought refuge in Nigeria. More than 409,000 people had
been displaced within the two Regions and faced significant protection risks,
including high rates of sexual and gender-based violence. As at 30 April, there were
more than 409,000 returnees within the two Regions, while an additional 302,000 had
been displaced to other regions of Cameroon. An estimated 700,000 children were
left out of school owing to the crisis in the two Regions.
34. Attacks against humanitarian, health and education personnel and facilities in
the North-West and South-West Regions of Cameroon continued. Armed clashes
between non-State armed groups and government forces, the use of improvised
explosive devices and the enforcement of lockdowns by non-State armed groups
continued to pose security threats and access challenges to humanitarian partners. On
8 January, a truck contracted by the World Food Programme carrying food items was

21-06345

7/16

S/2021/517

caught in the crossfire after Government forces had been ambushed at the Metazem
checkpoint, North-West Region. The driver and his assistant were both killed. On
4 February, unidentified gunmen fired upon a clearly marked ambulance from a
medical NGO, responding to an emergency call, near Muyuka, South-West Region,
wounding one aid worker. On 24 April, the vehicle of a national NGO was shot at by
a soldier at an official checkpoint near Mamfe town in the South -West region. Two
staff members were injured.
35. On 26 March, a United Nations convoy comprising six staff members from the
World Food Programme and one from the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs was attacked with stones and gunshots by a non -State armed
group at Ikata village, South-West Region of Cameroon. The convoy returned safely
to Buea, although two armoured vehicles were severely damaged. The attack on a
United Nations convoy was the first of its kind in the North -West and South-West
Regions. The United Nations suspended food distribution and humanitarian mi ssions
in the area until further notice.
36. On 10 February, the Governments of Cameroon and Nigeria and UNHCR
announced the planned voluntary return of 5,000 Nigerian refugees from the Minawao
refugee camp in the Far North Region of Cameroon. As at 30 April, 3,880 Nigerian
refugees had been voluntarily returned to Banki and Bama, Borno State, Nigeria.
37. In Chad, multiple crises, compounded by COVID-19, continued to affect several
areas, exacerbating malnutrition and food insecurity. The revised humanitarian
response plan for 2021 requires $617.5 million targeting 4 million of the 5.5 million
people in need of emergency humanitarian assistance. As at 14 April, some 4,754 new
refugee arrivals from the Sudan were reported in eastern Chad, following attacks by
armed militias in West Darfur.
38. In December, the Congo saw an influx of new refugees from the Central African
Republic, following the elections. As at 30 April, 8,500 new refugees had been
recorded, including 2,700 biometrically registered. The Congo hosted some 361,000
refugees, asylum seekers, internally displaced persons and others of concern to
UNHCR as at 30 April.
39. In Equatorial Guinea, on 7 March, a series of explosions at military barracks in
Bata left 107 people killed and more than 700 injured, including women and children,
with extensive destruction. The only COVID-19 testing laboratory in Bata was
significantly damaged in the incident.
Boko Haram/Lake Chad basin
40. The Lake Chad basin crisis has led to the internal displacement of more than
321,880 Cameroonians and some 401,510 Chadians and forced almost 129,000
Nigerians to seek refuge in Cameroon and Chad. People in the Lake Chad basin
continued to suffer from epidemics, including cholera, measles and polio, as well as
destruction due to heavy flooding.
41. In the Far North Region of Cameroon, activities of Boko Haram factions,
compounded by chronic vulnerability and the growing impact of climate change, left
1.2 million people in need of urgent humanitarian assistance. As at 30 April, there
were approximately 112,700 Nigerian refugees, more than 321,880 internally
displaced persons and more than 123,000 returnees in the Region, who faced
significant protection risks. Heavy rainfall since July 2020 caused widespread
flooding, affecting more than 162,000 people. The loss of livelihoods due to conflict
and floods and the impact of COVID-19 led to increased food insecurity.
42. More than 16,290 Nigerian refugees, some 401,510 internally displaced persons
and more than 30,160 Chadian returnees from the Niger and Nigeria were recorde d
8/16

21-06345

S/2021/517

in the Chadian provinces affected by Boko Haram as at 30 April. More than half of
the population in Lac Province remained displaced owing to insecurity and flooding.
Protection concerns persisted, with women and girls facing higher rates of sexual and
gender-based violence and limited access to health care. Insecurity, flooding and
COVID-19-related movement restrictions in the province continued to affect access
to livelihoods, leading to increased food insecurity and the vulnerability of local
populations.

C.

Human rights trends
43. In Angola, protests continued over demands for better living conditions, good
governance and alternation of power. Civil society organizations complained about
the excessive use of force by security forces during those pr otests. On 30 January, a
demonstration organized by the Lunda Tchokwe Protectorate Movement was
violently dispersed by the police in Cafunfo, Lunda Norte Province. At least six
individuals were killed and several others injured. Authorities opened investig ations
into the incident.
44. In the North-West and South-West Regions of Cameroon, non-State armed
groups continued to attack government forces and civilians, perpetrating killings,
torture and ill-treatment against civilians, abducting for ransom, enforcing lockdowns
and detonating improvised explosive devices. On 12 March, Human Rights Watch
issued a statement in which it accused armed separatists of perpetrating abuses against
the civilian populations in the two regions.
45. Reports of alleged abuses by government forces against civilians in the NorthWest and South-West Regions of Cameroon also continued. On 10 January, at least
10 people, including civilian women and children, were reportedly killed by
government forces in Mautu, South-West Region. On 23 January, government forces
reportedly killed four teenagers during a raid in Bamenda, North -West Region. The
Government claimed that they were members of non-State armed groups.
46. In Chad, between December 2020 and April 2021, authorities restricted
democratic space, arresting members of opposition parties, human rights activists and
journalists, and banning gatherings organized by opposition parties and civil society
organizations to demand the opening of political space, citing public health and pub lic
order reasons. The investigation into the death in custody of 44 of 58 suspected Boko
Haram members in March 2020 has not concluded. The 14 survivors continue to be
held in the high-security prison of Koro Toro awaiting trial. On 27 April, the police
violently repressed protests, which had been prohibited by the authorities, against the
takeover by the transitional military council, in N´Djamena and a few towns in
southern Chad, including by using live ammunition. At least six people were
reportedly killed, while several dozen were injured and many more arrested. The
transitional military council announced a judicial inquiry into the events.
47. In the Congo, on 12 December, the human rights organization, Observatoire
congolais des droits de l’homme, called upon the authorities to release the coordinator
of the Congolese platform of human rights NGOs, arrested in Brazzaville on
11 March, following accusations that he had sought to interfere in the electoral
process. On 3 May, the editor-in-chief of Sel-Piment, arrested on 5 February on libel
charges involving a key government official, was sentenced to six months in prison.
The coordinators of the civil society movements Tournons la page and Ras -le-bol
were arrested on 11 and 25 March, respectively, and have been in detention since
then. Opposition figures Jean-Marie Michel Mokoko and André Okombi Salissa
remained in detention, notwithstanding calls by the United Nations Working Group
on Arbitrary Detention for their release.

21-06345

9/16

S/2021/517

48. In Gabon, on 18 February, two curfew violators were shot dead during violent
demonstrations against COVID-19 restrictions in some neighbourhoods of Libreville.

D.

Socioeconomic trends
49. Governments continued to invest critical resources to mitigate the impact of
COVID-19, while facing calls for enhanced social and economic measures and the
opening of political space. The regional economy in the Central African Economic
and Monetary Community (CEMAC) area was projected to rebound moderately to
2.6 per cent of gross domestic product in 2021, before stabilizing to 2.4 per cent in
2022, according to the International Monetary Fund.
50. In the ECCAS region, the economic impact of COVID -19 continued to affect
oil-exporting countries and those with large tourism sectors d isproportionally.
Prospects for an asymmetric economic rebound challenged efforts towards greater
regional economic integration in the ECCAS region.
51. On 24 February, the Presidents of the ECCAS and CEMAC Commissions met
in Libreville as part of a dialogue between the two institutions to develop synergies
towards facilitating regional integration, accelerating economic transformation and
promoting subregional economic and social development.
52. The protracted health and economic crises could have longer-term effects on
regional growth, given that the subregion faces the effects of higher debt loads on
economic and social investment. The crises could accentuate poverty and inequality
and worsen the livelihoods of vulnerable populations, especially women an d young
people.

III. Activities of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa
A.

Good offices, preventive diplomacy and mediation
Cameroon
53. The Special Representative for Central Africa continued to engage with key
actors in Cameroon and abroad on the need for all stakeholders to engage in dialogue
for a peaceful and lasting resolution of the crisis in the North -West and South-West
Regions.
54. From 17 to 20 March, the Special Representative travelled to Cameroon at the
request of the authorities. During his visit, he met the Prime Minister, the Secretary General at the Presidency and the Minister Delegate to the Minister of External
Relations in charge of Relations with the Commonwealth. He also met with bilateral
and international partners and civil society organizations. In his meetings, the Special
Representative discussed ways of resolving the crisis in the North -West and SouthWest regions peacefully and addressing its root causes and socioeconomic
consequences. He also maintained channels of communications with diaspora-based
leaders of armed groups.
Central African Republic
55. Working closely with the Special Representative for the Central African
Republic and senior officials at the Secretariat, the Special Representative for Central
Africa continued to mobilize regional support for the implementation of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. From 10 to

10/16

21-06345

S/2021/517

13 December, he undertook, with the President of the ECCAS Commission, a visit to
the country, to engage in broad consultations with political actors ahead of the
elections.
Chad
56. From 7 to 13 March, UNOCA dispatched a team to Chad to undertake a gender
and human rights assessment and support the finalization of the national action plan
on Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and security. From
7 to 13 April, UNOCA deployed a working-level mission to Chad to support the
resident coordinator and the United Nations country team in the context of the
presidential election.
57. From 23 to 27 April, the Special Representative travelled to Chad to represent
the Secretary-General at the State funeral of President Déby. He took the opportunity
to meet with Chadian stakeholders, notably with the transitional military council
leader, the President of the dissolved National Assembly and key opposition leaders,
to promote a peaceful, inclusive and consensual process to return to constitutional
order and civilian rule. The Special Representative also maintained close contact with
the African Union and ECCAS to coordinate efforts.
Congo
58. On 18 and 19 February, the Special Representative travelled to Brazzaville for
consultations with the Government, political leaders, the national electoral
commission and the diplomatic community. He urged interlocutors to remain
committed to a peaceful electoral process and respect for the rule of law. From 15 to
29 March, UNOCA deployed a working-level mission at the request and in support
of the resident coordinator and the United Nations country team. Fr om 14 to 17 April,
the Special Representative travelled to Brazzaville to participate in the swearing -in
ceremony of President Nguesso and hold consultations with the authorities.
59. From 22 February to 6 March, UNOCA supported a series of workshops for
some 100 journalists on conflict awareness-raising reporting with a focus on the
electoral process. The workshops were organized by the office of the resident
coordinator and funded by the United Nations Development Programme -Department
of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs Joint Programme on Building National
Capacities for Conflict Prevention. The workshops mobilized facilitators and resource
persons from various United Nations entities, in liaison with national authorities.
60. The United Nations country team adopted joint programming intended to
prevent a relapse into conflict in Pool department, broaden the space for political
solutions and strengthen peacebuilding. United Nations agencies were working on a
community violence reduction approach in Pool department to mitigate the risk of
ex-combatants remobilizing and rearming owing to frustrations over the stalled
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme.
Equatorial Guinea
61. In response to the Government’s call for international support in the aftermath
of the Bata explosions, the United Nations coordinated a multidimensional
humanitarian response. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
mobilized a humanitarian team through the United Nations Disaste r Assessment and
Coordination Team mechanism, and a security team was deployed under the umbrella
of the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa to look
at unexploded ordnance risks. The office of the resident coordinator present ed the
Government with recommendations in relation to the humanitarian situation and
ammunition management.
21-06345

11/16

S/2021/517

62. From 16 to 20 April, UNOCA and the ECCAS Commission deployed a joint
technical mission to Malabo, in response to a request from the Government f or
assistance in the development of its national action plan on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and security.
Gabon
63. On 9 December, President Bongo Ondimba and the Special Representative had
an exchange on the legacy of Gabon’s ECCAS chairmanship, including the successful
completion of the institutional reform process, and recent developments in the
subregion, focusing on the crisis in the Central African Republic.
Sao Tome and Principe
64. From 25 January to 1 February, an electoral needs assessment mission was
deployed to Sao Tome, in response to a request for United Nations assistance for the
presidential election. Following approval of the mission’s recommendations, resource
mobilization is ongoing to provide electoral assistance.
65. The Special Representative visited Sao Tome from 16 to 20 May to advocate a
peaceful and inclusive electoral process.
66. From 25 to 29 April, UNOCA and the ECCAS Commission conducted a joint
visit to Sao Tome and Principe to provide technical support for the preparation of the
country’s national action plan for the implementation of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) on women and peace and security.

B.

Support for the United Nations, regional and subregional
initiatives on peace and security
United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in
Central Africa
67. From 4 to 12 March, UNOCA dispatched an advance team to Bujumbura to
assist the Burundian authorities in the preparations for the fifty -first ministerial
meeting of the Committee, scheduled to be held from 24 to 28 May.
68. From 25 to 30 April, the Bureau of the Committee c onducted a visit to Bangui
within the framework of the Political Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic and the disarmament, demobilization, rehabilitation and
reintegration programme in the country.
Collaboration with regional, subregional and intergovernmental organizations
69. The Special Representative held regular meetings with the President of the
ECCAS Commission to discuss key issues of peace and regional stability and the need
to further strengthen ECCAS preventive diplomacy and for ECCAS to continue to
work in synergy with regional and international partners.
70. On 12 January, UNOCA met the ECCAS Commissioner for Gender and Social
Affairs to discuss partnership between the two offices in support of ECCAS efforts to
promote women’s participation in governance and mediation structures and in gender sensitive civil society platforms for early warning and conflict prevention.
71. On 29 March, the Special Representative and the President of the EC CAS
Commission co-chaired a virtual UNOCA-ECCAS joint retreat. The two offices
endorsed their joint strategic plan for the period 2021–2025 focusing on collaborative
efforts to advance national and regional governance; an integrated approach to

12/16

21-06345

S/2021/517

transnational security challenges; management of armed groups and rule of law
deficits; partnerships with women, young people and civil society for conflict
prevention; and strategic planning, resource mobilization and communication.
72. On 30 April, the Special Representative met, virtually, the Regional Vice-President
of the World Bank for Western and Central Africa, at his request. They agreed to
coordinate their analyses and activities in several countries in Central Africa.
Climate security
73. UNOCA completed the first phase of a two-year project on climate security,
which has been implemented since October 2020. The first phase identified key
pathways linking the effects of climate change to peace and security challenges in the
subregion, such as land conflict, pastoralism-related insecurity, maritime insecurity,
unregulated urbanization and the rise of non-State armed groups. The findings will
inform a comprehensive assessment of climate-related security risks in Central
Africa, to be conducted with subregional partners.
Boko Haram
74. Between 21 February and 1 May, UNOCA and the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) conducted joint working-level missions to
Cameroon, Chad, the Niger and Nigeria, to assess the impact of Boko Hara m in those
countries, the humanitarian needs, the impact on the human rights situation and
regional and national capacities to address security threats and respond to the needs
on the ground.
75. On 18 March, UNOCA participated in the first meeting of the governance cluster
of the regional task force on the Regional Stabilization, Recovery and Resilience
Strategy for Areas Affected by Boko Haram in the Lake Chad Basin Region.
Facilitated by the secretariat of the Regional Strategy, the meeting was also atte nded
by various United Nations entities and the European Union, among others.
Participants were updated on the activities of the Lake Chad Basin Commission and
its partners.
76. From 29 to 31 March, UNOCA participated in a regional expert consultation on
the gender dimensions of prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration approaches for
persons associated with Boko Haram, co-organized by the Lake Chad Basin
Commission, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Office of Counter Terrorism and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate. The
consultation yielded recommendations designed to strengthen the gender dimension
of prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration approaches in the Lake Chad basin.
Maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea
77. On 18 March, the Special Representatives for Central Africa and West Africa
and the Sahel facilitated a virtual high-level meeting on maritime security in the Gulf
of Guinea, attended by the Presidents of the ECCAS and ECOWAS Commissions and
the Executive Secretary of the Gulf of Guinea Commission. Participants agreed to
establish a plan in support of the functioning and operationalization of related
regional coordination mechanisms, convene the fourth annual meeting of heads of
institutions of the Interregional Coordination Centre for Maritime Safety and Security
in the Gulf of Guinea, undertake joint high-level advocacy missions to Member States
and intensify joint advocacy with international partners in order to address the
challenges to peace and security in the Gulf of Guinea.

21-06345

13/16

S/2021/517

Transhumance and farmer-herder dynamics
78. On 10 March, the Special Representative for Central Africa, the Special
Coordinator for Development in the Sahel and the Deputy Special Representative for
West Africa and the Sahel met to galvanize United Nations system action to
strengthen joint analyses and integrated operational responses to the farmer-herder
dynamics in West and Central Africa, in collaboration with the relevant resident
coordinators, United Nations country teams, regional offices and peace operations.

C.

Enhancing United Nations coherence and coordination in
the subregion
79. On 23 February, the Special Representative participated in the first virtual
meeting of the Senior Policy Group for the implementation of the United Nations
Strategy for Peace Consolidation, Conflict Prevention and Conflict Resolution in the
Great Lakes Region, chaired by the Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region.
Participants discussed the Group’s terms of reference with a view to adopting, in June,
the action plan for the implementation of the Strategy.
80. On 4 March, the Special Representatives for Central Africa and the Central
African Republic and the Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region met virtually, at
the latter’s initiative, to coordinate their approach with regard to regional initiatives
in support of the peace consolidation efforts in the Central African Republic, in which
they reiterate that regional initiatives should be in support of the Political Agree ment
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic.
81. On 23 March, the Special Representative for Central Africa convened a meeting
with United Nations resident coordinators and heads of several United Nations
regional offices in Central Africa, at which he introduced the President of the ECCAS
Commission. Participants were briefed on peacebuilding funding for cross -border
initiatives in support of ECCAS and reviewed the situation in Central Africa and the
partnership between UNOCA and ECCAS.
82. On 29 April and 6 May, UNOCA held virtual meetings with UNOWAS, the
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women) and the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs to review the
situation of women in Chad and prospects for their participation in the political
transition process. Participants discussed coordinated United Nations action in
support of Chadian women and explored avenues for championing a gender agenda
and ensuring women’s meaningful participation in the transition.

IV. Observations and recommendations
83. Elections were organized by several countries in Central Africa. In some
instances, however, there were significant restrictions on the exercise of civil and
political rights and growing grievances against the management of elections. That
situation frustrated democratic aspirations and led several political actors and parties
to not take part in or withdraw from electoral processes. States of the subregion are
encouraged to actively promote the civil and political rights and freedoms of their
people, to hold elections in accordance with constitutional timelines and to
implement, through inclusive dialogue, consensual electoral reforms nurturing
peaceful, inclusive and credible elections that sustain peace and contribute to the
attainment of the Sustainable Development Goals.

14/16

21-06345

S/2021/517

84. The United Nations encourages the promotion of regional platforms for the
sharing of best practices in the area of democratic elections and the promotion of rules
that govern and enforce credible, transparent, inclusive and peaceful elections in line
with relevant continental and international standards. My Special Representative will
continue to mobilize all relevant United Nations entities to support efforts in this area,
including through implementation of the Malabo Declaration on democratic and
peaceful elections as a means of strengthening stability and achieving sustainable
development goals in Central Africa and the African Charter on Democracy, Elections
and Governance. In that context, the continued engagement of the African Union,
ECCAS and the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, as well as the
support of international partners, is critical, and enhanced coordination among all
partners is necessary.
85. Notwithstanding important efforts made to date, the COVID -19 pandemic
continues to affect the political stability and economic progress of Central African
States. Measures adopted by Governments to contain the spread of COVID -19, while
critical in stemming the health impact of the virus, challenged basic liberties and
accentuated poverty and inequality, especially among women and young people.
ECCAS member States are encouraged to ensure that response strategies are in line
with their human rights obligations and promote recovery strategies, prioritizing
vulnerable populations, including women and young people.
86. The persistence of armed violence, including internal and cross -border
movements of armed groups, in various parts of Central Africa poses a serious threat
to the stability of the entire subregion, with grave consequences adding to an already
precarious humanitarian situation, exacerbated by the impact of COVID -19. Terrorist
attacks by Boko Haram in Cameroon and Chad continue to take a heavy civilian toll.
Coordination among countries and partners of the Lake Chad basin region is crucial
to addressing the threat of Boko Haram, its root causes and its impact on the affected
populations and countries. Joint efforts of UNOCA, UNOWAS and other United
Nations entities in the region, including joint analysis, advocacy and programming,
remain key to addressing the impact of Boko Haram. All stakeholders should
implement the Regional Stabilization, Recovery and Resilience Strategy for Areas
Affected by Boko Haram in the Lake Chad Basin Region, including through the
finalization and implementation of the territorial action plans.
87. I condemn the continued violence against civilians, schools and United Nations
and humanitarian personnel and assets in the North-West and South-West Regions of
Cameroon. There is no military solution to the crisis in the two Regions. The
Cameroonian authorities are encouraged to prioritize and promote inclusive dialogue
and reconciliation and further implement the recommendations of the major national
dialogue. In line with those recommendations, the Cameroonian authorities are also
encouraged to reach out to members of the Cameroonian diaspora, who did not
participate in the dialogue and continue to reject its outcome, to address outstanding
issues underlying the crisis.
88. I reiterate my profound condolences to the people and the Government of Chad
on the passing of President Déby. All stakeholders in Chad should pursue a peaceful,
inclusive and consensual process towards a rapid return to constitutional order and
civilian rule. It is my hope that Chadian stakeholders will have the vision, devotion
to the national interest, courage and determination to transform this pivotal moment
for Chad into an opportunity for all Chadians to advance towards sustainable peace
and inclusive development. I call upon all actors to respect the territorial integrity of
Chad and refrain from the use of violence for political gain. Chad remains bound by
its obligations under international law to fulfil, protect and respect human rights,
including the rights to life, freedom of expression and peaceful assembly. The United
Nations stands with the Chadian people and will continue to work closely with the
21-06345

15/16

S/2021/517

African Union and ECCAS to support the country in building a peaceful and
prosperous future.
89. The United Nations welcomes regional initiatives in support of the peace
process in the Central African Republic. The coordinated engagement of regional
actors, in close cooperation with the United Nations and other relevant stakeholders,
remains essential to fully implement the peace process. Continued improvement in
bilateral and regional cooperation between the Central African Republic and countries
in the region, including its neighbours, is encouraged.
90. International mobilization in the fight against the Lord’s Resistance Army
remains crucial, given that the armed group continues to pose a threat to peace and
security across Central Africa and beyond. Regional partners, includin g the African
Union and ECCAS, with the support of international partners, should bolster efforts
and synergies to address this threat.
91. The notable contributions of ECCAS to peace and stability in Central Africa and
the adoption of its joint strategic plan with UNOCA for the period 2021–2025 are
commendable. The United Nations remains determined to assist the subregion in its
efforts towards greater stability. I call upon ECCAS member States to continue to
promote and consolidate regional integration as a driving factor for sustainable peace
and prosperity.
92. To support these efforts, UNOCA will bolster its partnership with ECCAS to
prevent conflicts and sustain peace in Central Africa, strengthen national and regional
governance, address cross-border security challenges, and promote the participation
of women, young people and civil society in early warning, peacebuilding and
sustaining peace.
93. Notwithstanding noticeable progress and institutional gains made over the past
few years, the persistent fragility of peace and security in Central Africa necessitates
continued United Nations support, especially in the areas of preventive diplomacy
and peace consolidation. I therefore recommend that the mandate of UNOCA be
extended for another three years, from 1 September 2021 to 31 August 2024.
94. I would like to express my appreciation to the Governments of the subregion,
the African Union, ECCAS, CEMAC, the Lake Chad Basin Commission, the Gulf of
Guinea Commission and other regional and subregional instit utions for their
continued collaboration with UNOCA. I also wish to express my appreciation to the
Multinational Joint Task Force and the troop-contributing countries for their
dedication and commitment to the service of peace and stability. I am grateful to the
Government and people of Gabon for their generous hospitality and support to
UNOCA. I would like to thank the various entities of the United Nations system
working in Central Africa, including the heads of United Nations peace operations,
regional offices, country teams and other entities, for their support to and cooperation
with UNOCA.
95. Lastly, I would like to thank my Special Representative, François Louncény
Fall, and the staff of UNOCA for their continuing support for regional efforts to
advance the cause of peace and security in Central Africa.

16/16

21-06345
