UNITED NATIONS

NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
SECOND YEAR

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
PROC ES- VE RBAU X 0 FFICI ELS
OEUXIEME ANNEE

No. 66
169th and 170th nleetings
29 July 1947

16geme et 170eme seances
29 juillet 1947

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATIERES

Hundred and sixty-ninth meeting

Cent-soixante-neuvieme seance
Page

Pages

1583

255. Ordre du jour provisoire

1583

256. Adoption de l'ordre du jour. . . . . . . .. 1583

257. Credentials of the representative of
China on the Security Council.
1583

257. Lettres de creance du representant de la
Chine au Conseil de securite. . . . . . . .. 1583

258. Continuation of the discussion on the
Greek question
, 1584

258. Suite de la discussion sur la question
1584
grecque

Hundred and seventieth meeting

Cent-soixante-dixieme seance

255. Provisional agenda
256. Adoption of the agenda

,

1583

259. Provisional agenda

1601

259. Ordre du jour provisoire. . . . . . . . . . .. 1601

260. Adoption of the agenda

1602

260. Adoption de l'ordre du jour. : ... : . .. 1602

261. Continuation of the discussion on the
Greek question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 1602

261. Suite de la discussion sur la question
grecque
1602

Documents

Documents

The following documents, relevant to the hundred
and sixty-ninth and hundred and seventieth
meetings, appear as follows:

Les documents se rapportant aux cent-soixante·
neuvieme et cent-soixante-dixieme seances figu.
rent dans les publications suivantes:

Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year:

Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite,
Deuxieme Annee:

Supplement No. 15, Annex 38

Supplement No 15, Anne;-ce 38

Amendments to the United States draft resolution on the Greek question submitted by the
representative of the United Kingdom at the
one hundred and sixty-second meeting of the
Security Council (document S/429)

Amendements au projet de resolution des EtatsUnis sur la question grecque, presentes par le
representant du Royaume-Uni it. la centsoixante-deuxieme seance du Conseil de securite (document S/429)

Supplement No. 15, Annex 39

Supplement No 15, Annexe 39

Amendments to the United States draft resolution on the Greek question submitted by the
representative of France at the one hundred
and sixty-second meeting of the Security
Council (document S/430)

Amendements au projet de resolution des Etats·
Unis sur la question grecque, presentes par le
representant de la France a la cent-soixante·
deuxieme seance du Conseil de securite (docu.
ment S/430)

Special Supplement No. 2

Supplement special No 2

Report of the Commission of Investigation concerning Greek Frontier Incidents to the Security Council (document 8/360)

Rapport presente au Conseil de securite par la
Commission d'enquete sur les incidents surve·
nus a la frontiere grecque (document 8/360)

UNITED NATIONS

NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY
COUNCIL

CONSEIL
DE SECURITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS
SECOND YEAR

No. 66 DEUXIEME ANNEE

No 66

HUNDRED AND SIXTY ~NINTH MEETING

CENT·SOIXANTE~NEUVIEME SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, New York,
Tuesday, 29 ] ul)' 1947, at 10.80 a.m.

Tenue a Lake Success, New-York,
le mardi 29 juillet 1947, a 10 h. 30.

President: rvIr. O. LANGE (Poland).

PRESIDENT: M. O. LANGE (Pologne).

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, Fr~l1lce, Poland, Syria, Union of Soviet Socialist Rcpublic~, United Kingdom,
United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
AustraIie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine, Colombie,
Etats-Unis d'Amerique,
France, Pologne,
Royaume-Uni, Syrie, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques.

255. Provisional agenda (document 5/444)

255. Ordre du jour provisoire (document
5/444)

1. Adopt.ion of the agenda.

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.

011

F\i.

PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS

2. Report by the Secretary-General to the Presi- 2. Rapport du Secretaire general au President
du Conseil de securite concernant les lettres
dent of the Security Council concerning the
credentials of the representative of China on
the Security, Council (document S/439).

.

de creance du representant de la Chine au
Conseil de securite (document 8/439).

3. The Greek question: Report of the Commis- 3. Question grecque: rapport presente au
sion of Investigation concerning Greek Frontier Incidents to the Security Council (document 8/360):

256. Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Conseil de securite par la Commission d'enquete sur les incidents survenus
la frontiere grecque (document S/360)'.

a

256. Adoption de I'ordre du iour
L'ordre du jour est adopte.

257. Credentials of the representative of 257. Lettres de creance du representant
de la Chine au Conseil de securite
China on the Security Council
The PRESlm::NT: The first item on the agenda
. Is the report of the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council concerning the
credentials of the representative of China on the
Security Council. The text of the report (document 5/439) is as follows:
I

i·:
I

See Official R/lCPfds of th/l S6CUritjl Council, Second
V"" 'p,dol Suppl,m," No. 2.
1

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l' anglais): Le premier point figurant a l'ordre du jour est le rapport du Secretaire general au President. du
Conseil de securite sur les lettres de creance du
representant de la Chine au Conseil de securite. Void le texte de ce rapport (document
8/439) :
1 Voir le! Procis-uubawc offici,ls dlJ. Conseil de sic",·
ritl, Deuxieme Annee, Supplement speCIal No 2.

1584
[Texte original en anglaisJ

"Pursuant to rule 15 of the provisional rules
of procedure of the Sec~rity Council, I wish to
r~port that I have re~eIved a telegram, dated
23. July 1.9~7, from HIS.Excellency Wang ShihChICh, MInIster. of ForeIgn Affairs, stating that
the representatlVe of. C~in.a on the Security
CouncIl, Mr. Quo Tal-chI, IS on sick leave and
that Dr. T. F. Tsiang has been designated by the
Government of China to act in his place until
further notice.
"In my opinion this telegram constitutes adeq uate provisional credentials."

"Conformement a. Particle 15 du reglement
interieur provisoire du Conseil de securite j'ai
l'honneur de vous faire connal'tre que j'ai're<;u
de Son Excellence Wang Shih-chieh, Ministre
des affaires etrangeres, un telegramme date du
23 juillet 1947 qui m'apprend que M. Quo Taichi, representant de la Chine au Conseil de
securite, est en conge de maladie et que le Gouvernement chinois a designe M. Tsiang Ting-fu
pour le remplacer jusqu'a nouvel avis.
ccJ'estime que ce telegramme constitue de va~
lables lettres de creance provisoires."

As there is no objection, I shall consider that
the Council concurs· with the opinion of the
Secretary-General, and that we accept the telegram as adequate provisional credentials. That
is Our usual practice, and is in accordance with
the rules of procedure.

En l'absence d'opposition, je considere que les
membres du Conseil partagent l'opinion du Secretaire general et que nous acceptons que ce
telegramme tienne lieu provisoirement de lettres
de creance. C'est ainsi que nous procedons d'habitude et cette procedure est conforme au reglement interieur.

258. Continuation of the discussion on the
Greek question

258. Suite de la discussion sur la question
grecque

At the invitation of the President J Colonel
Kerenxhi, representative of Albania) Mr. MevoTah J representative of BulgariaJ Mr. Dendramis,
representative of Greece, and Mr. Vilfan, representative of Yugoslavia, took their seats at the
Council table.

Sur ['invitation du President, le colonel
KerenxhiJ representant de [,Albanie, M. Mevorah J representant de la Bulgarie, M. Dendramis,
representant de la Grece J et M. Vilfan, representant de la Y ougoslavie, prennent place a la
table du Conseil.

The PRESIDENT: We have discussed the
amendments to the United States draft resolution
(document S/391) 1 presented by the representatives of the United Kingdom (document S/429)'
and France (document S/430),' as well as the
suggestions presented by the representatives of
other countries. The discussion has led to an
acceptance of all these suggestions by the representative of the United States, and the amended
United States draft resolution has been distributed to all the representatives at the table.
There is only one point which has not been
cleared. That is point 7 (a)" referring to the
composition of the commission. The original
United States proposal stated that the commission should be composed of representatives of all
the members of the Council. There were alternative suggestions and possible formal proposals.
The discussion of that point was postponed,. and
I wish to take it up now. May I ask the representative of the United States for his reactions
to the suggestions which were made.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Nous
avons discute les amendements au projet de
resolution des Etats-Unis (document 8/391)'
presentes par les representants du Royaume-Uni
(document S/429)' et de la France (document
S/430)' et les propositions faites par les representants des autres pays. La discussion nous a
conduits a accepter toutes les propositions du
representant des Etats-Unis, et le projet de resolution amende de la delegation des Etats-Unis
a ete distribue tous les representants presents
autour de cette table.
Il reste un seul point qui n'a.pas ete eclairci.
C'est le point 7a)' traitant de la composition de
la commission. Aux termes de la proposition
originale de la delegation des Etats-Unis, la commission doit comprenclre des representants de
tous les membres du Conseil. Des variantes ont
ete proposees et des propositions officielles peuvent ctre faites. La discussion de ce point a ete
renvoyee et je voudrais la reprendre maintenant.
Puis-jc demander au representant des Etats-Unis
ce qu'il peuse des ~ropositions qu'on a faites?

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America):
During the discussion of this resolution I have
had the opportunity to speak twice on that particular paragraph, and I have nothing substan-

M. JOHNSON' (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais) : Au cours de la discussion relative a la resolution en question, j'ai eu deux fois
fois l'occasion de prendre la parole au sujet de

t See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 51, 147th meetIng, pages 1124 to 1126.
l

Ibid., Second Year, Supplement No. 15, Annex 38.

I

Ibid., Second Year, Supplement No. 15, Annex 99.

• Poin t 6 (a) of the final text.

a

'Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conuil de securite, Deuxieme Annee, No 51, 147eme seance, pages
1124 a 1126.
'Ibid., Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 15, Annexe 38.
I Ibid.,
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 15, Annexe 39.
.
• Point 6a) du texte final.

1585
tial to add to what I have already said. My Government and my delegation feel very strongly on
this point for reasons that have been stated, and
I should like to have the paragraph voted on as
it is, if possible.

cc paragraphe particulier et je n'ai riend'important ajouter ce que j'ai declare. Mon Gouvernement et la delegation des Etats-Unis ant
sur cc point, pour des raisons que j'ai deja. fait
connaitrc, une attitude tres ferme et j'aimerais
que le paragraphe soit mis aux voix tel qu'il est,
si possible.

The PfmSlDF.NT: The original fonnulation of
the paragraph was:

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Le texte
original du paragraphe est le suivant:

"The cornmi.<;~ion shall be composed of a representative of each (If the nations members of
the Security CCHlI1cil, as they may be from time
to time."

"La Commission est composee d'un representant de chacun des membres permanents et non
permanents du Conseil de securite."

That is the original wording. I should like to

Telle est la redaction originale. Je voudrais

a

a

know whether any representative wishes to make savoir si l'un des representants desire proposer
an alternative propmal.

une variante.

M. PAROD! (France): Qu'il me soit permis
1'!r. PARom (France) (translated from
French): :!'IIa)' I recall the rca.~()ns, as already d'evoquer les raisons que j'ai deja fait valoir
advanced by me, which appear to me to militate
in favollr of a dHfercnt composition of the
commi:';sicm.

et qui me paraissent militer en faveur d'une
composition differente de la commission.

I should like. first of all, to recall briefly that
the actual report made to us by the Commission
of In\"e:'ti~ati()11 contains a recommendation
for a conHlli$sion with a !imall number of memben;, and secondly, that a. tollllni!iSion with a
smaller membn':'hip than onc that was a rcplica
of the Security Council would be more efficient
amI could wo'rk bl~ltcr; lastly, and most impOl'tant of all, in "kw of the powers and responsibilitics of t he cIl11lmi~sinn, I thou~ht it would be
better if its mClllhcr~hip conveyed the impression
of the ,greatest possihle impartiality, a body
which would nmsider the Greek question, possibly k~s as a particular ca~{\ 01' a political dispu{(', than 011 it.s own merits, by isolating it and
!\tudyin~ it from the most objective point of view.

Je voudrais tout d'abord rappe1er rapidement
que le rapport meme de la Commission d'enqucte dont nous avons ete saisis contenait la
recommandation d'une commission reduite en
nombre; que, d'autre part, une commission plus
reduite en nombre que celle qui serait constituee
l'image du Conseil de securite aurait plus
d'efficacite et de facilites pour travailler; enfin,
et surtout, qu'il me parrot preferable, etant
donne les pouvoirs et responsabilites de la commission, que celle-ci ait une composition donnant
l'impression d'une objectivite aussi complete que
possible et amenant a considerer la question
grecque moins peut-etre sous l'aspect d'un cas
particulier, d'un coni1it d'ordre politique, qu'en
elIe-meme, en l'isolant et en la prenant sous un
aspect aussi objectif que possiblc.
.

Fnr t1Il'SC reasons, which I have already advanced and on whh~h, consequently, I shall not
dwell fmtller. I am indincd to maintain my previous pnsition and to recoml11end setting up a
commission smaller in si~c and with a more objective, more neutral membcrship.

Ces raisons, que j'ai deja fait valoir et sur
lesquelles par consequent je ne m'etendrai pas
maintenir la posidavantagc, me conduisent
recommander la
tion que j'avais prise et
constitution d'une commission plus reduite en
nombre et plus objective, plus neutre dans sa
composition.

I should like to ask you, 1:fr. !lresident, how
we arl~ going to proceed. Assuming that .,we f~l.
low the method hitherto adopted by the CounCIl,
then, if I understand rightly, a precise proposal
will have to be tahled, distinct from the text of
the United Stat('~ resolution, in order that the
Council may be properly seized of the question.

Je voudrais vous demander, Monsie~r le President comment nous allons proceder: en
admettant quc nous en restions a la mani~re
en usage jusqu'ici au Co~seil, il serai.t .neceSSa1:e,
si je comprends .bi~n, qu une propos1tlo~ pre:ISe
soit presentee, dlStmcte du texte de. la res.olut1o~
des Etats-Unis, pOUf que la questIon S01t vraIment posee au Conseil de securite.

In the present case, there is perhaps one drawback to this method. If we decide to set IIp a
smaller rol1l1l1issiol1 than that proposed by the
United States delegation, we may ~esitate between the several variants from whIch we can
choose.
I wonder, therefore, if it would not be possi~le
to vote, first of all, on the proposal. for ~ co.mmlssion of eleven members and, If thIS IS not

a

a
a

Cette maniere de faire, dans le cas present,
a peu t-etre un inconvenient: si nous decidons
de crecr une commission moins nombreuse qt;e
celle qu'a proposee la delegation; des Etats-UnIS,
nous pouvons hesiter entre plusleursJormules aI'egard desquelles le choix est perrms.
J e me demande done s'il n; serait pas possi~le
que nous nous prononcions d abord sur !e pr~Je~
d'une commission de onze membres et, SI celUl-c1

< .......

"

1586
adopted, we could then discuss what size would
be best for a smaller commission. If, however,
you felt that a formal proposal should be made,
I would submit one.
When 1 spoke the other day, I had in mind a
commission of seven members, that is to say, the
six non-permanent members plus a seventh. I
thought it better that the commission should consist of an odd number of members. The subsequent discussion showed that a fairly large number, I think, of our colleagues are in favour of a
commission smaller than that proposed by the
United States; but various possibilities differing
slightly from one another were suggested. I personally would be glad to agree to them; I would
not insist on my own formula-I proposed it
merely as a suggestion. Possibly the proposal to
take the six non-permanent members of the
Security Council would be the simplest and least
contentious.

Once again, however, I would first of all ask
if the normal procedure, assuming that the
United States representative agrees, would not be
for the Council to vote first on whether the commission should consist of eleven members or of a
smaller number. If this second solution were
adopted, could we not then have a further exchange of views on the membership of the commission?
Colonel HODGSON (Australia) : As my delegation understands it, the only formal proposal before the Council is that contained in the original
United States resolution. In the course of the
discussion, the representatives of Colombia,
France and Australia· submitted alternative proposals or suggestions, but they were never presented as formal written proposals.

I do not wish to go into the reasons why we
made our suggestion, except to say that it differs
from the French proposal in two important aspects. If 1 remember correctly, the French proposal provided that the non-permanent members
of the Security Council should be permanent
members of the commission, even though their
Governments might no longer be members of
the Security Council. There may ?e l?ood reasons
for that, in order to ensure
. contmUlty of. repre~
.
sentation' but, to our mmd, representatlOn ID a
body su;h as the proposed commis;sion shou~d
be a real representation of the Secunty Council.
The second point of difference is that the Australian proposal suggested representatives of the
non-permanent members only, without any out~
side neutral such as Sweden. Because of those
two import~nt differences, the Australian proposal is really an amendment to the French
proposal.

n'etait pas retenu, que nous discutions alors de
la meilleure composition d'une commission plus
reduite. Cependant, si vous estirniez necessaire
qu'une ,proposition formelle soit faite, j'en pre~
senterais une.
J'avais envisage, lorsque j'ai pris la parole
Pautre jour, l'idee d'une commission composee
de sept membres, c'est-a.dire des six membres
non permanents et d'un septieme membre. I1
me semblait preferable que la commission ftit
composee d'un nombre impair de membres. La
discussion qui a suivi a fait apparaitre qu,un
assez grand nombre, je crois, de nos collegues
sont, en dIet, partisans d'une commission plus
reduite en nombre que celle qui figure dans le
projet des Etats-Unis; mais des formules possibles, un peu differentes les unes des autres,
etaient envisagees. Pour ma part, je m'y rallierais
volontiers; je ne tiendrais pas essentiellement a
la formule que j'avais proposee, d'ailleurs a titre
de simple suggestion; et peut-ctre que la formule
consistant a prendre les six membrcs non permanents du Conseil de se.curite serait la plus simple,
celle qui preterait le moins a discussion.
Mais, encore une fois, je demande d'abord
si l'ordre normal, a supposer qu'il soit accepte
par le representant des Etats-Unis, ne serait
pas que le Conseil se pronon~at en premier lieu
sur le point de savoir si la commission doit
comporter onez membres, ou un mains grand
nombre. Dans le cas ou cette seconde solution
serait adoptee, ne serait-il pas possible de pro"
ceder alors a un echange de vues compIementaire sur la composition de la commission?
Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
l'anglais): Comme croit le savoir ma delegation,
la seule proposition officielle qui ait ete soumise
auConseil est celle qui se trouve dans la resolution originale presentee par la delegation des
Etats-Unis. Au cours de la discussion, les representants de la Colombie, de la France et de
l'Australie ont propose des variantes ou fait des
suggestions, mais leurs suggestions n'ont jamais
revetu le caractece de propositions officielles
ecrites.
Je ne veux pas me livrer a un examen des
raisons qui nous ont pousses a faire notre proposition, si ce n'est pour dire qu'elle differ~ de la
proposition franc;aise par deux aspects lmportants. Si mes souvenirs sont exacts, la proposition franc;aise prevoit que les membres non
permanents du Conseil de securite seront membres permanents de la commission meme si leurs
Gouvernements cessent d'etre membres du
Conseil de securite. n pent y avoir a cela de
bonnes raisons notamment p·our assurer la
continuite de la' representation; mais, selon nous, .
la composition d'un organism~ td que la co~­
mission doit etre la veritable Image du Conseil
de securite. La seconde difference reside dans le
fait que la proposition australienne envisage la
representation des pays membres. nOR permanents mais non celle des pays qUI ne font pas .
parti~ du Conseil de securite,. par exeu;ple la
Suede. Etant donne ces deux differences nnportantes la proposition austra!i~nne est .en fait
un amendement de la propOSItion franc;atSe.

1587
I propose that we accept the suggestion of the
United States representative and vote on the
United States resolution, which is the only one
before this Council. Then, if the United States
resolution is not carried, my delegation would
reserve its right to place the Australian proposal
before the Council as an amendment to the
French proposal.

.

Je propose que nollS acceptions les suggestions
du representant des Etats-Unis et mettions aux
voix la resolution qu'il a presentee et qui est la
seule dont le Conseil soit saisi. Par la suite, si la
resolution des Etats-Unis n'est pas adoptee, ma
delegation se reserve le droit de soumettre au
Conseil la pwposition australienne consideree
comme amendement a la proposition fran~aise,

Mr. TSIANG (China): My Government favM, TSIANG (Chine) (traduit de l'anglais) :
ours a full commission with all members of the Mon Gouvernement est en faveur d'une commisCouncil represented. The importance of the sion pleniere Oll tous les membres du Conseil
question, as well as the general interest which seraient representes. L'importance de la question
Governments have in its solution, justifies, and et l'interet general que les Gouvernements poreven requires, a full commission.
tent asa solution justifient et exigent meme une
commission pleniere.
The difficulties involved in the selection of a
Les difficultes que comporte le choix des memsmaller commission are quite real. But these dif- bres d'une commission restreinte sont tres reelles.
ficulties would not be the only ones, I should like Mais ces difficuItes ne sont pas les seules. Je
to call attention to even greater difficulties in the voudrais attirer l'attention du Conseil sur les
execution of the duties entrusted to the commis- difficultes plus grandes que rencontrerait l'accomsion of its membership is less than one fully rep- plissement des devoirs confies a la commission
resentative of the Council.
dans les cas ou ses membres seraient moins
nombreux que ceux du Conseil.
In the first place, the full commission of eleven
members would settle differences and adjust difficulties more easily than a smaller commission.

En premier lieu, il serait plus facile a. la
commission pleniere de onze membres de regler
toutes les divergences de vues et de resoudre
les difficultes qu'il ne le serait a une commission
moins importante.

En second lieu, si la commission est composee
In the second place, if the commission had a
membership of six or seven, it could not then be de six ou sept membres seulement, il n'est pas
sure that a majority in the commission would be certain qu'une major~te. ~ la comm,ission soit
sustained by a majority in the Council. The ele- confirmee par une maJonte a~ Consel!. 1.!n el~­
ments of hesitation and uncertainty in the execu- ment d'hesitation et d'incertItude se ghsseralt
dans l'accomplissement des devoirs de la commistion of its duties would creep in.
sion.
Finally, if ~e have a smaller commissiOl:, Go~­
ernments not represented may have to mvestlgate and obtain information ind~pende~tly. The
Governments not represented rrught raIse more
questions and institute more debates here.

It seems to me that a full commission would
more adequately represent the Council, and, in
the long run save the time of the Council. For
these reasons; I hope that our colleagues w.ill see
their way clear to support the proposal laId before us by the representative of the United States.
Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America): I
had not thought that this proposition,would be
debated further but inasmuch as VIews have
been expressed, it may be useful if Irecall to ~he
Council certain of the reasons why my delegatlon
favours the larger representation.

En-fin si nous nous decidons pour une commission 'mains importante, 1es Gouvernem.en~
qui n'y sont pas representes pour;ont avoll' .a
proceder it des enquHes et a reumr des renselgnements individuellement. Les Gouvernements
non representes pourront soulever de nouvelles
questions et susciter ainsi de nouveaux debats.
SeIon moi une commission pIeniere representerait plus fidclement le Conseil et, a la lo~gue,
lui ferait gagner du temps. P.our ces rals~ns,
j'espere que mes co11egues esbmeront posslb~e
de soutenir la proposition que soumet le representant des Etats-Unis.
M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'~merique) (traduit de l'anglais): Je ne pensaIS pas que cette

'(on ferait l'objet d'un nouveau debat,
propoilsl
1
te"tre utile,etant
malS peu
. donne. que diverses
11
opinions ont ete formulees, que Je rappe e au
Conseil certaines des raisons pour lesque11es ~a
delegation est en faveur d'une representation
plus large.
.
Les representants de l'Australie et de la Cehine
Some of those reasons have been stated by the
representatives of Australia and China. The ont expose certaines de ces Jrais~.ns, Le ~epr se~­
a dec}ar~ qu il ~ensaIt qGuee a
representative of Australia stated that he .thoug?t tant de. ,l'Australie
qui pourraIt etre creee en l' ce
il C t
gument
the commission which might be establIshed ~ COIDffilSSlon
't representer le Conse. e ar
Greece should be representative of the. CouncIL clevral
f
'
la
, r certainement en par le a propoThat argument would certainly apply ill part to S.3PP lqu~il a soumise au sujet de la representathe proposal he suggested for the non-permanent SltlOn qu

1588·
membe~ of th~ Securit~ C~un~il as they may be
at any glVen tIme. I thmk it applies with equal
and ev.en superior force to the proposal that the
CouncIl should be fully represented on this commission.

tion des membres non permanents du Conseil,
d'apres la composition de celui-ci, a un moment
donne. Je crois qu'il s'applique avec la meme
rigueur et meme peut-etre avec une rigueur plus
grande a la proposition que le Conseil doit etre
represente, d'une fa~on complete, au sein de
cette commission.

I believe the full commission would more adequately represent the Council's purposes, and
would be able to co-ordinate its work with the
policy and decisions of the Council more effectively than if the representation were smaller; it
would give a unity to the execution of the Council's policies and purposes which would be lacking if there were a limited representation. While
many arguments in favour of any of these proposals might seem good (anyone of the proposals for the composition of this commission
could be defended plausibly, and could be opposed plausibly), we believe the full commission
would offer the best chance for success and the
smallest number of inconveniences.

Je crois que la commission pleniere representerait le Conseil plus fidelement et serait en
mesure de coordonner son travail avec la politique et les decisions du Conseil mieux que ne le
ferait une commission ou la representation serait
moins large. Elle donnerait a la mise en application des programmes et des projets 9,u Conseil
une unite qu'une representation limitee ne permettrait pas. Un grand nombre d'arguments en
faveur de rune quelconque de ces propositions
peuvent pa,raJ:tre valables (rune quelconque des
propositions soumises au sujet de la composition
de cette commission peut etre defendue et attaquee raisonnablement) > mais nous pensons
qu'une commission pleniere offrirait les plus
grandes chances de succes et presenterait le plus
petit nombre d'inconvenients.

I personally seriously doubt that the sharp
differences of opinion which have existed at different times in the Commission which is still in
existence would be in the least attenuated by
having a small commission. I think that it is an
ill lision, and that those differences of opinion
may perhaps be more easily smoothed out by a
group representing the entire Security Council.

Personnellement, je doute serieusement que les
grandes divergences d'opinions qui se sont fait
jour a diverses reprises au sein de la Commission
actuelle soient le moins du monde attenuees si
nous disposons d'une commission de composition
plus restreinte. Je pense meme que le croire est
une illusion et que ccs divergences d'opinions
peuvent peut-etre plus facilement disparal:tre
au sein d'un groupe representant tout le Conseil.

I therefore earnestly hope that the Security
Council will be able to take a decision to the
effect that the membership of the commission
will correspond exactly to that of the Council.

J'espere done que le Conseil de securite voudra bien decider que la composition de cette
commission representera exactement celle du
Conseil.

Mr. MUNIZ (Brazil): At the hundred and
sixty-si.xth meeting,' I mentioned two principles
that should be taken into account in the composition of the commission: the representative
character of the commission, and the elimination
of choice.

M. MUNIZ (Bresil) (traduit de l'anglais):
Lors de la cent-soixante-sixieme seance\ j'ai fait
mention de deux principes qu'il convient de
prendre en consideration dans la composition
de cette commission: le caractere representatif
de la commission et l'eIimination du choix.

Ayant etudie la nature de la tache confiee aHaving viewed the nature of the task entrusted
to the commission, I believe it is important that la commission, je pense qu'il est important que
the conunission should be fully representative of la commission represente le Conseil de securite
the Security Council, and should reflect its pres- de fil.<;on plus complete et soit le reflet de son
tige and moral force. If it is a body representa- prestige et de la force morale qu'il represente.
tive of the Security Council itself, the commission Si elle constitue un organisme representant le
will gain in authority not only in its investigating Conseil de securite lui-meme, la commission y
gagnera en autorite, non seulement en tant
capacity but also in its duty as 'a conciliator.
qu'organisme d'enquete, mais aussi dans ses.
taches de conciliation.
The commission will have a delicate and difficult task ahead of it. We should not spare any
effort to impart to it the highest degree of authority. For the commission to have the same
cOll:1position as the Security Council would also
be an advantage to it in its relations with the
Security Council.

La commission se trouvera en presence d'une
tache delicate et difficile. Nous ne devons epargner aucun effort pour lui conferer le maximum
d'autorite. Avail' la meme composition que le
Conseil de securite sera pour eUe un avantage
dans ses relations avec ce Conseil.

A commission of eleven members, as proposed
by the United States delegation, fulfils all those

Une commission de onze membres, teUe que
la propose la delegation des Etats-Unis, reunit

~ Sce Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 63.

1 Voir les Proces-v8rbau~ officiels du Con.seil de securite, Deuxieme Annee, No 63.

1589
conditions and also eliminates the need for
choice. That is why the Brazilian delegation will
favour the adoption of the United States proposal.
1\1r. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgium) (translated
from Frc"} ch ): I want to confirm briefly a statement wInch I made at the meeting of 24 July.'

If the Security Council is offered a choice between the various formulas proposed during the
debate,. the Belgian delegation would prefer the
suggcstlOn made by the Australian delegation.
If, however, no such amendment is moved-and
if we are to have a choice, there must be an
amcnclment--the Belgian delegation will vote
for the original text submitted by the United
States delegation.
Ivh-. LAWFORD (United Kingdom): In this
matter, the United Kingdom delegation is in
fa.vour of the text of the United States draft
resolution as it stands. We think it is in accordance with the responsibility of the Security Council as a whole, and the United Kingdom, for its
part, would be willing to assume its responsibility in this regard.

The PRESIDENT: As there are no formal pro~
posals or amendments to paragraph 7 (a), the
original United States wording stands.

Mr. PARODI (France) (translated from
French): As I pointed out just now, the best
kind of procedure in this discussion would seem
to me to be to vote first of all on the United
States text; if this text were not adopted, we
could try to find the formula which would best
replace it. This was also, I think, the opinion of
the representative of Australia.

toutes ces conditions et elimine la necessitc du
choix. ~:est la raison pour laquelle la delegation
du Bresrl est en faveur de la proposition des
Etats-Unis.
M', VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgique): Je desire
~?~fir~er en quelques mots la declaration que

] al fmte au cours de la seance du 24 juillet'.
Si un choix est offert au Conseil de securite
entre les diverses formules proposees au cours
des debats, les preferences de la delegation belge
se porteront sur la suggestion formulce par la
delegation de l'Australie. A defaut toutefois d'un
am:nderr:ent ,dans ce ,sens - car pour que ce
ChOlX pUlsse s exercer 11 faut un amendement la delegation belge votera pour le texte primitif'
de la delegation des Etats-Unis.
M. LAWFORD (Royaume-Uni) (traduit de
l'anglais): Pour la question qui nous occupe, la
delegation du Royaume-Uni est favorable au
texte du projet de resolution des Etats-Unis, td .
qu'il se presente actuellement. Nous pensons
qu'il est en accord avec les responsabilites du
Conseil de securite considere dans son ensemble,
et le Royaume-Uni, en ce qui le concerne, est
pret a assumer sa part de responsabilite a cet
egard.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Etant
donne qu'il n'existe aucune proposition ni amendement officiels relatifs au paragraphe 7a), la
redaction originale presentee par les Etats-Unis
est maintenue.
M. PARODI (France): Comme je l'ai indique
tout a l'heure , la meilleure maniere de proceder
dans cette discussion me paraissait etre de nous
prononcer d'abord sur le texte des Etats-Unis; si
ce texte n'etait pas adoptc, nous pouvions chercher la formule qui le remplacerait le mieux.
Cela etait egalement, il me semble, l'opinion du
representant de l'Australie.

La declaration que vient de faire le represenThe statement just made by the Belgian repretant
de la Belgique me gene un peu car eUe ne
sentative worries me a little because it does not
cadre
pas avec cette methode de travail. Je
fit in with this procedure. I should therefore like
to know your decision, Mr. President, as to how voudrais donc Monsieur le President, connaitre
you wish this question put. I shall submit an votre decision' sur la falion dont vous desirez
amendment if that is necessary. But I thought que la question soit posee. S'il c;st necess~re qu.e
je presente un amendemc;nt, ]e ~e feral. MaJS
the other solution was the best.
l'autre solution me semblaIt la meilleure.
M. EL-KHOURI (Syrie) (traduit de f anglais) :
Mr. Er.-KHOURI (Syria): The representative
Le representant de la France a propose que l'on
of Fl'ance has suggested that action should be
prenne d'abord une decision au sujet de la protaken on the original proposal first. If it were
position originale et, si celle-ci etait repoussee,
rejected, he would then present an amendment
il presenterait un amendement ou une a?tre proor another proposal. That procedure does not
position. Cette procedure ne. me parrot p~s a
seem to me advisable. It would be better for the conseiller. 11 serait preferable que le represenrepresentative of France to present his amend- tant de la France soumette son amendement
ment now before' the United States proposal is
maintenant, avant que la proposition des E~ats­
voted upon l so that his amendment may be voted U nis soit mise aux voix, afin que nous vonons
upon first. If it were rejected, and if all the other d'abord sur cet amendement. S'il etait rejet~
amendments were rejected, we should then re- et si tous les ;autres amendements l'etaient aUSSl,
turn to the original proposal.
nous reviendrions alors a la proposition originale.
Au nom de la delegation de la Syrie, j'ai proOn behalf of the Syrian delegation, I proposed pose, lors de la cent-soixante-sixieme seance',
at the hundred and sixty-sixth meeting' that there
'See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 63, 166th meeting.

'Voir les Proces-verbaux officisls du Conseil de sicurite, Deuxieme Annee, No 63; 166eme seance.

1590

should be only one commissioner. As that pro'posal may not be adopted and as the other members of this Council may find great difficulty in
nominating a commissioner, I shall return to the
formula of simplicity which has been proposed
by the representative of Belgium, for the simplest
formula would be the best formula. We should
appoint on the commission either one commissioner not a member of the Security Council or
all the members of the Security Council as a
whole. This latter formula, if not the simplest,
would be next to the simplest. Therefore, I am
inclined to favour the latter procedure.

qu'on nomme un seul commissaire. Cette proposition pouvant ne pas etre adoptee et les
autres membres du Conseil pouvant eprouver
de grandes difficultes a designer un commissaire,
je reviens a la formule simple proposee par le
representant de la Belgiquej car la formule la
plus simple serait la meilleure. Nous devrions
nommer pour la commission, soit un commissaire non membre du Conseil de securite, soit
tous les membres du Conseil de securite dans
son ensemble. Cette derniere formule, si el1e
n'est pas la plus simple, est du moins celle qui
se presente irnmediatement apres la plus simple.
En consequence, je suis dispose a accueillir favorablement cette derniere fac;on de proceder.

If any delegation wishes to present an amendment, it should be presented now before we proceed to vote on the original text. If the French
representative would hesitate to approve that
method of deciding upon a formula, we should
then return to the original text. In any case, the
Syrian delegation would not vote for the French
proposal to have on the commission six nonpermanent members of the Council and another
member of the United Nations outside the Security Council. There is no justification for that
forml,lla. It is much better either to appoint all
the Security Council members, or to adopt the
Australian proposal, if there is a proposal to be
presented now before voting on the original proposal.

Si une delegation quelconque desire presenter
un amendement, c'est maintenant qu'il convient
de le faire, avant que nous mettions aux voix
le texte original. Si le representant de la France
hesite a approuver cette fac;on de decider de la
formule choisie, nous reviendrons au texte original. En tout cas, la delegation de la Syrie ne
votera pas en faveur de la proposition franc;aise
de faire sieger a la Commission six membres
non permanents du Conseil et un autre Membre
des Nations Unies qui ne soit pas m.embre du
Conseil. Cette formule ne se justifie pas. Il est
de beaucoup preferable, soit de designer tous
les membres du Conseil de securite, soit de s'en
tenir a la proposition australienne, si nous devons
nous prononcer maintenant sur une proposition
avant de mettre aux voix le texte original.

We are faced with these formulas for the composition of the commission. We can appoint only
the five permanent members to constitute the
commission, or the six non-permanent members,
or all the members of the Security Council.
There is no proposal, except mine, which advocates a single commissioner; that is not easy to
handle in this present situation.

Nous nous trouvons en presence des formules
suivantes relatives a la composition de la commission: elle peut etre constituee des cinq membres permanents ou des six membres non permanents seulement ou de tous les membres du
Conseil. Il existe aucune proposition, si ce n'est
la mienne, qui recommande un seul commissaire,
ce qui n'est peut-etre pas tres pratique dans le
cas present.

The PRESIDENT: I shall follow the wishes of
the representatives of Australia and France. If
they wish to make a formal amendment, I shall
submit it to the Council for discussion. If they
prefer the other course, then we shall vote in due
time on the paragraph of the United States proposal in question. If it is not adopted, I shall
then give them the opportunity to present any
amendments they may desire.

Le PRESIDENT (tradui"t de l'anglais): Je me
conformerai au desir des representants de l'Australie et de la France. S'ils desirent faire une
proposition officielle d'amendement, je la soumettrai au Conseil pour discussion. S'ils pre:ferent s'en tenir a l'autre methode, nous mettrons
aux voix, en temps voulu, le paragraphe en question de la proposition des Etats-Unis. S'il n'est
pas accept6, je leur donnerai la possibilite de
soumettre tous les amendements qu'ils desireront.

Colonel HODGSON (Australia): I share the
Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
view which has just been expressed by the Presi- l'anglais): Je partage l'opinion que vient d'ex-

dent. If we are going to vote on this text now,
there would be some point in what the representative of Syria has just said about taking a
decision on it. We are not going to vote at the
present time. The position is therefore quite
clear. When we come to the vote, we shall have
before us only the original proposal. If that is
not carried, I shall then be ready to submit my
proposal to the Council.

primer le President. Si nous devons immediatement mettre le texte aux voix, ce que vient de
declarer le representant de la Syrie au sujet de la
decision a prendre est tres pertinent. Mais nous
n'allons pas voter tout de suite. La situation
.est done parfaitement claire. Lorsque nous en
viendrons au vote, nous nous trouverons en presence de la proposition originale. Si elle n'est pas
adoptee, je serai pret asoumettre ma proposition
au Conseil.

Mr. LOPEZ (Colombia): There is very little
that I can add to what I have already said about

M. LOPEZ (Colombie) (traduit de l' anglais) :
Je ne peux pas ajouter grand-chose a ce que

1591
the composition of a small commission, especially
after the majority of the Council has very definitely expressed its desire to adopt the recommendations in the United States proposal, which
leave entirely out of the question the suggestions
submitted by the Colombian delegation. However, I should like to advance the opinion of the
Colombian delegation on several points.

j'ai dit au sujet de la composition d'une commission restreinte, plus particulierement apres que
la majorite du Conseil a exprime clairemcnt son
des~r. d'adopter les recommandations de la propOSItIon des Etats-Unis, ce qui laisse entierement
hors de question les suggestions avancees par la
delegation de la Colombie. Cependant, j'aimerais exposer l'opinion de la delegation de la
Colombie sur differents sujets.

First, I shall refer to the procedure, which is
the point we are discussing at present. It seems
to me rather important to decide whether or not
we are establishing a precedent in the way in
which we are conducting this discussion. If I
interpret our rules correctly, the proper course
of action to follow, after a proposal has been
presented, is to submit amendments, if any, and
to vote on the amendments first. Therefore, if
there is a French or an Australian amendment to
the original United States proposal, according to
our rules of procedure such an amendment
should be formally submitted and voted on before a vote is taken on the proposal itself.

Je parlerai d'abord de la procedure dont nollS
discutons en ce moment. n me parait important
de decider si nous allous ou non creer un precedent par la far;on dont nous conduisons ces
debats. Si j'interprete correctement notre reglement interieur, il convient, apres qu'une proposition a ete presentee, de soumettrc des amendements, s'il y a lieu, et de les mettre tout
d'abord aux voix. En consequence, s'il existe
un amendement franr;ais ou australien a la proposition originale des Etats-Unis, il convient,
conformement a notre reglement interieur, de le
presenter officiellement et de le mettre aux voix
avant de mettre am.: voiX la proposition ellememe.

Of course, we have been following a rather
unprecedented procedure, because both the
President and the Security Council have decided
to overlook the rules. Whenever an amendment
is introduced, our first step is to ask the United
States delegation whether the amendment is acceptable to it. But the rules really provide that
the Security Council itself should make that decision. When there is a proposal, and an amendment to it is submitted, the Council, according
to our rules of procedure, is expected to take a
decision on the amendment. But according to
our present procedure, any amendment submitted is presented to the United States delegation
first; and if it is acceptable to the United States
delegation, then the Council discusses it. That is
why I believe it is extremely important for the
Council to decide whether we are going to follow
that procedure in other cases, or whether this
procedure applies only to the discussion of the
Greek question.

EVidemment, nous avons suivi une procedure
assez nouvelle puisque le President et le Conseil
de securite a la fois ont decide de ne pas tenir
compte du reglement. Chaque fois qu'un amendement est presente, la premiere chose que nous
faisons .est de demander a la delegation des
Etats-Unis si dIe le juge acceptable. Mais en
realite le reglement prevoit que le Conseil de
securite lui-mcme doit prendre une decision.
Lorsque nous nous trouvons en presence d'une
proposition et d'un amendement a cette proposition, le Conseil, conformement notre reglement interieur, doit prendre une decision au
sujet de l'amendement. Mais dans notre procedure actuelle, tout amendement propose est
prealablement soumis a la delegation des EtatsUnis. Si elle l'accepte, le Conseil le discute.
C'est pourquoi je peuse qu'il est extremement
important que le Conseil ~ecid~ si no;zs alions
suivre cette procedure a I avemr ou SI elle.ne
s'applique qu'a la discussion de la questIon
grecque.

a

Pour en venir au point que nous examinons,
With regard to the point under consideration,
je
pense que differents modes de .votation p~ur­
I also find that entirely different results. may
raient
entrainer des resultats entlcrement diffefollow from different voting procedures. It does
rents.
Le
fait de mettre d'abord aux voix la pro~
make a difference whether we vote first on the
United States proposal or on one of the amend- position des Etats-Unis ou l'un des amendements
proposes n'est pas sans importance.
ments suggested.
Notre collegue fran~ais a declare que la ~eil­
To begin with, our French colleague said that
leure
procedure serait d~ metu:e aux ,VOIX la
the best procedure would .be. t.o vote on the
proposition
des Etats-U111S et, SI eHe n est pas
United States proposal, and 1£ It 18 not accepted,
acceptee,
de
mettre aux voix yn ~mendcmeD:t
to vote on the amendment which he would then
qu'il
proposerait
alors. Quant a m?I! le Con~eil
propose. From my point of vie~, once the.Counn'ayant pas accepte notre prop~sl~lOn relative
cil has not accepted our suggestlOns regarding the
au lieu de reunion de la comllUSSlOn et a ses
seat of the cOl111lUssion and its functions, and I
attributions,
et je pourrais J?em~ di;c rel~tive a
might even say regarding the appr?ach to the
la far;on d'aborder la questlOn, Je D: en SUlS que
question, I would ~e .~ore stron~l~ ~n .favour of plus dispose a laisser aux Etats-Ums la respon~
leaving the responsIbility of the mlt1atlVe to the
sabilite de l'initiative.
United States.
. NoilS avons propose la creation d'une commisWe have proposed that a smaller commiss~on
sion restreinte avec l'intention d'aborder le proshould be set up with the idea of approaching

1592
the problem in a different way, and of creating, bleme d'une fac;on differente et de Creel', ainsi
as I said before, not an investigation commission que je l'ai dit precedemment, non une commisbut a conciliation commissicn with powers to sion d'enquete, mais une commission de conciliainvestigate. It then seemed to us that, from the tion ayant pouvoir de proceder a une enquete.
point of view of conciliation, it was much better Il nous a pam alors que du point de vue concito have the seat of the commission removed from liation, il etait de beaucoup plus preferable que
the frontier. That is why we suggested a different le siege de la commission ne fUt pas sur la fronplace for the headquarters of the co:nmission. tiere. C'est pourquoi nous avons propose qu'il
fUt en quelque autre lieu.
But since the commission is going to be on the
border, since it is going to have powers of investigation, and since it is supposed to take over the
same functions and powers as the original Commission of Investigation and the Subsidiary
Group, I believe we have to come to the conclusion that there is really very little fundamental
change f~om the original United States proposal.
The French amendments may have helped to
make some improvement in the wording of some
paragraphs i but after all, as the press has reported, there is no substantial change either in
the approach or in the proposals originally submitted by the United States delegation. Substantially, it stands as it did at the beginning. There
is very little use in following a different approach
in a fragmentary way, because it would not
change the policy and it would not change the
approach.

Mais puisque la commission sera sur la frontiere, puisqu'elle doit avoir des pouvoirs d'enquete et puisqu'elle doit assumer les memes
fonctions et pouvoirs que la Commission d'enquete et le Groupe subsidiaire originaux, je
pense que nous en sommes arrives a la conclusion
que la proposition originale de la delegation des
Etats-Unis n'a subi que tres peu de modifications
fondamentales. Les amendements fran~ais peuvent avoir ete de quelque utilite pour ameliorer
la redaction de certains paragraphes, mais apres
tout, ainsi que le signale la presse, il n'y a pas
de modification substantielle, ni dans la fac;on
d'aborder la question, ni dans les propositions
soumises initialement par la delegation des EtasUnis. Elle est telle qu'elle etait des le debut
quant au fond. Adopter une fac;on differente
d'aborder certaines parties de la question, une
solution fragmentaire, ne serait pas d'une grande
utilite, car cela ne changerait ni la politique, ni
la fac;on d'aborder la question.

If we have a commlSSlOn of six of the nonpermanent members and none of the permanent
members of the Security Council, I doubt very
much that the commission would have the necessary backing. In my opinion, the backing of the
commission does not rest primarily with the
number of members. I do not believe that the
num1;>er of members, whether it were seven, nine
or eleven, would influence the solidarity or the
authority the commission might have. As I said
before, that depends upon how far the Security
Council decides to go in backing' the findings of
the commission. Then, of course, I do not believe
we should be blind to the fact that, under the
arrangements just completed by the Greek and
the United States Governments, implementing
the Truman Doctrine, the presence of the United
States representatives in Athens has very much to
do with the whole development of the task of
this commission. I believe that is what gives the
decisions of the commission their primary
strength.

Si nous disposons d'une commission composee
de six des membres non permanents sans aucun
des membres permanents du Conseil de securite,
je crains fort que la commission ne soit pas suffisamment soutenue. A mon avis, le nombre de'
membres qui la composeront ne suffit pas essentielIement a lui donner de I'autorite. J e ne pense
pas que cenombre - que ce soit cinq, neuf ou
onze - puisse influencer la solidarite ou l'autorite que la commission peut montrer. Ainsi que
je l'ai dit precedemment, cela depend uniquement de la fac;on dont le Conseil de securite
decidera de soutenir les conclusions de la commission. D'autre part, je ne pense evidemment
pas que nous devions ignorer le fait que, conformement aux mesures priSes d'un commun accord
par les Gouvernements de la Grece et des EtatsUnis pour l'application de la doctrine de Truman, la presence de representants des EtatsU nis a Athenes a beaucoup a faire avec l'accomplissement de la tache de la commission. Je
crois que c'est ce qui donne aux decisions de la
commission leur force principale.

A point has been raised here regarding the
weight the recommendations of the Security
Council will carry with the Balkan Governments.
I should like to state that that point has given
us great concern. When it brought up the Spanish question in the General Assembly, the Colombian delegation stated very clearly that it understood that the recommendations of the General
Assembly were binding upon the Members of
the Organization. Likewise, we believe that the
recommendations of the Security Council are
binding upon the Members of the Organization.
We may be wrong, but that is our opinion. Of

On a souleve la question de l'importance
qu'attacheront les Gouvernements des Balkans
aux recommandations du Conseil de securite. Je
desire declarer que l'examen de ce point nous a
donne beaucoup d'inquietude. Lorsque nous
avons souleve la question espagnole a I'Assemblee generale, la delegation de la Colombie a
declare tres clairement qu'elle comprenait que,
seIon eIle, les recommandations de l'Assemblee
generale liaient les Membres des Nations
Unies. Nous pensons que les recomrnandations
du Conseil de securite les lient egalement. 11 se
peut que nous ayons tort, mais telle est notre

1593
course, we have yet to see whether the recom~pinion. Evidemment, il nous reste encore voir
mendations are really binding upon all the
SI les recommandations lient reellement tous les
Members or only upon a group of the Members
Membres ou seulement un groupe de Membres
of the United Nations. I beHeve the whole sucdes Nations Unies. le pense que tout le succes
cess of the O~ganizatio? will depend very largely
de, l'~rganis~tio? dependra tres largement de
on that partlcular pomt: whether the recomc.e pomt partIcuher, a savoir si les recommandamendations of the Security Council and the
hons du Conseil de securite et de l'Assemblee
General Assembly are or are not binding upon
g~ne~ale lient ou non les Membres de l'Orga.the Members of the Organization.
nIsation.

a

If some Members have the privilege of making their choice with respect to whether or not
they accept the recommendations, I believe we
will have an entirely different situation. In the
same way, I believe that, since we are taking
such a positive stand on thc possibility of a threat
to the peace in the Balkans, we should not be so
very slow in considering, for instance, a question
such as we have in Indonesia at present. We do
not have a threat to peace there, but actually
an undeclared war, regarding which the Security
Council is doing nothing.

Si certains Membres ont le privilege de choisir
entre l'acceptation ou le refus de respecter Ces
recommandations, je crois' que la nous nous
trouverons devant une situation enticrement differente. De la rneme maniere, je peuse que, puisque nous prenons une attitude aussi nette sur la
possibilite d'une menaCe a la paix dans les Balkans, nous ne devons pas tarder a examiner, par
e.xemple, une question telle que celle de la situation actuelle en Indonesie. En Indonesie, ce n'est
pas une menace it la paix que nous aVOilS mais
en fait une guerre non declaree au sujet de
laquelle le Conseil de securite ne fait rien.

I am very glad .to see that the Council has
le suis tres heureux de constater que le
shown its willingness, by its decision, to take Conseil de securite a manifeste par sa decision
some very positive action in the sense of avoiding son desir de prendre quelque mesure tres positive
threats to the peace and breaches of the peace. pour eviter les menaces a la paix et les attentats
As we 110W make this decision, I believe we are contre la paix. En prenant cette decision, je crois
taking a very encouraging step towards carrying que nous faisons un pas tres encourageant vers
our work in other fields to its logical conclusion. la conclusion logique du travail que nous accomplissons dans d'autres domaines.
For instance, in the Spanish Cj.uestion, the resoEn ce qui concerne la question espagnole, par
lution of the General Assembly provided that, if exemple, la resolution de l'Assemblee general~
after a certain time the resolution did not have prevoit que si, apres un certain temps, cette
a satisfactory effect, something should be done resolution n'a pas eu un effet satisfaisant, le
by the Security Council. I suppose wc shall be Conseil de securite devra prendre quelque
able to take IIp the matter with the idea of giv- mesure. le suppose que nous pourrons reprendre
ing general effect to general policy, in keeping la question avec l'intention d'appliquer d'une
with the provisions of the Charter. If we apply fa~on egalement generale cette politique genethe provisions of the Charter democratically and rale, conformement aux dispositions de la
sincerely in every case, I believe the work of the Charte. Si, dans chaque cas, nous appliquons
Security Council will become more effective and ces dispositions democratiquement et sincerecommand the support of the world at large.
ment, je pense que le travail du Conseil de
securite sera plus efficace et recevra l'appui du
monde entier.
S'il en etait autrement, je crois que nollS CaUl'·
Otherwi~e, I believe we shall be running the
risk of simply having a new resolution, like the rions le risque de n'avoir qu'une resolution de
resolution on Spain, like the resolution regarding plus, comme la resolution espagnole, comme la
the treatment of Indians in South Africa,' or resolution concernant le traitement des Hindous
another situation like any of those we ha"{re been dans l'Union Sud-Africaine', ou nne situation
considering for the last six or seven months and analogue a celle qui se presente pour les queson which we have not been able to reach agree- tions que nous avons examinees au cours des six
ment: for example, the atomic bomb, the report ou sept derniers mois, questions sur lesquelles
of the Military Staff Committee, conventional nous n'avohs pas pu aboutir a un accord: la
armament,>, the Corfu Channel incident and bombe atomique, le rapport du Comite d'etatmajor, les armements de type classique, les inciTrieste.
dents de Corfou et la question de Trieste.
Autant que je puisse m'en rendre com~te
As far as I can sec now, we arc not going to
reach much agreement on the Greek question. maintenant, nous ne sommes pas ~ur le pomt
Vve shall have a majority agreement, as we' have d'aboutir a un accord sur la questlOn grecque.
always had, on the subjects under discussion; but Nous aurons l'accord d'une majorite, comme
we shall not be making very real and substantial nous l'avons deja eu sur les sujets discutes, m,ais
progress in reaching an agreement that will give DOUS ne ferons pas un progres reel et ,substantiel'
1 Sce Resolutions adopted
by the General Assembly
during the ~ccolld part of its first session, resolution
39(1), page 63.
a Ibid' J resolution 44(1). page 69.

~ Voir les Resolutions adop~Jes par I' AS!el}tblh g~ni"
rale pendant la seconde partJe de sa premIere seSSIon,
resolution 39(1), page 63.
'Ibid., resolution 44(1), page 69.

1594
the world some reasonable assurance that we are
moving in the direction of lasting peace and cooperation among nations.

vers un accord qui donne au monde quelque
assurance raisonnable que nous progressons dans
la voie d'une paix durable et de la cooperation
entre nations.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Je
The PR:E;SIDENT: I wish to give a few words
of explanation on the point raised by the repre- desire ajouter quelques mots d'explication sur
sentative of Colombia. I do not think that we la question soulevee par le representant de la
have in any way deviated from our rules of pro- Colombie. Je ne pense pas que nous nous soyons
cedure. Whenever there is a formal proposal for ecartes en aucune fa<;:on de notre reglement intean amendment, it is voted before the text of the rieur. Chaque fois que nouS nous trouvons en
resolution. Thus far not a single formal amend- presence d'une proposition officielle d'amendement to the United States text has been pro- ment, nous la mettons aux voix avant de mettre
posed, so that we could not have a vote on non- aux voix le texte de la resolution. Jusqu'ici, on
existent amendments.
n'a pas propose un seul amendement officiel
au texte de la delegation des Etats-Unis et il ne
nous etait pas possible de mettre aux voix des
amendements inexistants.
Furthermore, whenever, any suggestion is
made, whether formally or informally, it is quite
natural for the original author of the resolution
to be given the chance to accept or reject it,
because it is his resolution. That is the procedure
which we have usually adopted.

De plus, chaque fois qu'une proposition est
faite, que ce soit officiellement ou officieusement,
il est parfaitement naturel de donner a l'auteur
de la resolution le choix de l'accepter ou de la
refuser, puisque c'est de sa resolution qu'il s'agit.
Telle est la procedure que nous avons generalement suivie.

Mr. PARODI (France) (translated from
French): I agree with you, Mr. President, that
so far as the procedure is concerned, it has all
been perfectly normal. With special reference to
the suggestions my delegation has made regarding the composition of the commission, I would
remind the Colombian representative that thus
far we have not submitted an amendment; we
have taken precisely the same course which he
himself has frequently taken-and very usefully
Do-of making proposals in the form of simple
uggestions.

M. PARODI (France) : Comme vous, Monsieur
le President, je pense qu'en ce qui concerne la
procedure tout a ete parfaitement regulier. Pour
ce qui est specialement des suggestions que nous
avons faites quant a la composition de la commission, je fais remarquer au representant de la
Colombie que nous n'avons pas, jusqu'ici, preaente d'amendement; nous avons suivi precisement la voie qu'il a lui-meme suivie a plusieurs
reprises - tres utilement d'ailleurs - consistant
a presenter des propositions sous la forme de
simples suggestions.

At the moment we are offering a suggestion.
If I go no further than that, whereas in the case
. of other points the French delegation submitted
amendments, the reason once again is that, in
the logical order of discussion, I thought that the
normal thing would be to decide first on the
deven-member proposal, which, if adopted, ends
the whole discussion; then, only if it is not carried, to see which is the best of the other possible
solutions.

Actuellement, nous en sommes a une suggestion. Si je m'en tiens la, alors que pour les, autres
points la delegation fran<;:aise avait tenu a proposer des amendements, c'est encore une fois
parce que, dans l'ordre logique de la discussion,
il me paralt que la maniere de faire normale
consiste d'abord a nous prononcer sur le projet
de onze membres, qui, s'il est adopte, met fin
.a toute discussion; puis, seulement s'il n'est pas
adopte, a faire examiner queUe est la meilleure
des autres solutions possibles.

With regard to the very interesting general
remarks just made by the Colombian representative, I should like to say that, in my opinion, the
text we have before us today differs quite appreciably from the original text. It differs in its
spirit, in the way in which the various points are
submitted and, above all, in the way it stresses
the commission's task of conciliation.

A l'egard des observations generales que le
representant de la Colombie vient de presenter
de fa<;:on si interessante je voudrais dire qu'a
mori avis le texte en presence duquel nous sommes aujourd'hui se distingue assez sensiblement
du texte initial. Il s'en distingue par son esprit,
par la maniere dont les differents points sont
presentes et, essentiellement, parce qu'il met en
valeur la tache conciliatrice de la commission.

. If I have modified my previous views on many
points, it is because I felt that the membership
of the commission was one of its essential aspects.
I still think that the spirit of the resolution will
largely depend on how the commission is constituted. I repeat what I said just now, that it
appears to me essential that we should stress the

Si, sur beaucoup de points, j'ai attenue les
vues qui avaient d'abord ete les miennes, c'est
parce que je considerais qu'un aspect essentiel
etait precisement celui de la composition de la
commission. Je continue a penser" que l'esprit
de la resolution dependra en grande partie de la
maniere dont la commission sera constituee. Ce

1595
objective character of the commission which it
is proposed to set up.

qui me parrot essentiel, encore une fois - je
l'ai dit tout a l'heure - c'est que nous insistioI1B
sur le caractere d'objectivite de la commission
dont la constitution est envisagee.

I would add a secondary remark about the
other arguments put forward here.

J'ajoute une remarque secondaire se rapportant a d'autr~ arguments presentes ici.

It has been said that, if the commission did
not exactly represent the Security Council, it
might perhaps get less support from the Council;
it would have less authority. I should recall,
however, that it is not the function of the commission to take decisions. Its functions are, on
the one hand, conciliation or rapprochement;
and on the other, information. For purposes both
of information and conciliation, the commission,
by virtue of its membership, should have the
intrinsic authority derived from the neutral or
balanced character of its membership.

.La commission, a-t-on dit, si eUe ne representalt pas exactement le Conseil de securite risquerait peut-etre d'etre moins suivie p~ le
Conseil, d'avoir moins d'autorite. Mais je rappelie que le role de la commission n'est pas un
role de decision: d'une part, il est de conciliation,
de rapprochement; d'autre part, d'information.
Aussi bien pour la tache de rapprochement que
pour ceUe d'information, il est necessaire que la
commission, par la maniere dont eUe est composee, ait une autorite intrinseque tenant, encore
une fois, au caractere neutre ou equilibre de sa
composition.

In these circumstances, I still think that the
Je persiste, dans ces conditions, apenser que la
solution I advocated just now is preferable, and solution que j'ai defendue tout a l'heure est prethe one best calculated to settle the difficulties ferable et la plus propre a mettre fin aux difficonfronting us.
cultes en presence desquelles nous nous trouvons.
Mr. LAWFORD (United Kingdom): May I
ask the French representative whether he intends
to propose an amendment on this point before
we finally vote on the text of the United States
resolution; because if not, I wonder whether, in
accordance with our rules of procedure, we can
vote on his suggestion?
The PRESIDENT: Before I call upon the representative of France to reply, perhaps I may express my view on this subject. The procedure
will be to vote in due course upon this particular
paragraph of the United States resolution. If it
is accepted, the question is settled; if it is not
accepted, then what the representative of France
would present would not be an amendment but
a new proposal. The same is true with regard to
the representative of Australia.

M. LAWFORD (Royaume-Uni) (traduit de
l'anglais): Puis-je demander au representant de
la France s'il a l'intention de proposer un amendement ace sujet avant que nous mettions definitivement aux voix le texte de la resolution des
Etats-Unis, car, s'il n'en fait rien, je me demande
si, confonnement a notre reglement interieur,
nous pouvons mettre aux voix sa proposition?
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de, l'anglais): Avant
de donner la parole au representant de la France
pour lui permettre de repondre, peut-etre puis-je
exprimer mon opinion a ce sujet. La procedure
que nous adopterons sera de mettre aux voix en
temps voulu ce paragraphe particulier de la resolution des Etats-Unis. S'll est accepte, la question
est resolue, s'll ne l'est pas, ce que le representant
de la France soumettra ne serait pas un amendement, mais une proposition nouveUe. La meme
remarque reste valable pour la proposition du
representant de l'Australie.

M. PARODI (France): Je n'ai rien a ajouter,
Mr. PAROD! (France) (translated from
French): I have nothing to add to what you Monsieur le President, a ce que vous venez de
have just said, Mr. President. I entirely agree
with you.

dire. Je partage entierement vos vues.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Aucune
The PRESIDENT: As there are no formal proposals, paragraph 7 (a) of the new text stands proposition officielle n'ayant ete presentee, le
in the original formulation presented by the paragraphe 7a) du n?~veau texte re~te t~l qu'il
etait dans le texte ongmal de la delegatIOn des
United States delegation.
Etats-Unis.
We have now finished our discussion on the
draft resolution submitted by the representative
of the United States, and we are ready to vote
upon it. Before we do so, the representatives of
Bulgaria and Yugoslavia wish to make brief
declarations.

Nous avons maintenant termine notre discussion du projet de resolution soumis par le representant des Etats-Unis et nous sommes prets a le
mettre aux voix. Avant que noUS le fassions, 178
representants de la Bulgarie et de la Yougoslavle
desirent faire de breves declarations.

Mr. MEvoRAH (Bulgaria) (translated from . M. MEvoRAH (Bulgarie): Le representant
French): The United Kingdom representative du Royaume.Uni m'a reprochC hier d'av~?, frereproached me yesterday for having described sente la situation sous un aspect tel, qu il ev~­
the situation as reminiscent of the best of all quait le meilleur des mo~des. Je ~ al. pas, dlt
declare qu'll n'y aValt nen a la
possible worlds. I did not say that. I said, how- cela. Mais

rai

1596

I

ever, that there was nothing on the northern
frontier of Greece which could be a threat to
peace. Nearly three years have elapsed since the
Balkans were liberated and, throughout the
whole of this period, only insignificant incidents
have been reported to you, which were discarded
by the Commission of Investigation itself. If you
were asked to say what aid Bulgaria gave to
Greece, you would find it difficult to reply. That
being so, I feel that, for the sake of having a
dear conscience, it would have been enough to
make recommendations and offer good offices.

frontiere nord de la Grece qui put presenter un
danger pour la paix. Pres de trois annees se sont
ecoulees depuis la liberation des Balkans, et
durant toute cette periode on n'a pu vous signa~er que des incidents insignifiants, qui ont ete
laisses de cote par la Commission d'enquete el1ememe. Si on vous demandait en quoi consiste
l'aide que la Bulgarie a accordee a la Grece,
vous seriez en peine de repondre. Dans ces
conditions, pour avoir la conscience tranquille,
je crois que l'on aurait dO. se contenter de recommandations et d'une offre de bons offices.

In the second place, the resolution disregards
the findings of the Commission of Investigation
about the internal situation of Greece and its
causes. The report expressly states that the causes
of the trouble are to be sought in the discrimination shown by the pres~nt Government towards
the opposition and minorities. That, I think, is
the most important part of the report.

En second lieu, la resolution ne fait aucun cas
des constatations de la Commission d'enquete
relatives a la situation interieure de la Grece
et aux causes qui l'ont d6terminee. Le rapport
constate expressement que les causes du malaise
doivent etre cherchCes dans la discrimination
dont le Gouvernement actue1 a fait preuve a
1'egard de 1'opposition et des minorites. C'est la,
a mon avis, la partie la plus importante du rapport.

The report very tentatively suggests that, if the
Greek Government should decide to grant an
amnesty to the political prisoners and the partisans, the Commission would propose that the
Security Council infonn the Greek Government
of its readiness, on the Government's request, to
lend its good offices to assure the implementation
of this measure. Nothing is said of this proposal
in the draft resolution.

Avec beaucoup de circonspection, le rapport
suggere que si le Gouvernement grec decide
d'atcorder une amnistie aux prisonniers politiques et aux partisans, la Commission propose
que le Conseil de securite fasse savoir au Gouvernement grec qu'il serait pret, si celui-ci le
lui demandait, a preter ses bons offices afin
d'assurer la realisation de cette mesure. Cette
proposition n'a pas trouve d'echo dans le projet
de resolution.

To avoid any misunderstanding, I should add
that I am not expressing myself in favour of an
amnesty. I merely note that this important point
has been overlooked by the Council, and that the
unfortunate result of this omission was to divert
attention towards us instead of concentrating it
on the real crux of the problem, namely, the terror exercised against the Greek people.

J'ajoute, pour eviter tout malentendu, que je
ne me prononce pas pour l'amnistie. Je constate
seulement que ce point primordial a ete omis
par le Conseil et que cette o,mission a eu pour
resultat malheureux de devier l' attention vers
nous, .au lieu que celle-ci se concentrat sur le
nceud veritable du probleme, a savoir: la terreur
exercee contre le peuple grec.

Everything else is secondary. The proposed
commission will not put an end to the civil war
nor to the "fabrication" of frontier incidents. If
some State wishes at all costs to establish, consolidate and justify control over Greece, and if it
thinks that the commission might help it to do
so, we can only regret that we have been chosen
to be the scapegoat.
.

Tout le reste est secondaire. La commission
que 1'on veut creer ne mettra pas fin a la guerre
civile ni a la "fabrication" d'incidents de fron-·
tihe. Si quelque Etat veut a tout prix instituer,
consolider et justifier un controle sur la Grece et
croit que la commission puisse lui etre utile en
cela, nous n'avons qu'a regretter d'avoir ete
choisis comme bouc emissaire.

In conClusion, I declare, nevertheless, that our
people and our Government have no aggressive
intentions and will continue to work, in the factories and in the fields, for the establishment of
peace, at home and in the Balkans.

J e declare neanmoins, en terminant, que notre
'peuple, comme notre Gouvemement, ne nourrit
pas d'intentions agressives et continuera de travailler, dans les usines et dans les champs, a
1'etablissement de la paix, chez lui et dans les
Balkans.

Je vous remercie, Monsieur le President, et je
r thank you, Mr. President, and I also thank
the Council for having given me a patient hear- remercie egalement le Conseil, d'avoir eu la
patience de m'ecouter jusqu'au bout au cours de
ing throughout all my speeches.
mes interventions.
M. VILFAN (Yougoslavie) (traduit de l'anMr. VILFAN (Yugoslavia): It seems to me
appropriate at this moment to stress once more glais): I1 me semble maintenant cipportun de
the attitude of the Yugoslav delegation with re- souligner encore une fois l'attitude de la deIe~
gation yougoslave en ce qui concerne la resogard to the amended United States resolution.
lution amendee des Etats-Unis.

The spirit of the United States resolution as a
whole shows that it is based on an erroneous pre8un1ption. To our mind, the documentation collected by the Commission of Investigation directs
the Security Council to reach a decision that
would. guarantee to the Greek people internal
peace, democratic order, and national independence, in order that such a Greece may devote
its efforts to reconstruction and become a factor
for peace in the Balkans.

L'esprit de la resolution des Etats-Unis dans
son ensemble montre qu'elle repose sur une presomption fausse. Selon nous, la documentation
reunie par la Commission d'enquete invite le
Conseil de securite a prendre une decision qui
garantisse au peuple grec la paix interieure,
l'ordre democratique et l'independance nationale, afin que la Grece puisse alors consacrer
ses efforts a la reconstruction et devenir dans les
Balkans un element de paix.

However, the contrary was taken as the starting point and the following erroneous presumptions were taken as a basis: (1) that the general
condition of unrest in Greece and foreign intervention in the country are not important to, and
have no connexion with the causes of the disturbed situation in Greece and on its northern
frontiers; (2) that disturbances in northern
Greece and on its northern frontiers were provoked by its northern neighbours, who had
armed and sent groups of partisans into that
country.

C'est cependant le contraire qui a ete pris
comme point de depart et les fausses presomptions suivantes ant servi de base: 1) que la
situation generale d'insecurite en Grece et les
interventions etrangeres dans ce pays sont sans
importance pour la situation troublee qui regne
dans ce pays et sur ses frontieres nord et n'ont
aucun lien avec eUe; 2) que les troubles qui
regnent dans la Grece du Nord et aux frontieres
nord de ce pays ant ete provoques par ses voisins du nord, qui ont arme et envoye dans le
pays des groupes de partisans.

Because of these presumptions, the report of
the Conunission of Investigation certainly cannot provide a basis for recommendations. We
have, in our statements before the Security
Council, proved the accuracy of that thesis, and
have at the same time urged a systematic and
detailed discussion on these questions. Our request was not honoured; this, too, was one of
the reasons which contributed to the formulation
of erroneous recommendations.

Du fait de ces presomptions, le rapport de la
Commission d'enqucte ne peut certainement pas
servir de base a des recommandations. Au cours
de nos declarations devant le Conseil de securite,
nous availS demontre la verite de cette these et
en meme temps demande une discussion systematique et detaillee de ces questions. Notre
requete n'a pas ete entendue, et c'est la encore
une des raisons qui ant contribue a la redaction
de recommandations erronees.

Let us be more precise. The contents of the
resolution can be divided into two parts. The
first part-paragraphs 1, 2 and 3-includes recommendations which, if separately applied,
would be of help to the situation in the Balkans.
Paragraphs 4, 5 and 6, however, provide for
measures which could be characterized as unjust
and as having no legal foundation.

Soyons plus precis. Le contenu de la resolution
peut etre divise en deux parties. La premiere
partie, paragraphes 1, 2 et 3, comprend des
recommandations qui, si elles etaient appliquees
separement, contribueraient a eclaircir la situation dans les Balkans. Les paragraphes 4, 5 et 6
prevoient cependant des mesures qui peuvent
etre qualifiees d'injustes, car elles n'ont aucun
fondement juridique.

As regards the problem of refugees, it is erroneous and unjust to identify the refugees in
Yugoslavia with the quislings in Greece. In our
opinion, that is not in accordance either with
international obligations or with a basic concept
of justice. The international control of refugees
in the form proposed is, we think, incompatible
with the principle of sovereignty. It is perfectly
true, as has been said, that this would mean a
police control.

En ce qui concerne le probleme des rCfugies,
il est faux et injuste d'identifier aux quislings
grecs les refugies qui se trouvent en Yougoslavie.
Selon nous, cela n'est en accord ni avec les
obligations internationales, ni avec le concept
fondamental de' justice. Le controle international
des rCfugies, sous la forme que 1'0n propose, est,
croyons-nous, incompatible avec le principe: de
la souverainete. I1 est parfaitement exact, comme
on l'a declare, que cela reviendrait a uncontrole
de police.

We cannot agree with the recommendation
regarding the problem of national minorities.
Following the establishment. of facts on the denationalization and extermination of the Macedonian and Albanian national minorities in
Greece, admitted also by the majority in its conclusions, an astonishing recommendation was
reached concerning a possible transfer of these
minorities. We cannot consider it otherwise than
as sanctioning the denationalization and extermination carried out, and sanctioning the Greek
thesis as a whole.

Nous ne pouvons pas accepter les recommandations relatives au probleme des minorites
nationales. Apres avail' etabli les faits relatifs a
la denationalisation et a l'extermination des
minorites ethniques macedonienne et albanaise
en Gn~ce, egalement admis par la ~aj~rite dans
ses conclusions une recommandatlOn etonnante
a ete votee au ~ujet d'Ull transfert possible ~e, ces
minorites. Nous ne pouvons pas la conslderer
autrement que sanctionnant l~ denationaIisa~on
et l'extermination auxquelles il a ete procede et
satlctionnant la these grecque dans son ensemble.

1598
A decision to· create a commission, as provided
for in the United States resolution, not only
could not be founded on the results of the investigation and the actual facts of the situation,
but would also be contrary to the provisions of
the Charter. Under the pretext of examining an
alleged situation in the Balkans, the purpose is to
limit the sQvereign rights of three countries.

Non seulement on ne saurait legitimer par les
resultats de l'enquete et les faits reels de la situation la decision de creer une commission, comme
le prevoit la resolution des Etats-U nis, mais une
telle decision serait egalement contraire aux dispositions de la Charte. Sous pretexte d'examiner
une pretendue situation dans les Balkans, le but
de cette resolution est de limiter les droits souverains de trois pays.

The proposals included in paragraphs 4, 5
and 6 jeopardize the positive effect of the proposals included in paragraphs 1,2 and 3. Therefore, the resolution as a whole cannot help normalize conditions in the Balkans nor, more precisely, can it help normalize the situation in
Greece and on its northern frontiers.

Les propositions figurant dans les paragraphes
4, 5 e~ 6 annulent l'efl'et positif des propositions
figurant dans les paragraphes 1, 2 et. 3. En
consequence, la resolution dans son ensemble
ne peut pas contribuer a normaliser la situation
dans les Balkans, ni, plus precisement, a normaliser la situation en Grece et sur la frontiere nord
de ce pays.

Colonel KERENxHI (Albania) (translated
from French): During the discussions on the
Greek question, the amended United States proposal has undergone severe criticism based on
the Charter and on the facts observed by the
Commission during its investigation. Despite this,
the changes made in the United States proposal
do not constitute an improvement in the substance of the proposal except as regards the reference to re-establishing good relations between
the interested countries. We found ourselves contending and we are still contending with unfair
proposals, proposals which are not justified by the
true situation in Greece and which are at variance with the United Nations Charter. We are
confronted with proposals which threaten to confuse the situation and are of no help in clarifying
or improving it.

Le colonel KERENXHI (Albanie): Au cours
des discussions sur la question grecque, la proposition amendee des Etats-Unis a ete soumise
a une critique severe fonMe sur la Charte et
sur les faits releves par la Commission durant
son enquete. Malgre cela, les changements
apportes a la proposition des Etats-Unis ne
representent aucune amelioration quant au fond
de cette proposition, sauf en ce qui concerne
la mention du retablissement de bonnes relations
entre les pays interesses. Nous etions, et nous
sommes toujours, devant des propositions injustes, des propositions qui ne sont pas dictees par
la situation reelle en Grece et qui sont contraires
a la Charte des Nations Unies. Nous sommes
devant des propositions qui risquent d'embrouiller la situation et ne contribuent pas du tout a
l'eclaircir ou a l'ameliorer.

And yet, the United States proposal is about
to be put to the vote. We would have welcomed
draft resolutions based on the real facts of the
situation. We cannot possibly admit the justice
of proposals which do not meet the requirements
of the situation, and which, on the contrary,
might oblige us to submit to control and would
place our Government under the authority of an
external body, which, in the concrete case before
you, would be contrary to the Charter.

Et cependant, la proposition des Etats-Unis
est sur le point d'etre mise aux voix. Nous
aurions salue des projets de resolution qui se
seraient inspires des causes reelles de la situation.
Nous ne pouvons en aucune maniere admettre
comme justes des propositions qui ne repondent
pas aux necessites de la situation; qui, au
contraire, pourraient nous obliger a nous soumettre a un control~ et qui placeraient notre
Gouvernement sous l'autorite d'un organisme
exterieur, ce qui, dans le cas concret que vous
examinez, serait contraire a la Charte.

Tout d'abord, le projet de resolution des
In the first place, the draft United States resolution is erroneous since it is based on conclusions Etats-Unis est errone puisqu'il est fonde sur des
which are not in accordance with the facts. The conclusions qui ne correspondent pas aux faits.
conclusions which· maintain that the northern Les conclusions selon lesquelles les voisins septenneighbours of Greece have supported the cam- trionaux de la Grece ont donne leur soutien a
paign against that country are manifestly, from .la lutte contre ce pays apparaissent de toute
beginning to end of the report, entirely un- evidence, d'un bout a l'autre du rapport, comme
founded. The facts which emerge from the in- depourvues de tout fondement; les faits ressorvestigation do not justify such conclusions or, tant de l'enquete ne permettent pas d'arriver a
consequently, such proposals. The bias shown de telles conclusions et, par consequent, a de
in the Commission of Investigation's conclusions telles propositions. Le manque d'objectivite des
has served subsequently as a basis for the pro- conclusions de la Commission d'enquete a servi,
posal embodied in the United States resolution. par la suite, de base a la proposition de resolution
This proposal cannot apply to a situation which des Etats-Unis. Cette proposition ne peut s'applihas been the subject of investigation; it has no quer a une situation qui a fait l'objet d'une
bearing on that situation. The evidence collected enquete; elle est etrangere a cette situation. Les
showed that the situation is due to causes of an preuves recueillies ont demontre que cette situainternal nature, and that Greece's north~rn tion est due a des causes d'ordre interieur; elles

1599
neighbours cannot be accused of having supported the campaign against that country.

ont aussi demontre que les VOlsms septentrion~ux. de la Grece ne peuvent etre accuses
d avorr soutenu la lutte contre ce pays.

The draft United States resolution, however,
~ais le projet de resolution des Etats-Unis
takes no account of all these elements, although ne tie?t pas compte de tous ces elements cepenthey are indispensable for drawing up a proper dant mdIspensables pour en faire une resolution
resolution which is just and necessary in the juste et necessaire dans les circonstances actue!present circumstances. This proposal is not the les. Cette proposition ne decoule pas d'une veriresult of charges that have been verified; it is ficati0Il; des accusations, e!le ne correspond pas
not in conformity with the facts. It cannot be au~ faIts. ~n ne peut admettre que les accusaid that the accusations made against us by the sa~lOns .P?rtees contre nous par les Grecs aient
Greeks have been proven; consequently, no ete ve~Ifiees; par consequent, aucun verdict ne
judgment can be given against us. Still less can pe.ut et:e prononce contre nous; a plus forte
there be any question of compulsory decisions, ralson, il ne peut etre question de decisions obli.
decisions made without our consent.
gatoires, de decisions prises sans notre consentement.
It has been clearly pointed out in the Security
Il a ete clairement expose devant le Conseil
Council that the Council's recommendations are de securite que les recommandations faites par
not binding when the decisions adopted are ce demier n'ont pas un caractere d'obligation
based on Chapter VI of the Charter. Decisions lorsque les decisions prises sont fondees sur le
taken under Chapter VI bear essentially the Chapitre VI de la Charte. Toutes decisions prises
character of recommendations and not of obli- en vertu du Chapitre VI assument essentielle.
gations. The amended United States proposal,· ment un caractere de recommandation et non
however, goes beyond the measures provided in pas un caractere d'obligation. Or, la proposition
Chapter VI, and consequently, infringes the amendee des Etats-Vnis depasse les mesures preCharter by providing for decisions which violate vues au Chapitre VI et, par suite, va a l'enconthe sovereignty of our countries and place them tre meme de la Charte en prevoyant des deciunder control and tutelage.
sions qui violent la souverainete de nos pays et
soumettent ces derniers a un controle et a une
tutelle.
This has been strikingly proved during the discussion of the draft United States resolution. To
summarize, there are strong reasons why the
Security Council should not take decisions unrelated to a situation which has been the subject
of investigation, decisions of a compulsory character which would be in contradiction to the
Charter.

Ced a ete demontre par des exemples frappants au cours de la discussion du projet de
resolution des Etats-Unis. En resume, il existe
de fortes raisons pour que le Conseil de securite
ne prenne pas de decisions etrangeres a une
situation qui a fait l'objet d'une enquete, deci·
sions presentant un caractere d'obligation et qui
seraient en contradiction avec la Charte.

These various reasons can be summarized as
follows:

On peut resumer ainsi ces diverses raisons:

1. The real causes of the situation are to be
found inside Greece and have nothing to do with
us. The Security Council's recommendations
should be directly related to these causes.

1. Les causes reelles de la situation se trouvent a. l'interieur de la Grece et n'ont pas de
rapport avec nous. Les recommandations du
Conseil de securite doivent etre en relation
directe avec ces causes.

2. We are not defendants, sitting at the Council table waiting for decisions which will entail
an obligation.

2. Nous ne sommes pas, ala table du Conseil,
des accuses attendant des decisions ayant un
caractere d'obligation.

3. The United Nations Charter does not allow
the prestige. of independent countries to be injured, nor does it allow such countries to be
placed under tutelage or control.

3. La Charte des Nations Unies ne permet
pas de porter atteinte au prestige de pays independants et elle ne permet pas de soumettre
de tels pays a une tutelle,8. un contrOle.

4. Le Chapitre VI de la Charte ne permet
4. Chapter VI of the Charter does not allow
pas
qu'on nous impose des deci.sions .d'un c~rac­
binding decisions to be imposed upon us. During the discussions which have taken place here, tere obligatoire. Au cours des dISCUssIons qUI ont
efforts have been made to affirm the contrary eu lieu ici on a tente d'affirmer la these opposee,
and to justify the draft United States resolution. de justifi~r le projet de resolution des ~tats­
We are not convinced, however. We shall not Vnis. Mais nous ne sommes pas convamcus.
Nous ne changeons pas d'opinion.
change our opinion.
Nous ne pensons pas que le Co';Seil de s~cu.
We do not think that the Security Council is
rite
agisse, dans ce cas concret: d une m~mere
acting in this concrete. case in conformity with
the facts as revealed by the investigation or the conforme aux faits releves par I enquete, m aux
necessites de la situation, ni a la Charte.
requirements of the situation or the Charter.

1600
Mr. DENDRAMIS (Greece) (translated from
French): From the beginning of the debate on
the Greek question, Greece has said that it supported the recommendations of the majority of
the Commission of Investigation and the United
States representative's draft resoltuion: It does
not claim the right to decide whether it will
conform to the Council's resolution or not.
Greece will respect the authority of the· new
commission which it is proposed to set up.
I declare that my country considers itself
bound, as are Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania,
to comply with the resolution and the Council's
recommendations and that it undertakes to discharge its obligations fully and in good faith.
The PRESIDENT: I believe that we have finished the discussion and are now ready to vote.
Desires have been expressed that the resolution
should be voted on in parts. I should like to
know whether the representative of the United
States has any objection to this. Rule 32 says:
"Parts of a motion or of a draft resolution shall
be voted on separately at the request of any
representative, unless the original mover objects."
There is also another point. If we are going to
vote on the parts of the resolution separately, it
might be desirable to adjourn now and to take
the vote at the beginning of the afternoon meeting, with the understanding that no further discussion will take place before the vote. If a
member wants to say something before the vote,
he should say it nOW.
Mr. ]OHNSON (United States of America):
In regard to voting on the different sections, I
should like to inquire whether my understanding
is correct, that we shall vote according to the
general line laid down in the numbered sections
of the original United States resolution. Some of
those have been expanded into more than one
section. We are not voting line by line.
At the beginning of our discussion, when we
were adopting the amendments to this draft text,
the numbered paragraphs of the United States
resolution were taken as a guide to control the
discussion. For instance, paragraph 2 has been
expanded into paragraphs 2, 3, 4 and 5; and in
the text given to us this morning, the preamble
to paragraph 6 has been given· a separate number, whereas, as a matter of fact, paragraphs 6
and 7 on the paper we received this morning are
really one paragraph. The present paragraph 6
on this paper is only the preamble to the other,
but it has been put down as a separate numbered
paragraph. That is possibly merely an error in
typing, because the present paragraph is not a
separate section; it is the preamble to what follows. There must have. been an error in transcription.
The PRESIDENT: In regard to the last point
raised by the representative of the United States,

M. DENDRAMIS (Grece): La Grece, des le
debut des debats sur la question grecque, s'est
declaree en faveur des recommandations de la
majorite de la Commission d'enquete et du
projet de resolution du representant des EtatsUnis. Elle ne s'arroge pas le droit de decider si
elle se conformera ou non a la resolution du
Conseil. La Grece respectera l'autorite de la
nouvelle commission dont la creation est envisagee.
Je declare que mon pays se considere tenu,
comme le sont la Yougoslavie, la Bulgarie et
l'Albanie, de se conformer a la resolution et aux
recommandations du Conseil et il s'engage a
s'acquitter de ses devoirs entierement et avec
bonne foi.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l' anglais): Je crois
que notre discussion est terminee et que nous
sommes maintenant prets a proceder au vote.
Certains ont exprime le desir que la resolution
soit mise aux voix. par parties. J'aimerais savoir
si le representant des Etats-Unis a quelque raison de s'opposer a cette procedure. L'article 32
du reglement declare: "La division est de droit
si eUe est demandee, a moins que l'auteur de la
proposition ou du projet de resolution ne s'y
oppose." .
Une autre question se pose egalement: si nous
divisons la resolution avant de la mettre aux
voix, il est peut-etre souhaitable de s'ajourner
maintenant et de proceder au vote au debut de
la seance de l'apres-midi, etant bien entendu
qu'aucune autre discussion n'auI'a lieu avant le
vote. Si l'un quelconque des membres desire
ajouter quelque chose avant le vote, il doit le
faire maintenant.
M. ]OHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l' anglais): En ce qui concerne la
methode de vote par division, je voudrais savoir
si j'ai bien compris et si nous allons proceder a
un vote portant sur chacun des paragraphes
numerotes de la resolution originale des EtatsUnis. Certains ont ete developpes et constituent
maintenant plus d'un paragraphe. Nous ne
devons pas voter ligne par ligne.
Au debut de notre discussion, lorsque nous
avons adopte les amendements a ce projet de
texte, les paragraphes de la resolution des EtatsUnis etaient pris comme reperes pour orienter la
discussion. Par exemple, le paragraphe 2 a donne
les paragraphes 2, 3, 4 et 5 et, dans le texte qui
nous a ete remis ce matin, le preambule du paragraphe 6 a re~u un numero distinct, alors qu'i1
est bien clair que ce qui constitue maintenant
les paragraphes 6 et 7 du document que nous
aVOilS re~u ce matin n'est en realite qu'un paragraphe. Le paragraphe 6 actuel de ce document
n'est que le preambule de l'autre. mais il a ete
presente sous forme de paragraphe separe. Cela
n'est peut-etre qu'une erreur de dactylographie,
etant donne que le paragraphe 6 actuel ne constitue pas une section distincte; il constitue le
preambule de ce qui suit. Il y a dil y avoir une
erreur de transcription.
Le PRESIDENT: En ce qui concerne la dernihe remarque faite par le representant des

1601

it is quite true that paragraph 7 of the text that
we have before us makes no sense unless it starts
with the present paragraph 6 as a preamble.
I shall instruct the Secretariat to re-number
the paragraphs of the resolution in accordance
with what has been said.

Etats-Unis, eIle est parfaitement exacte. Le paragraphe 7 du texte que nous avons sous les yeux
ne correspond a rien s'il ne commence pas par
le paragraphe 6 considere comme preambule.
le chargerai le Secretariat de renumeroter le
paragraphe de la resolution conformement a ce
que nous venons de dire.

In regard to the division of the voting, it
En ce qui conceme la division de la resoluseems to me that the simplest way would be to tion pour le vote, il me semble que la fa~on
vote on the preamble, and then on the para- la plus simple serait de voter sur le preambule,
graphs.
puis sur les paragraphes.
The specific requests which I have received
Les demandes particulieres que j'ai re~ues
are these. The representative of France would sont les suivantes: le representant de la France
wish paragraph 6 ( a), according to the final desire que le paragraphe 6a), d'aprcs le numenumeration, which deals with the composition rotage definitif qui traite de la composition de
of the commission, to be voted on as a separate la commission, soit mis aux voix separement si
paragraph, if that is agreeable to the representa- le representant des Etats-Unis y consent. Le
tive of the United States. The representative of representant de la Pologne desire que les deux
Poland would appreciate it if the two sections in alineas du paragraphe 1 soient mis· aux voix
paragraph 1 could be voted on separately, if that separement si le representant des Etats-Unis y
is agreeable to the representative of the United consent.
States.
If any other representative has some special
Si l'un quelconque des autres representants
wishes regarding the way the paragraphs should a quelque desir particulier relatif a la fa~on dont
be voted on, I invite him to express them.
il convient de meUre aux voix les differents paragraphes, je l'invite a nous faire connaitre sa
fa~on de voir.
Mr. lOHNsoN (United States of America):
M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traI cannot attempt to pose any objection to those duit de l'anglais): Je ne veux pas m'opposer
two requests. I should like to remind the Council, aces demandes de quelque fa~on que ce soit.
however, that at the very beginning of this dis- J'aimerais cependant rappeler au Conseil qu'au
cussion, the United States delegation reserved debut meme de la presente discussion la delethe right to have its original resolution voted on gation des Etats-Unis s'est reserve le droit de
as it stands, at the very end, if this amended faire mettre aux voix sa resolution originale telle
qu'elle etait con~ue si en definitive la pr6sente
resolution does not carry.
resolution amendee n'etait pas adoptee.
Le PRESIDENT: le desire egalement faire
The PRESIDENT: I also want to inform the
Council that following the usual procedure, after connaitre aux membres du Conseil que, conforhaving voted on the paragraphs, I shall call for mement a la procedure habitueIle, je soumettrai
l'ensemble de la resolution a un vote lorsque les
a vote on the resolution as a whole.
differends paragraphes auront cte votes.
La seance est levee et nous nous reunirons a
I shall therefore adjourn the meeting, and we
15 heures.
shall re-assemble at 3 p.m.
La seance est levee 12 h. 50
The meeting rose at 12:50 p.m.

a

HUNDRED AND SEVEN1'IETH MEETING
Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Tuesday, 29 July 1947, at 3 p.m.

CENT-SOIXANTE-DIXIEME SEANCE
Tenue a Lake Success, New-York,
le mardi 29 juillet 1947, a15 heures.

President: M. O. LANGE (Pologne).
President: Mr. O. LANGE (Poland).
Presents: Les representants des pays suivan~:
Present: The representatives of the. foIlov:ing
Australie
Belgique, Bresil, Chine, Colomblc,
countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, ~hina,
Etats-Udis
d'Amerique, France" Pol~gne,
Colombia. France Poland, Syria, Umon of
Royaume-Uni,
Syrie, Union des Republiques
Soviet S~cialist Republics, United Kingdom,
socialistes
sovietiques.
United States of America.
259. Ordre du jour provisoire
259. Provisional agenda
1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.
e e au
1. Adoption of the agenda,
.
2. La question grecque: rlaPCport r:r .sen e"en
2. The Greek 'question: report .of the CkomFmlsConseil de securite par a omm~slOn d .
sion of Investigation concermng Gree ronquete sur les incidents survenus 1 a la frontier Incidents to the Security Council (docutiere grecque (document S/360) .
ment S/360):
See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Special Supplement No. 2.
1

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux' officiels ~u. ~oNse~ de sicurite, Deu,oeme Annee, Supplement sp Clll 0 •
