General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session
194
----------------------=---

tion of Human Rights,44 the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights45 and the Interna­
tional Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,45 with spe­
cial regard for the right to education and to work,
Aware of the fact that insufficient education and the
unemployment of young people limit their ability to parti­
cipate in the development process, and, in this regard,
emphasizing the importance of secondary and higher edu­
cation for young people, as well as access for them to
appropriate technical and vocational guidance and training
programmes,
Expressing its serious interest in the success of the forth­
coming International Youth Year which should, inter alia,
promote increasing participation of young people in the
socio-economic life of their country,
1. Calls upon all States, all governmental and non-gov­
ernmental organizations and the interested bodies of the
United Nations and specialized agencies to pay continuous
attention to the implementation of General Assembly res­
olutions 36/29, 37/49 and 38/23 relating to efforts and
measures aimed at the promotion of human rights and
their enjoyment by youth, particularly the right to educa­
tion and vocational training and to work, with a view to
resolving the problem of unemployment among youth;
2. Requests the Advisory Committee for the Interna­
tional Youth Year to pay, in its activities, full attention to
resolutions 36/29, 37/49 and 38/23 and to all relevant
international human rights instruments, particularly in
elaborating guidelines for further planning and suitable
follow-up in the field of youth;
3. Invites national co-ordinating committees or other
organs of co-ordination for the International Youth Year:
Participation, Development, Peace to give appropriate pri­
ority in the activities to be undertaken during the Year to
the implementation and the enjoyment by youth of human
rights, particularly the right to education and to work;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to pay adequate
attention, in his report surveying the implementation of
the Specific Programme of Measures and Activities to be
undertaken prior to and during the International Youth
Year, 46 to the enjoyment by youth of human rights, partic­
ularly to the right to education and to work.
71st plenary meeting
23 November I 984

39/24. Channels of communication between the
United Nations and youth and youth
organizations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/135 of 16 December 1977
and 36/17 of 9 November 1981, in which it adopted
guidelines for the improvement of the channels of commu­
nication between the United Nations and youth and youth
organizations, and also recalling its resolution 38/26 of 22
November 1983,
Bearing in mind the importance of the existence of effec­
tive channels of communication between the United
Nations and youth and youth organizations for the proper
information of young people and their effective participa­
tion in the work of the United Nations and the specialized
agencies at the national, regional and international levels.
44 Resolution 21 7 A (lll).
45 See resolution 2200 A (XXI). annex.
46 N36/2 I 5, annex, sect. IV. dension I (I)

raking note of the report of the Secretary-General
relating to youth.4 •
Also taking note of the report of the Expert Group meet­
ing on channels of communication. held at Vienna from 9
to 13 January 1984,
Further taking note of the report of the Advisory Com­
mittee for the International Youth Year on its third ses­
sion,43 specifically of the paragraphs dealing with the chan­
nels of communication,
Taking note of resolution 22 on youth adopted on
25 November 1983 by the General Conference of the
United Nations Educational. Scientific and Cultural
Organization, 48
Convinced that effective and proper functioning of chan­
nels of communication between the United Nations and
youth and youth organizations forms a basic prerequisite
for active involvement of young people in the work of the
l lnited Nations,
Equally convin.:ed that the effective participation of
youth representatives from the Member States in interna­
tional congresses dealing with youth issues will enhance
and strengthen the current and future channels of commu­
nication and will help in understanding the problems
facing youth in our contemporary world,
I. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a
detailed. structured and evaluative report on the imple­
mentation of the guidelines and additional guidelines for
the improvement of the channels of communication,
which would serve as a background paper at the fourth ses­
sion of the Advisory Committee for the International
Youth Year, and to submit that report to the General
Assembly at its fortieth session;
2. Calls upon Member States, United Nations bodies,
specialized agencies and other intergovernmental organi­
zations to implement fully the guidelines relating to the
channels of communication not only in their general
terms. but also in concrete projects dealing with issues of
importance to young people:
3. Calls upon the national co-ordinating committees of
the International Youth Year and other similar structures
to assist national youth organizations, upon their request,
in carrying out their role as channels of communication
between the United Nations and youth and youth
organizations:
4. Stresses the necessity of making use, within the
framework of the channels of communication, of mecha­
nisms which have been set up by youth and youth organi­
zations themselves at the national, regional and interna­
tional levels:
5. Decides to take up at its fortieth session the question
of the channels of communication between the United
Nations and youth and youth organizations on the basis of
the next report of the Advisory Committee for the Interna­
tional Youth Year
71st plenary meeting
23 November I 984

39125. Question of aging
The General Assembly.
Reaffirming its resolution 38/27 of 22 November 1983.
rn which it called upon Governments to make efforts to
implement the principles and recommendations contained
47E;I984i40 and Corr.I
48 United Nattons Fducat,onal. Sornt1fic and Cultural Organization.
R,n1rds o(the (iencra (',inf(·n-nn'. Tw,,nti·-sccond S(•ssion. vol I. R,,so/u
,',',)/'Vi, p

100
