S/PV.7467

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7467th meeting

Monday, 22 June 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Adnin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malaysia)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Adamu
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2015/422)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-18715 (E)
*1518715*

S/PV.7467

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2015/422)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Australia, Canada,
Germany, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Japan,
the Netherlands, Pakistan, Sweden and Turkey to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/422, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
I now give the floor to Mr. Haysom.
Mr. Haysom: I thank you for this opportunity to
share the perspectives of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) on recent
developments in Afghanistan.
Since my most recent briefing to the Security
Council (see S/PV.7403), there has been progress in
meeting Afghanistan’s challenges in three distinct but
interrelated areas: the economic, security and political
areas. Although such progress itself has been modest,
this should not be undervalued.
It needs to be stressed that Afghanistan continues
to be tested in meeting its benchmarks in all three areas.
There is no room for complacency. Failure in any one

2/34

22/06/2015

of these areas would have consequences for the overall
success of the Afghan transition. It is absolutely clear
that Afghanistan continues to need the support of the
international community and the sustained attention of
the Council.
The economic contraction that followed the
withdrawal of international military forces presents a
continuing challenge to the Government to meet the
fiscal gap — that is, the gap between the resources it
can muster and the monies it must spend. Afghanistan
is meeting and exceeding admittedly modest revenue
targets. Nevertheless, Afghanistan is struggling
to harness the resources to meet its governance
commitments and its development priorities. At this
time of continued low economic growth, we must also
guard against the danger of an increasing shift into the
illicit economy, particularly so in the case of burgeoning
narcotics production.
Afghanistan is meeting its security challenges, but
is nonetheless being increasingly tested. The Afghan
National Security Forces (ANSF) have been undeniably
stretched as they take on full security responsibilities.
We have seen an intensification of conflict across the
country, including in areas previously considered to
be safe. Only yesterday, there were fresh challenges
to Government security control in an area close to the
strategically important Kunduz City. Today, there was
a failed attack on Parliament as it was about to review
the nomination for Minister of Defence. While the
ANSF face operational challenges, their commitment is
beyond question, and they are demonstrating continued
resilience in the face of insurgent efforts to take and
hold ground.
Foreign fighters from Afghanistan’s northern
neighbours and elsewhere present a particular
challenge. There also remains considerable concern
that the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, referred
to in Afghanistan as “Daesh”, is seeking to establish
a foothold. Addressing that shared threat demands
greater regional involvement and collaboration. It seems
inequitable that Afghanistan should be shouldering the
burden of taking on terrorists whose points of origin
and eventual destinations are its neighbours.
The determined outreach from Afghanistan to its
neighbours is encouraging. Stronger relations between
the Governments of Afghanistan and Pakistan are
particularly noteworthy, with growing recognition of
shared interests. Ultimately, deeper collaboration on

15-18715

22/06/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

the full range of political, economic and social issues
will promote regional stability and prosperity.
The intensification of the conflict was predicted.
There has been higher attrition on both sides, but the
most tragic index of this intensification is the toll on
civilians — so far this year 4,216 civilians have been
killed or injured. Just two days ago, 16 civilians,
mostly women and children, were killed when a bus
hit an improvised explosive device. Sadly it was not an
isolated incident, but rather a typical event.
Such incidents take a terrible emotional, economic
and social toll on families, especially surviving
widows, often left in the most appalling economic
circumstances. Many other Afghans continue to be
affected by the conflict, including those who have been
displaced. Humanitarian assistance is often impeded by
the continued insecurity and, lamentably, humanitarian
actors have been targeted.
The United Nations will continue to provide
humanitarian support to those affected, and the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
will work to increase levels of trauma care and meet
the short-term needs of the increasing number of those
internally displaced. UNAMA will also continue
to advocate with all parties, including the Taliban,
to strengthen measures to ensure the protection of
civilians.
On the political front, there has also been modest
progress. Since I last briefed the Council in March (see
S/PV.7403), all the members of the Cabinet have been
appointed, even though one remains to be confirmed.
As of this morning, 21 provincial governors have been
appointed, and there has been agreement on other
significant appointments.
After long delays, the Government has committed
to appointing the electoral reform commission within a
week and to providing clarity on the electoral calendar
within a month. The term of office of the lower house
of the National Assembly, the Wolesi Jirga, was due to
end today, without the election for the new members
having taken place. The lack of clarity on the future of
the current Wolesi Jirga had caused consternation, with
the potential for public discord. Fortunately, just three
days ago, President Ghani decreed an extension of the
Wolesi Jirga until elections can be held.
Despite political tensions, Afghan institutions were
able to work together to find solutions on sovereign

S/PV.7467

issues. The United Nations looks forward to a decision
on the date of the next elections, as well as action to
implement the commitment to electoral reform. Those
steps will go a long way towards reassuring Afghans
that the democratic institutions and processes are
able to fulfil their proper roles and to meet public
expectations.
The most difficult aspect of the national
unity Government partnership has been to effect
appointments. With those now largely now completed
and the Cabinet in place, we expect to see a more
effective functioning of the Government. Now is the
time for a surge in the delivery of public services, the
fulfilment of election promises and the implementation
of the reforms set out in London and promised in the
ministerial 100-day action plans. The upcoming senior
officials meeting of the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework, coming in less than three months’ time,
presents an opportunity to demonstrate real progress
on the mutual commitments of donors and Government
to supporting the Government’s reforms.
In reference to the request by the Security Council
that the Secretary-General initiate an examination of the
role, structure and activities of all United Nations entities
in Afghanistan, I am pleased to say that we have now
agreed with the Government to establish a commission,
composed of representatives of the Government, the
international donor community, UNAMA and affiliated
agencies, funds and programmes, co-chaired by
UNAMA and the Government. The terms of reference
have been shared with the members of the commission,
which will commence its work shortly. We anticipate
having a report ready for the Council by the time of its
September meeting on Afghanistan.
Peace would have a major positive impact on the
capacity of the Government to address its economic,
security and political challenges. In the long term, peace
is not a luxury, it is a necessity. Unless Afghans can
find a way to live together in harmony, Afghanistan’s
political and security institutions and its economy
simply may not be sustainable. Failure would have no
beneficiaries.
Despite the disturbing security trends, or perhaps
even as a consequence of them, there has been a renewed
interest in peace efforts to resolve the conflict. Last
March, I spoke of a unique alignment of circumstances
that could be conducive to fostering peace talks.
Indeed, the essential ingredients for a peace process are

15-187153/34

S/PV.7467

The situation in Afghanistan

present: a protracted violent conflict with little prospect
of a military victory for either side combined with clear
signs of a growing interest in a peace process.
A conference hosted by the Government of Qatar
in early May reaffirmed the appetite for peace felt by
a wide range of Afghans, showing the potential for
progress to that end through dialogue. Since then, there
have been several similar meetings in various locations,
most recently in Oslo last week, which I attended.
Those events have confirmed that Afghans want an end
to the ever-present violence that does so much harm and
shows no signs of abating.
While the Government has repeatedly stated its
readiness to engage in direct talks with the Taliban,
what is still missing is a clear indication from the
Taliban that they are ready to engage directly with
the Government. Without that direct engagement, no
meaningful progress towards peace will be possible, a
point that I continue to stress in my conversations with
Taliban representatives. Conference pronouncements
have been useful in clarifying positions, but can never
provide a format for a systematic engagement between
empowered representatives on the conditions for, the
agenda of and the barriers to an enduring peace. In
short, a direct engagement is necessary for a negotiated
agreement.
With leadership, peace is within reach. However,
the intensification of the conflict is eroding the
atmosphere for constructive negotiations. Just as the
voices for peace are growing louder, so too are those
who believe that peace is neither possible nor desirable
or that the focus should be on war. It is thus critical
that the international community as a whole, and
the regional neighbours in particular, send the same
message to all involved, unambiguously and forcefully.
The time to begin direct peace and reconciliation talks
is now.
UNAMA supports a direct engagement between
the armed groups and the Government, has attempted
to facilitate its realization and will continue to do so in
full consultation with the Government.
I would finally like to express my hope that, in the
holy month of Ramadan, Afghans will be able to come
together to worship in peace.
The President: I thank Mr. Haysom for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Afghanistan.

4/34

22/06/2015

Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I would like to thank
Malaysia for its leadership of the Council this month and
for organizing this important debate. I would also like to
thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for
his statement and the Secretary-General for his recent
report (S/2015/422) on the situation in Afghanistan.
As we gather today to discuss the situation in
Afghanistan, the country has reached a critical moment
in its history. The armed enemies of the country have
embarked on a new offensive against the Afghan
Government and its people, subsequent to the end of
the International Security Assistance Force’s combat
mission and the transfer of full security responsibility
to the Afghan national defence and security forces.
Just today, the enemies of Afghanistan conducted a
heinous attack against the Afghan Parliament in Kabul,
wounding dozens of civilians, including children.
We strongly condemn that deliberate attack against
democracy and the representatives of the people.
This new wave of fighting is compounded by
an unprecedented convergence of extremist and
international terrorist networks on our soil — they
consist of the Taliban, thousands of foreign terrorist
fighters and violent extremist groups such as the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. Those groups not
only target Afghan forces and civilians with suicide
bombings, set improvised explosive devices, take
hostages and carry out assassinations, but they also
seek to take control of districts and even provinces
to use them as bases for their agenda in Afghanistan,
as well as in the wider region in South and Central
Asia. Afghan security forces have responded to those
tremendous challenges with bravery, strength, and
determination. In the past months, they have thwarted
numerous attempts to control territory, eliminated
thousands of enemy fighters and foiled plots designed
to kill, shock and terrorize the people of Afghanistan.
For the first time, Afghan forces have moved from a
defensive to an offensive posture and have shown more
capability, potential and resilience than ever before.
They have proved their capacity to protect the security
and safety of the Afghan people and to prevent the
enemies of Afghanistan from sending the country down
a spiral of chaos and disorder.
Security is a pressing national priority and is an
essential item on the agenda of His Excellency President
Ashraf Ghani as Commander in Chief. Our efforts

15-18715

22/06/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

to defend the country serve not only the interests of
the Afghan people; we are also fighting on behalf of
every one of our neighbours to uphold the safety and
security of our greater region. As the national unity
Government pursues that agenda, we are grateful for
the continued support of our international partners and
their commitment to train, advise and assist the Afghan
forces. In the face of the great challenges before us,
continued support to the Afghan forces, including air
support and other necessary assistance, will remain
essential.
While our counter-terrorism and military efforts
are fundamental to the security of the country, it is
clear that lasting peace requires a political solution.
To that end, the national unity Government has
prioritized the reinvigoration of the peace process.
Recent engagements between representatives of the
High Peace Council, Afghan civil society — including
women — and the Taliban have promoted dialogue
and mutual understanding and generated momentum
towards an Afghan-led, Afghan-owned and Afghanmanaged peace process. The role of our neighbours is
crucial to our efforts to secure peace. In that regard, the
Government of Afghanistan has taken bold steps to open
a new page in our relations with the Islamic Republic
of Pakistan. Over the past 14 years, an undeclared state
of war between our two countries has impacted our
national security and the security of the wider region.
A new dialogue between our two brotherly nations will
allow us to move past that history and work together
for peace and stability. We highlight the recent visit of
Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif to Kabul as a positive step
and expect that Pakistan’s commitment to peace and
stability extends to ending sanctuaries and compelling
the Taliban to stop their violent campaigns.
Following last year’s historic elections, the
national unity Government is dedicated to advancing
its agenda for political, economic and social reform.
President Ghani has appointed all of the ministers
and continues to appoint governors and other senior
leadership officials within the Government. Every
ministry has embarked upon a public 100-day action
plan designed to achieve the national objectives
identified by the Government’s Realizing Self-Reliance
agenda. The principles of merit, transparency and
accountability lie at the centre of all new appointments
and the Government’s work. From tackling the Kabul
Bank case as one of the Administration’s first acts to
establishing a national procurement board — chaired
by the President himself — to reviewing every single

S/PV.7467

government contract, the national unity Government
is committed to combating corruption, ending
impunity and strengthening the rule of law. A culture
of accountability has emerged across the country as a
result of our commitment to ensure the establishment
of a clean, functioning and effective Government.
The Government’s dedication to accountability
encompasses a greater focus on the transparent and
effective use of international aid and assistance.
Afghanistan is tremendously grateful for the
contributions of our international partners, which have
allowed us to rebuild our country. At the same time,
it is clear that development cooperation should evolve
so that aid can play a facilitating and enabling role
countrywide. We look forward to in-depth discussions on
aid efficiency at the upcoming Senior Officials Meeting
of the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework. The
Government has also requested presentations from
major donors, international financial institutions and
the United Nations on their development portfolios, and
it is actively engaged in the upcoming examination of
the role, structure and activities of all United Nations
entities in Afghanistan, as mandated by the Council.
The agenda for reform and transformation is guided
by a strong commitment to advance the rights of all
Afghan people — particularly the rights of women.
There are now 4 female Cabinet ministers and one
female governor, and President Ghani has pledged to
appoint more women to senior Government positions,
including ambassadorial posts. Last week, President
Ghani introduced Afghanistan’s first female Supreme
Court nominee. That sets an important precedent and
shows that the Government’s commitment to increasing
women’s participation is not merely symbolic, but part
of a systematic policy aimed at including women at the
highest levels of decision-making. The national unity
Government is working closely with our international
partners to protect and promote the rights of all Afghan
citizens. Last week, the Afghanistan-European Union
Human Rights Dialogue was launched in Kabul to
provide a forum in which to discuss, coordinate and
synergize a full range of human-rights issues. The
national unity Government is also focused on fulfilling
its commitment to carry out comprehensive electoral
reforms. To that end, in March the Government
established a Special Commission on Electoral Reform,
which includes representatives of civil society and
the United Nations, and this month the Government
announced plans to finalize the election calendar in one
month’s time.

15-187155/34

S/PV.7467

The situation in Afghanistan

Afghanistan continues to strengthen cooperation
with all our neighbours and countries in the region as
part of a broader framework for regional cooperation.
In the last three months, President Ghani has engaged
the leadership of Iran, India, Pakistan and Saudi
Arabia, and Afghan senior officials have participated
in key regional meetings — including the Heart of
Asia-Istanbul Process meeting on 25 May. Afghanistan
has also signed the draft Afghanistan-PakistanTajikistan Trilateral Transit Trade Agreement, and the
final pending documents for the Central Asia-South
Asia Electricity Transmission and Trade Project, which
will strengthen Afghanistan’s potential to become the
capital of the continental economy, a hub in the Heart
of Asia.
We look forward to the Sixth Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan in September,
which will be an important step towards ensuring
further cooperation and better connections in the
region.
Our international partnerships remain vital to
Afghanistan’s long-term development and prosperity.
The historic visit to the United States of the Afghan
high-level delegation led by President Ghani in
March reaffirmed our commitment to the United
States-Afghan strategic partnership. During the visit,
President Ghani addressed the American people and the
Congress and held enormously productive discussions
with President Obama and the leadership of the United
States. Together they announced a new development
partnership, which will mobilize up to $800 million
in economic assistance for Afghan development and
reform priorities. President Ghani concluded his visit
in New York, where he underlined the importance of
the United Nations-Afghan partnership at meetings
with the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, and the leadership of the United Nations.
At a time when new conflicts and wars plague
the world and divert our attention and resources, the
continuing cooperation and support of the international
community is crucial to Afghanistan’s future. While
Afghanistan faces great challenges, the country is
steadily realizing the goals of the transformation decade
and moving towards a brighter future. As we do so, we
know that our ongoing partnerships and the support of
the international community will be essential to the
peace and stability of Afghanistan, the region and the
world.

6/34

22/06/2015

The President: I now give the floor to the members
of the Security Council.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to thank the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative and Ambassador Tanin for
their outstanding presentations. I would like to begin
my statement today by condemning this morning’s
deplorable attack in Kabul against the parliament
of Afghanistan. My condemnation is twofold: first,
because it was an attack on innocent people; and,
secondly, because it was an attack on all of Afghan
society and on all of the country’s parliamentary groups,
which, I would recall, were democratically elected. It
took place at a particularly important moment, because
those groups were deciding on the appointment of
the new Minister of Defence and agreeing on the
extension of the parliament’s legislative functions. The
Security Council and the members of the international
community must therefore be more united than ever
in their condemnation. As the Security Council’s
penholder on Afghanistan, Spain is circulating a draft
press release that we trust will be adopted today.
My statement will focus on five main areas
related to Afghanistan: first, recent developments,
the Government and the elections; secondly, security
matters; thirdly, questions related to reconciliation;
fourthly, the situation in the region and its new
involvement in the country; and, fifthly, the Tripartite
Commission. Before I move on, I should say that Spain
aligns itself with the statement to be made later by the
representative of the European Union.
In the three months since the Security Council
last met on this issue (see S/PV.7403), there has been
continued progress of the Afghan Government, which
I welcome, on the road of reform and the consolidation
of the gains already made, in accordance with the will
of the Afghan people, expressed through the ballot box.
It is essential to continue on that road. I would like to
reiterate once again Spain’s support for President Ghani
and the national unity Government. We also welcome
the fact that the process of forming the Government and
appointing the remaining high-level positions is nearing
completion, and I listened with particular interest to
Ambassador Tanin’s words regarding the participation
of women in that process. We also welcome the
impetus given to the practical implementation of the
Government’s work through tools such as the 100-day
action plans of the various ministries.

15-18715

22/06/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

Much remains to be done, however, and the
challenges ahead are considerable. The implementation
of the reforms, in particular the electoral reform, which
remains pending, must be accelerated. The postponed
parliamentary elections must be held and, above all, the
gains of recent years must be preserved. In this new
phase, as in previous phases, Afghanistan can count on
the support of Spain and the international community
as a whole.
With regard to security, we are concerned by the
increase in insurgent violence and terrorist acts, whose
perpetrators clearly hold Afghanistan and Afghans in
contempt. We deplore the increase in the number of
civilian victims of the conflict, which is reflected in
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2015/422), and we
are concerned by the persistent reports of the presence
of foreign terrorist fighters. We must not be daunted,
however, just as the members of the Afghan security
forces and bodies, who are paying a high price for
valiantly and resolutely performing their mission,
are not daunted. Spain reiterates its commitment to
supporting those forces and bodies through the Resolute
Support Mission, which provides security training,
advisers and assistance.
With regard to the reconciliation process, progress
must be made as quickly as possible towards national
peace and reconciliation in Afghanistan, and I would
emphasize that we must involve the Taliban more. The
process must be Afghan-led, as Ambassador Tanin
rightly said, or it will quite simply not succeed. It
must also, however, preserve the gains made over the
last 14 years, particularly in the area of human rights
and, above all, women’s and girls’ rights. We therefore
welcome the guarantees provided in that regard on many
occasions by President Ghani and the high priority that
his Government will give to the respect and promotion
of human rights in Afghanistan.
I will now move on to the role of the region, about
which Ambassador Tanin spoke in detail. We also
welcome the newfound dynamism of Afghanistan
and its neighbours, which have recently given a new
dimension to regional affairs. As a supporting country
of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process, Spain is utterly
convinced of the importance of that new dimension for
the stability of the progress made in Afghanistan. We
particularly welcome the substantive steps taken by
Afghanistan and Pakistan to enhance their cooperation
in the face of their common challenges and shared
threats.

S/PV.7467

Lastly, I would like to mention the Tripartite
Commission, which comprises representatives of the
Government of Afghanistan, the international donor
community, and UNAMA and United Nations agencies.
The Commission is to examine the role, structure and
activities of all United Nations entities in Afghanistan,
as requested of the Secretary-General by the Security
Council in its resolution 2210 (2015) and in response to
the interest in the matter expressed by Afghanistan. In
its capacity as penholder, Spain would encourage the
Government of Afghanistan to exercise its irreplaceable
leadership in that process, without which the expected
result will not be achieved within the desired time
frame.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): Madam
President, I wish to thank you for convening this debate
on Afghanistan.
I would also like to thank Mr. Haysom, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, for his briefing, and Ambassador Tanin,
the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, for his
statement.
Afghanistan is faced with the arduous task of
restoring national stability and achieving comprehensive
social and economic development. This year, 2015,
marks the beginning of its Transformation Decade.
Thanks to the joint efforts of the Afghan Government
and people, significant progress has been made in
maintaining stability and promoting development, and
the Transformation Decade is off to a good start. The
comprehensive creation of a united, stable, developed
and friendly Afghanistan and the achievement of the
ultimate objective, which is to see the Afghan people
governing Afghanistan, require not only the sustained
and unremitting effort of the entire country but also the
continued support and assistance of the international
community, while ensuring that Afghanistan’s
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
are respected. In that regard, I would like to make the
following comments.
First, China welcomes the recently formed Afghan
National Unity Government and the creation of the
Special Commission on Election Reform, which should
be able to actively advance the process of electoral
reform. We hope that the parties in Afghanistan will
be able to help the Commission make progress through
dialogue and consultation and ensure that the National
Unity Government can implement its mandate and
honour its obligations, so that parliamentary and local

15-187157/34

S/PV.7467

The situation in Afghanistan

elections can be held successfully, something that is
crucial to promoting the Transformation Decade in
Afghanistan.
Secondly, we support a national reconciliation
process led and owned by the Afghan people, which
is essential if comprehensive national peace and
stability are to be achieved. We commend the Afghan
Government’s serious efforts to advance national
reconciliation, and we hope that all actions taken in
Afghanistan will bear in mind the country’s need for
peace and stability and the interests of its people though
the promotion of positive progress in the national
reconciliation process. China welcomes the ongoing
assistance being provided by countries in the region,
and we hope that the international community will
support and coordinate with the Afghan Government
and people’s efforts with a view to creating an external
environment conducive to the country’s national
reconciliation process.
Thirdly, the situation in Afghanistan is still
challenging. Security incidents are quite frequent and
have led to massive civilian casualties. China supports
the Afghan Government’s efforts to improve the
domestic security situation, and we hope that all parties
will shoulder their responsibilities in working to help
Afghanistan strengthen the capacities of its national
security and police forces so that they can respond
effectively to the various security threats and challenges
facing the country, and in that way create a foundation
conducive to economic and social development.
Fourthly, China supports Afghanistan’s efforts to
advance peace and reconstruction, and we hope to see
those efforts supported vigorously by the international
community. While respecting the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Afghanistan,
the international community should proactively
support the country’s new Government as it creates its
administrative programme, honour its aid commitments
and strengthen Afghanistan’s self-reliance in working
to achieve social and economic development. We
support the efforts of the United Nations and the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
to address the country’s issues. We hope that UNAMA
will improve its communication with the Afghan
Government so as enhance synergy in the promotion of
peace and reconstruction.
Fifthly, we support Afghanistan in its efforts to
strengthen neighbourly and friendly relations with other
countries in the region and improve its participation
8/34

22/06/2015

in regional cooperation. Such cooperation can help it
respond effectively to joint challenges and threats, such
as those represented by terrorism and drugs. We would
like to congratulate Afghanistan for its participation,
for the first time, as an observer at the meetings of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization held in April, and
we will work to promote the continuing and constructive
role of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and
other regional entities in the Afghanistan issue. China
is looking forward to the fifth foreign ministerial
meeting of the Istanbul Process, to be held this year in
Pakistan, and believes it will produce positive results.
This year marks the sixtieth anniversary of the
establishment of diplomatic relations between China
and Afghanistan. It is also a year of friendship and
cooperation between the two countries. We will further
promote our countries’ strategic partnership and work
within the framework of the Belt and Road initiative
to help the Afghan Government intensify its capacitybuilding and play a constructive role in achieving
peace, stability and development in Afghanistan as
soon as possible.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), and Ambassador Zahir Tanin, the
Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan, for their statements.
Chad is pleased that Afghanistan has seen
considerable improvements in the past nine months
under the direction of its new authorities and thanks
to the determination of its people. Significant progress
has been made with political and administrative
reforms, despite the fact that major challenges continue
in the security and humanitarian areas, in regional
cooperation and in combating drug trafficking.
Similarly, Chad welcomes the Afghan authorities’
efforts in the political arena, which have enabled it to
proceed to the nomination of a cabinet for the National
Unity Government that includes four women, as well
as the appointment of 15 members of the Special
Commission on Electoral Reform, thus making
concrete their commitment to reforms in that area. We
also commend the start of the third phase of Afghan
civil society’s activities in implementing the national
and provincial road maps for peace, with UNAMA’s
support, and we encourage those groups to continue
their efforts. The countries of the subregion and the

15-18715

22/06/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

international community have made huge diplomatic
and political efforts to help restore peace and relaunch
Afghanistan’s development. However, much remains to
be done in mobilizing the financial resources needed to
support the Afghan authorities’ commendable efforts to
bring those processes to fruition.
Despite the political progress that has been
made, the security situation in Afghanistan is still
worrying. The staggering number of incidents recorded
by UNAMA between 15 February and 30 April,
particularly in the southern, south-eastern and eastern
provinces of the country, which accounted for 71 per
cent of the 5,033 cases recorded during that period — as
well as the two separate attacks on Saturday, 19 June,
for which the Taliban has claimed responsibility and in
which at least 17 civilians were killed and several more
wounded — unfortunately testifies to the seriousness
of the situation. Monday morning’s car-bomb attack
on the Afghan Parliament in Kabul, which killed at
least one woman and a child and wounded 15 people
in the surrounding streets, is yet more evidence of the
deteriorating security situation. We strongly condemn
all those attacks and call on those responsible, notably
the terrorist groups and armed groups, to immediately
halt such horrific criminal acts. We would like to express
our condolences to the Government of Afghanistan and
to the families of the victims. We wish the wounded a
speedy recovery.
The fact that some terrorist groups have pledged
their allegiance to the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and that there are foreign terrorist fighters
present on Afghan soil means that the international
community must be more vigilant. Furthermore,
concerning the fight against drug trafficking, Chad
welcomes the latest statistics that indicate a decrease in
such traffic and encourages the new Afghan authorities
to work harder to eradicate that traffic completely. On
that point, we would like to repeat our encouragement
to Afghanistan’s neighbouring countries and to the
international community to intensify and coordinate
their efforts in the trans-boundary fight against drug
trafficking.
On the deterioration of the humanitarian situation,
especially for internally displaced persons as a result of
natural disasters and for the victims of anti-personnel
landmines, we call upon the international community
to show greater solidarity and mobilization to support
those victims. In that regard, Chad would like to
reiterate its support for the Secretary-General’s appeal

S/PV.7467

to increase humanitarian assistance aimed at helping
the Afghan people to cope with their food needs and at
helping refugees return to their homes.
In conclusion, we support the Afghan authorities in
their efforts and call upon the international community
to further support the Government. Finally, we would
like to pay tribute to all United Nations and humanitarian
agency staff members working in Afghanistan under
extremely difficult conditions. We encourage them
to continue their commitment, working shoulder to
shoulder with the Afghan people.
Mr. Adamu (Nigeria): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this very important and timely
debate. I would like to thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom for
his briefing and Ambassador Tanin for a very perceptive
outlook on his country’s progress.
Afghanistan continues to make significant progress
towards post-conflict recovery. The appointment
of all ministers and the formalization of the Office
of the Chief Executive and other key offices are
notable achievements. Indeed, the development and
implementation of 100-day plans for each ministry
have certainly given the necessary momentum to the
realization of the national objectives. That progress can
be given further impetus by the Government with an
acceleration of its reform agenda. We welcome President
Ghani Ahmadzai’s efforts in not only advancing the
rights of Afghan women but also empowering them. No
less significant is his steadfast commitment to electoral
reform, which is essential to the long-term peace and
security of the country. The Government’s decision to
restore the faith of the people in the democratic process
is highly commendable. In our view, the establishment
of the Commission on Electoral Reform signals an
intent to address fundamental issues of governance
in consonance with the provisions of the political
agreement of 21 September 2014.
In addition to electoral reforms, we believe that
transparency, accountability and inclusive governance
are other dimensions that must be addressed in order
to achieve enduring peace and security in Afghanistan.
That must go hand in hand with the promotion of
economic growth in order to effectively address the
prevailing economic situation. Challenges, such as
institutional capacity and structural deficiencies, can
be more readily surmounted with the assistance of the
international community. That is why we are encouraged
by the agreement on the International Monetary Fund
programme designed to secure the Government longer-

15-187159/34

S/PV.7467

The situation in Afghanistan

term access to financial support. We know that some
progress has been made in developing the private sector.
However, more effort is required to promote vibrant
entrepreneurial activity. In addition to international
assistance, the private sector must also play a part in the
economic recovery of Afghanistan. Foreign investment
will be vital to stimulating economic growth in the
country. The Government should therefore exert more
effort towards improving the investment climate in
order to attract more foreign capital.
Political and economic activities can thrive only in a
peaceful environment. We are therefore encouraged by
the recent NATO initiatives to ensure continuous support
for the Afghan National Security Forces post-2015. We
expect that it will stand the Forces in good stead and
gradually build their capacity to successfully respond
to security threats. Yesterday’s violence and the attack
on the Parliament Building today only endanger lives
and widen the gap between negotiation, inclusiveness
and the use of force. As the Afghan National Security
Forces strive to ensure peace throughout the country,
we call on anti-Government elements to refrain from
attacks that deliberately target civilians, to lay down
their weapons and to respond positively to President
Ghani Ahmadzai’s offer to negotiate an inclusive peace
in the higher interests of the country.
Illicit drug production and trafficking in Afghanistan
remain a major concern. It is not only a major source of
terrorist financing, but its links with criminal activities
also undermine the rule of law. Nigeria commends
the efforts of the Afghan law-enforcement agencies
to eradicate drug crops; those efforts have been
strengthened by the improved coordination of efforts
among law-enforcement agencies and the improved
capability of the police to conduct operations. We are
encouraged by the success of the border liaison offices
in the seizure of narcotics, but believe that more can
be accomplished to strengthen those gains with the
support of the international community.
On regional cooperation, we welcome the active
engagement of Afghanistan with its neighbours,
especially in overcoming counter-terrorism challenges
and combating trafficking in drugs, arms and
humans and organized crime. We also welcome the
activities under the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process.
Both developments reaffirm the commitment of
regional partners to Afghanistan’s stability, economic
development, territorial integrity and sovereignty. It is
our expectation that the discussions centred on regional

10/34

22/06/2015

cooperation will address both security challenges
and the Afghan peace process and will also prioritize
regional economic activity as part of collective security.
Through that cooperation, the international community
has demonstrated its commitment to and support for
peace and prosperity in Afghanistan.
Afghanistan stands at the threshold of transformation.
The international community must be eternally
vigilant to make certain that the transformation is to
peace, security and, indeed, genuine reconciliation
and development. In that formidable endeavour, we
commend Special Representative Nicholas Haysom for
his inspiring leadership of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan. The Mission staff’s distinctive
accomplishments and invaluable contribution to the
concerted global efforts to restore democracy, peace
and stability in Afghanistan will endure eternally.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Haysom and Ambassador
Tanin for their candid and detailed remarks and for
their dedicated work to sustain a fruitful partnership
between the international community and the Afghan
Government. The United States warmly welcomes the
progress that both of them have noted in their briefings,
which the Secretary-General also highlights in his
report (S/2015/422).
We are particularly encouraged by the formation
of a Cabinet and by President Ghani Ahmadzai’s and
Chief Executive Officer Abdullah’s commitment to
work together to build a better future for the Afghan
people. Their leadership will be vital to achieving
the ambitious reform goals that the Government
has set for itself, especially with regard to electoral
reform. We hope that the Afghan Government’s recent
announcement to extend the parliamentary term will
allow the time necessary for the Government to carry
out electoral reform. As they work urgently to achieve
those goals, they can count on the strong, continued
support of the United States.
The progress Afghanistan has continued to make
is remarkable when considered in the context of the
ongoing armed conflict that is taking such a heavy toll
on the Afghan people. It seems clear that the Taliban
and other armed groups have been intent on testing the
resolve and capabilities of the Afghan national defence
and security forces since the beginning of the year
when the national forces assumed full responsibility for
Afghanistan’s security.

15-18715

22/06/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

The Afghan national defence and security forces
have risen to the challenge at great cost, and we honour
the sacrifices of the many Afghans who have given
their lives for their country and people and those who
continue to put their lives on the line. We also reaffirm
our commitment to continue to train, advise and assist
the Afghan national defence and security forces,
including through NATO’s Resolute Support Mission.
That is a key facet of the enduring United StatesAfghanistan strategic partnership.
The costs of the conflict can be seen in all segments
of Afghan society. Just this morning, as Special
Representative Haysom noted, the Taliban detonated a
bomb outside Afghanistan’s Parliament. The Taliban’s
actions today, which the United States condemns in
the strongest terms, demonstrate the growing distance
between the insurgency and the Afghan people Our
thoughts and prayers are with the victims and their
families at this time.
The continued deliberate targeting of civilians by
the Taliban and other groups is despicable and contrary
to international law. Behind the statistics, however,
are real lives, real people taken from their families
too soon, their full potential unrealized, people like
Dr. Jawid Sahai and Mohammad Mohammedy, who
were working to improve the health and education of
their fellow Afghans until they were killed by insurgents
in a savage attack on a Kabul hotel in May — an attack
in which a survivor said that the assailants hunted down
and executed civilians, repeatedly shooting victims to
make sure they were dead.
How many more Afghans might Dr. Sahai and
Mr. Mohammady have helped had they not been brutally
murdered? How do we account for the devastation felt by
the loved ones they left behind? Amid all the bloodshed
and heartache of that senseless violence, the Afghan’s
Government’s openness to dialogue is a testament to
the statesmanship of its leaders. Unfortunately, the
Taliban has not reciprocated, despite the commendable
efforts of international actors to facilitate dialogue. We
renew our call on the Taliban to end violence, break
their ties with international terrorist groups, accept
Afghanistan’s Constitution and engage in direct talks
with the Afghan Government on achieving lasting
peace for the Afghan people. All of us — members
of the Council, Afghanistan’s neighbours and the
international community as a whole — have a stake in
Afghanistan’s future and in helping Afghans confront
the challenges I have noted. We can and must work

S/PV.7467

together to support Afghanistan’s Government of
national unity, its security forces and its economic
development. We welcome the efforts of all countries
to work to increase and improve their engagement with
Afghanistan, and we look forward to the Heart of AsiaIstanbul Process ministerial conference in Pakistan in
November. That will be an opportunity to strengthen
regional cooperation and integration.
Afghanistan’s problems and challenges are
formidable. They are all too real. They grab headlines,
and those headlines can be dispiriting. But there are
other stories too — stories about the daily incremental
progress that give me great hope for Afghanistan’s
future. Stories such as that of a 22-year-old woman from
Logar province whose first two babies died at full term.
The third time she was pregnant, though, she gave birth
to a healthy baby girl at Kabul Hospital, thanks to the
use of the partograph, a low-cost tool that monitors key
issues during labour so that doctors can make betterinformed decisions. The increased use of that device
is one of the reforms that has improved Afghan health
care. Such stories may not sell newspapers or air time,
but they capture the resilience and determination of
Afghans committed to improving the lives of their
countrymen and women despite all the violence. They
offer hope for a brighter future for Afghanistan, and
they remind us why our support for Afghanistan and its
people must never falter.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I would like to
thank Nicholas Haysom, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, and Ambassador Tanin for their
briefings.
We want to begin by commending the Prime
Minister and Chief Executive of the Government
of Afghanistan for the progress they have made in
establishing a new representative Government for
Afghanistan. That progress is not as extensive as they
would have wanted — or we would have wanted — but
we know that they have had to deal with considerable
challenges, both internally and externally. This
morning’s horrible attack on Afghanistan’s Parliament
and the fighting in Kunduz and Badakhshan provinces
are saddening reminders of those challenges. So, let us
be realistic about it and acknowledge that things are
progressing pretty well, all things considered. But let
us also be realistic about the road ahead. It is going to
be difficult.
We firmly believe that Afghanistan can have a
great future, both as a self-reliant and independent

15-1871511/34

S/PV.7467

The situation in Afghanistan

country, and as a key player in the developing political
and economic architecture of Central Asia. But for that
to happen, Afghans — both those in power and those
who empower their leaders — have to decide whether
they want to forge a national future or whether they will
revert to the pursuit of narrow self-advantage and, in so
doing, consign their country and themselves to another
bout of fratricidal introspection. We earnestly hope that
the Afghan people will choose the former course.
The trials through which Afghanistan has been
passing over the past 15 years are incredible, in the
true sense of that word. Afghanistan was the locus of
the forces that brought down the Twin Towers in New
York City, damaged the Pentagon in Washington and,
for all we know, might also have taken out the Congress
of the United States of America or the White House.
Those attacks, while centred on the United States, were
an attack on universal human values and therefore
an attack on the basic principles that underlie this
Organization.
The response of the international community to
those events was itself incredible — a marshalling
of effort both to defeat Al-Qaida and the Taliban
and to restore Afghanistan and bring it back into the
community of nations. That effort bears comparison
to the Marshall Plan and the restoration of democracy
in Europe and the economic revival after the Second
World War. We hope that the Afghan people recognize
that that was no small or narrow self-interested
undertaking. We should not lose that perspective when
we consider the Secretary-General’s most recent report
(S/2015/422).
Clearly, there are things to be concerned about,
including the slow pace in the establishment of the
apparatus of Government at both the national and the
provincial levels; the postponement of parliamentary
elections; and the continued undermining of
Afghanistan’s economy and social cohesion by
organized crime, especially in connection with the
opium trade. Most worrisome of all is the deterioration
in the security situation brought about, principally, by
the Taliban, who simultaneously hold themselves out as
willing to engage with the Afghan Government while
increasing their fight against the Afghanistan National
Security Forces. Such internally inconsistent efforts
are muddle-headed and betray a self-interestedness that
negates any claim to be acting for a higher purpose,
whether religious, national or local.

12/34

22/06/2015

But there is also progress, both in the establishment
of the institutions of Government and in the maintenance
of peace in many parts of the country, despite the
efforts of those who seek to tear things down rather
build their country up. Maintaining peace in such an
environment is no small achievement, and we need
to recognize that. We want Afghanistan to succeed.
New Zealand’s commitment to and investment in
Afghanistan — especially to Bamyan province — has
lasted longer than our commitment to either the First or
the Second World War. And our contribution was, we
know, mirrored and exceeded by many others.
In that context, we note, in particular, the
willingness of the United States to extend its military
and economic contribution under the New Development
Partnership.
That is why we continue to pay close attention
to Afghanistan and why we continue to support the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. It
is the means by which we, the international community,
manifest our willingness to walk with and work with
the Government of Afghanistan as it navigates the
difficult road ahead.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I,
too, would like to begin by thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Haysom,
for his presentation. I also thank the Ambassador
of Afghanistan, Mr. Tanin, for his statement, and I
associate myself in advance with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
Like many before me, I would like to express
France’s strongest condemnation of this morning’s
attack on the Parliament in Kabul by the Taliban. France
stands by the Afghan authorities and the Afghan people
in their fight against terrorism, and we will continue to
support democracy and the rule of law in that country.
We also offer our full support to Spain in ensuring
that the Council can react as quickly as possible to this
unacceptable new terrorist attack.
As underscored by the Secretary-General in his
report (S/2015/422), the political progress being made
in Afghanistan is noteworthy, and we welcome the
recent appointments in the Government. With the
presidential elections already a year ago, the National
Unity Government must be able to work at its full
capacity, and we welcome the efforts made towards that
end. We hope that the reform agenda will be upheld, in
particular with regard to electoral reforms which will

15-18715

22/06/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

make it possible to maintain the democratic momentum
that began during the holding of the presidential
elections in 2014. We also recall the importance of the
senior officials’ meeting scheduled for 5 September in
Kabul, which should enable the adoption of a revised
Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework.
But many challenges remain. On the security
front, the spring offensive led to an unacceptably sharp
increase in the number of civilians killed. We also
deplore the attacks carried out against the institutions
of the Afghan State, including that on Parliament this
morning and also those against judicial bodies or their
representatives. Such attacks are a reminder of the need
to maintain our decisive support for the rule of law in
Afghanistan.
On the human-rights front, the lynching on
19 March of a young woman, Farkhunda, is shocking. It
is a reminder of the extent to which women continue to
be the victims of violence in Afghanistan. We hope that
Afghan civil society and the authorities will continue
to mobilize to ensure that the law on the elimination
of violence against women is implemented fully and
effectively.
In addition, we are counting on the continued
mobilization of the Afghan authorities against drug
trafficking. This is a subject of great concern for France
because it is a major destabilizing factor for Afghanistan
and its neighbours. We encourage the authorities
to continue their work to curb drug production and
trafficking.
In Afghanistan we are still facing a difficult
environment, and, in that context, the efforts of the
international community must continue for the longterm so as to support the country and enable it to
achieve stability, prosperity and a democratic future.
The commitments made during the London Conference
on Afghanistan in December 2014 must be upheld,
because Afghanistan, more than every before, needs the
support of its partners. The agreement signed with the
International Monetary Fund is an important element
of support for the long term. France will continue to
stand with Afghanistan within the framework of the
Franco-Afghan Friendship and Cooperation Treaty. We
are contributing to the European Union commitment to
Afghanistan in the amount of €1.4 billion for the period
from 2014 to 2020.
Finally, regional support is an important requirement
for guaranteeing the conditions conducive to a lasting

S/PV.7467

peace in Afghanistan. We welcome the efforts made
along those lines by Afghanistan’s regional partners.
Let me now say a word about the role of the United
Nations. While Afghanistan is at a turning point in
its history, the United Nations will continue to play a
decisive role during this Transformation Decade. The
support provided by the United Nations and its agencies
to the Government remains key, particularly in order
to enable the population to benefit from Government
programmes and international assistance. But that role
must evolve and be adapted to the situation. In that
regard, we welcome the establishment of a dialogue
mechanism between the United Nations, Afghanistan
and donors on the desirable evolution of the support
provided to the country by the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan. France will be involved in that
dialogue and will pay particular attention to the initial
results of consultations.
In conclusion, I would like to commend all of the
United Nations personnel, who, under the leadership
of Mr. Haysom, are working in particularly difficult
conditions in Afghanistan. They have our sincere
admiration.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): Angola would like to start
by condemning in the strongest terms today’s heinous
terrorist attack on the Parliament of Afghanistan,
which reflects the terrorists’ hatred of the country’s
institutions. We thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in Afghanistan and Head of the
United Nations United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Mr. Nicholas Haysom,
for presenting the quarterly report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (S/2015/422). We also thank the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan for his insights into his
country’s situation.
We commend the work of UNAMA as it discharges
its mandate in very difficult conditions, at a time when
Afghanistan is struggling to establish a society based
on the fundamental values of peace, human rights and
social equity. In the most recent debate on UNAMA
and the situation in Afghanistan (see S/PV.7403),
held in March, the Angolan delegation expressed a
comprehensive view of the issue. In today’s statement,
we will limit ourselves to touching on some of the most
pressing issues mentioned in the Secretary-General’s
report.

15-1871513/34

S/PV.7467

The situation in Afghanistan

The report highlights relevant developments in the
past three months. The near-completion of the National
Unity Government and the confirmation by the
legislative body of Government nominations — which
include four women, and we commend that — was a
decisive development in the country’s political life and
a step towards closing the complex presidential electoral
process. Other developments include President Ghani
and Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah’s reinvigorated
efforts to advance the realization of the reliance
agenda; the establishment of a social contract between
Government and citizens promoting transparency and
accountability in implementing socioeconomic reforms
and policies in priority areas to advance economic
growth; and the establishment of a Special Commission
on Electoral Reform, which we expect to get to work in
earnest in order to complete the electoral process, since
comprehensive electoral reforms are perceived to be
crucial to restoration of the people’s trust in the Afghan
democratic process.
Also notable are the Government’s continued
efforts to launch a process of peace and reconciliation;
its stated commitment to bringing about peace through
dialogue, translating Afghans’ deeply felt desire for
peace, despite a missing element, that is, the willingness
of the armed opposition to meet the Government in
direct talks; the mobilization of backing from regional
partners for the peace and reconciliation process;
and the steps taken by Afghanistan towards building
regional confidence and cooperation through its full
commitment, together with the Government of Pakistan,
to work for peace; the reintegration of a relatively large
number of anti-Government elements; the efforts of the
High Peace Council to counter fundamentalism, which
fuels violence; the call by the countries of the region
to the Taliban to join the peace process; and President
Ghani’s pledge to focus on establishing peace. Those
and other important political initiatives give us hope
that Afghanistan may be entering a new and decisive
phase.
However, the political progress I just outlined is
taking place against the backdrop of a deteriorating
security situation, with increased violence related to
the conflict, as the Afghan National Security Forces
have sought to contain the insurgent activity that has
resulted in an increasing number of civilian casualties,
the vast majority of them caused by the Taliban and
anti-Government groups. In that regard, we share the view
that long-term stability and prosperity in Afghanistan
depend on an inclusive internal reconciliation process
14/34

22/06/2015

and regional cooperation against the insurgents, and
on curbing the flow of foreign terrorist fighters into
Afghanistan. Afghanistan’s neighbours should be
aware that Afghanistan is the battlefront and that peace
in Afghanistan is fundamental if they are to keep peace
in the region.
We praise the efforts of the Afghan authorities
to engage actively with regional partners and, above
all, with Pakistan. Additionally, President Ghani
Ahmadzai’s visit to Iran in April, the meetings held
with the country’s hierarchy and mutual pledges
to enhance cooperation in the areas of security,
information-sharing, counter-narcotics, water resources
and refugees and migrants are encouraging signals of
an emerging regional cooperation between Afghanistan
and the countries of the region.
Furthermore, President Ghani Ahmadzai’s visit
to India and India’s reiterated readiness to join the
Afghanistan-Pakistan Transit Trade Agreement are
positive developments with respect to Afghanistan’s
external standing. We believe that implementation
of those agreements will contribute to the social and
economic development of Afghanistan and its full
integration within the subregion.
We are deeply concerned over violence against
women in Afghanistan. We urge an end to impunity
for crimes committed against women and call
for accountability on the part of the country’s
criminal-justice system. Furthermore, we condemn
the public murder of a woman by a crowd of men on
19 March, in broad daylight, in the capital, which
illustrates the continuing threat of violence against
women. We believe that it is essential, with respect to
the credibility of the justice system, that allegations of
abuse and ill treatment are thoroughly investigated and
properly prosecuted so that those responsible are held
accountable for their crimes.
On 19 April, UNAMA and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
released a report, entitled “Justice through the eyes
of Afghan women: cases of violence against women
addressed through mediation and court adjudication”.
We hope that the recommendations contained therein
will contribute to improving women’s access to justice
and a change in the mindset of Afghan men towards
women.
Finally, we express our hope that the international
community will maintain its commitment towards

15-18715

22/06/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

Afghanistan and that the long-suffering Afghan
people will be able to find a way to peace, national
reconciliation and economic and social development
and that Afghanistan’s Transformation Decade will
become a reality.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Haysom for his briefing on the
situation in Afghanistan and Mr. Tanin for delivering,
as usual, his highly comprehensive statement. We share
extreme concern over the description that the Council
heard today. The Russian Federation is troubled by the
deterioration of the situation in the country, further
proof of which is today’s attack against the Afghan
Parliament.
Of particular worry to the Russian Federation and
our neighbours in the Commonwealth of Independent
States in Central Asia are the very significant terrorist
threat and the fact that insurgents have recently
consolidated control in the northern regions of the
country, especially in Kunduz province. We cannot
allow the situation to collapse and thus destabilize the
entire region.
That is precisely the manner in which the matter was
discussed in the meeting of the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the Collective Security Treaty Organization,
of the Council of the Commonwealth of Independent
States and of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
We have more than once expressed our concern that
the insurgents will attempt to take advantage of the
withdrawal of foreign military forces from Afghanistan
to alter the balance of forces to their benefit.
Expectations in terms of the resumption of the
offensive in the spring and summer have, unfortunately,
been fully confirmed. The report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2015/422) contains worrisome statistics
in that regard. The number of attacks by the armed
opposition throughout the entire country, particularly
in the northern regions, has increased. We hope that
the Afghan forces will prove themselves worthy in
assuming that task and thus be capable of countering
the threat on their own.
It is our opinion that the threat generated by Islamic
State in Afghanistan is continuing to grow. We are
grateful to Mr. Haysom for clearly mentioning that in
his briefing. We call on the Secretary-General to devote
priority attention to the topic in his next report.

S/PV.7467

My country is extremely dispirited about the
situation regarding the illegal production and trafficking
in narcotics in the country. Today, the volume of drug
production, according to the Secretary-General’s
report, equals 13 per cent of the country’s gross
domestic product. It is well known that a significant
share of those resources is used to finance extremist
and terrorist organizations. In order to neutralize the
Afghan drug threat, collective efforts are necessary,
using all of the means available in our arsenals.
The remaining foreign military forces in the
country continue to pretend that the problem does
not exist. At the same time, the flow of heroin from
Afghanistan now affects not only bordering States, but
Western European States as well.
The Russian Federation has been working hard,
jointly with our partners in the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization and the Collective Security Treaty
Organization, to combat drug trafficking through
bilateral cooperation arrangements with Afghanistan.
I should note that for Afghanistan itself, the problem is
no less acute than it is for the international community.
In the framework of our bilateral cooperation with
Afghanistan, we continue to train Afghan narcotics
police in the training institutes of Russia’s Ministry
of Interior and the Federal Drug Control Service. We
cannot let our attention to be distracted from that
problem.
We commend the efforts of President Ghani
Ahmadzai to establish a dialogue with the armed
opposition with a view to advancing the national
reconciliation process. We welcome the position of
President Ghani Ahmadzai, who seeks to comply with
the principles of national reconciliation enshrined in
resolution 1988 (2011). Those principles are quite clear,
requiring the renunciation of violence, recognition of
the Afghan Constitution and the severing of links to
Al-Qaida — which, for some reason, was not mentioned
in the Secretary-General’s report — and links with
other terrorist organizations. It also clearly requires a
genuine willingness to pursue peace.
At the same time, we support the effective
participation of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan in coordinating the efforts of the
international community to assist the Afghan people.
It is important to continue maintaining the Council’s
effective sanctions regime, which remains an important

15-1871515/34

S/PV.7467

The situation in Afghanistan

instrument in the fight against terrorism, aimed at
Al-Qaida and other terrorist organizations.
In particular, we wish to note that the path leading
towards the country’s stabilization requires a single
consolidated position among the key external players.
It also requires a single-minded focus on combating the
terrorist threat that is tearing the country apart.
Resolving the security situation will depend on the
creation of economic opportunities for the country. It is
in the interest of all parties to achieve stabilization in
Afghanistan as quickly as possible, so as to shift efforts
and investments towards economic development and
towards establishing broad cooperation.
The Russian Federation will continue developing
cooperation efforts with friendly Afghanistan, both
in a bilateral format and through regional integration
organizations, including the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization, where Afghanistan enjoys observer
status. Russia is committed to building an independent,
thriving, free and stable Afghanistan.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I join others
in thanking the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2015/422), Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Nicholas Haysom for his briefing and
Ambassador Zahir Tanin for his remarks this morning.
I join my Spanish colleague and others in strongly
condemning this morning’s attack on the Afghan
Parliament. The Taliban have claimed responsibility. It
was a callous attack. It once again targeted civilians in
violation of international humanitarian law. My deepest
sympathies go out to all those affected, their families
and friends. I should like to pay tribute to the swift and
effective response by the Afghan National Security
Forces (ANSF).
The Taliban will further alienate the Afghan people
by such attacks. Afghanistan has clearly demonstrated
its commitment to democracy, as the Afghan people
courageously turned out to vote in the millions during
last year’s elections. The United Kingdom will continue
to stand alongside all those who seek a more peaceful,
prosperous and democratic future for Afghanistan.
After many difficult years and despite such attacks,
Afghanistan has now begun its Transformation Decade,
with full ownership of its national affairs. The country
is moving forward. Cabinet ministers and provincial
governors are being appointed, and the National Unity
Government has set out an impressive vision for reform

16/34

22/06/2015

at the London Conference. These reforms could have
a real impact on day-to-day life in Afghanistan by
improving citizens’ rights, strengthening accountability
and promoting economic growth.
It is vital that this vision now be translated into
actions to address Afghanistan’s many challenges.
The remaining Government appointments should be
made swiftly. Reforms should be implemented quickly
in order to build a better future for all Afghans. The
forthcoming meeting of senior officials from the
international community and Afghanistan to be held
in September 2015 should take stock of how far the
country has come in tackling corruption, strengthening
the economy and improving women’s rights. That
meeting is also a chance to look ahead to the longer-term
development of Afghanistan. We hope that it will agree
on a refreshed framework between the international
community and the Government.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) has a crucial role to play
throughout this process in support of the Government’s
reforms. Its continued presence in Afghanistan
underlines the international community’s commitment.
This year’s fighting season and the intensification
of armed clashes is testing the capabilities of the ANSF.
They are showing that they are capable of meeting
this challenge. I pay tribute to their resolve and the
sacrifices they are making for the sake of security and
stability in Afghanistan.
Let me take this opportunity to reiterate the United
Kingdom’s commitment to a strong and self-sufficient
ANSF. We are proud of our support for the Afghan
National Army officer academy, and we will maintain
our contribution of $110 million each year to the ANSF
until at least 2017.
However, no matter the strength of the ANSF,
a political settlement remains the best prospect for
bringing peace and stability to Afghanistan. We
welcome President Ghani’s commitment to a peace
process and his efforts to build regional cooperation for
a peaceful and stable Afghanistan.
The continued violence experienced by innocent
civilians gives us a clear illustration of why a political
solution is so vital. The rise in civilian casualties
highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report is
worrying. We deplore the Taliban’s large-scale
attacks against civilian targets, including Government
officials, legal professionals and those participating in
15-18715

22/06/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

cultural events. These are in stark contrast to Taliban
statements on protecting civilians. The time has come
for the Taliban to sit down at the negotiating table for
the sake of the people of Afghanistan.
Turning to the situation of women and girls
in Afghanistan, we welcome President Ghani’s
commitment to making fundamental and sustainable
changes for Afghan women. These need to include
participation in decision-making and economic
empowerment. Despite his commitment, women and
girls continue to face significant challenges, including
violence against them and against those who defend
their rights. We condemn the horrific killing of
Farkhunda Malikzada in March. Her death was a tragic
reminder of the scale of the challenge facing Afghan
women and girls.
There are two immediate steps that the Government
of Afghanistan can take to improve the lives of
women and girls: first, implement fully the law on
the elimination of violence against women, so that
the perpetrators of these terrible crimes face justice;
secondly, publish soon Afghanistan’s national action
plan for women and peace and security. We hope it will
set a clear framework for improving women’s rights
across the country.
In highlighting the challenges, we should not lose
sight of progress. As my Afghan colleague outlined,
Afghanistan now has women running the Ministries of
Higher Education, Women’s Affairs, Counter Narcotics
and Labour and Social Affairs. For the second time
in Afghanistan’s history, there is a female provincial
governor, and only last week, the first female judge
was nominated to the Supreme Court and the first
female officers graduated from the United Kingdomsupported national officer academy. All of this would
have been unthinkable a decade ago. These gains must
be protected and further promoted.
Let me close by stressing that we must never
forget the sacrifices made by the men and women of
Afghanistan and the international community to bring
Afghanistan this far. Thanks to their commitment, so
much has been achieved over the past 13 years. Life
expectancy is rising. Health care is improving. Millions
of children — and millions of girls in particular — are
now receiving education. Yet as the country moves
forward and tackles the challenges that remain, this
morning’s attack shows that we cannot afford to let
international attention to Afghanistan slip. Through

S/PV.7467

this regular debate and through the work of UNAMA,
we must maintain our focus.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Venezuela) (spoke in
Spanish): We wish to thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador Zahir
Tanin, for their statements.
We join others in condemning today’s terrorist
attack and would like to fully support the draft press
statement presented by the Spanish delegation. The
Security Council must present a unified front on the
issue of terrorism.
We welcome the fact that the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan has launched a new phase in its political
process aimed at overcoming the instability caused by
the successive foreign interventions of the end of last
century, the consequences of which are still making
themselves known.
We welcome the firm commitment by the
Government and the people of Afghanistan to meet
the challenges facing the country with a view to
strengthening peace and stability. The formation of
the National Unity Government under the leadership
of President Ashraf Ghani, who has made national
reconciliation his goal, is a highly positive development,
as it will allow the country to strengthen its institutions.
In that regard, the dialogue initiated with the armed
insurgents in order to reach a political agreement for
peace is encouraging.
Achieving peace and strengthening the political
process will require the full participation of the Afghan
people, including women. We therefore welcome the
fact that the President has appointed four women to
senior positions within the central Administration. We
support the participation of women in decision-making
in various Government areas to decisively combat the
exclusion of women and the violence committed against
them in Afghan society.
The holding of parliamentary elections is a pending
issue of particular importance for the strengthening of
the State. While awaiting the electoral reforms agreed
to on 21 September 2014, we encourage the Afghan
Government to undertake the necessary efforts to hold
those elections.

15-1871517/34

S/PV.7467

The situation in Afghanistan

One of the most important challenges facing the
current Government is the economic situation, which
presents great challenges, given the devastating effects
of war. We therefore urge the international community to
provide all necessary assistance to promote sustainable
economic and social development in Afghanistan.
We want to highlight the work carried out by
UNAMA in terms of peacebuilding. Meetings between
Afghan society and various levels of Government
aimed at strengthening the people’s leadership in
the peacebuilding process is a major breakthrough.
While recognizing their contributions, we believe that
UNAMA should continue its work in full coordination
with the Government.
The reintegration of former combatants is one of the
most important elements for efforts to build peace and
political and social stability and an objective that our
country warmly welcomes. In that regard, we recognize
the efforts of Afghanistan to reintegrate into society
more than 10,000 former combatants, who handed over
approximately 7,000 weapons that they had in their
possession. Despite that progress, the terrorist threat
remains in the form of the presence of foreign terrorist
fighters, who, filled with hatred and intolerance, are
trying to take Afghanistan back to an earlier time.
The security situation remains fragile, as noted
in the report (S/2015/422) of the Secretary-General.
Terrorist groups operating in Central Asia persist
in their plans to destabilize the region, including
Afghanistan. The presence of groups affiliated with
cells of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria is another
demonstration of the growing threat to regional stability
posed by the advance of violent non-State actors. The
reports indicate a considerable increase in the number of
extremist armed groups in various parts of the country
as a result of military operations in neighbouring
countries, which represents a new challenge to the
stability of Afghanistan. We would like to underscore
the importance of the cooperation of neighbouring
countries, including Pakistan and the Islamic Republic
of Iran, which have played an crucial role in providing
shelter to Afghan refugees affected by armed violence.
We welcome the voluntary repatriation programmes for
refugees that those Governments have promoted, with
the assistance of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees.
We are convinced that strengthening the country’s
armed forces is essential to building the State so that
it can effectively combat the various groups linked to
18/34

22/06/2015

terrorism and transnational organized crime operating
in the country. It is vital that Afghanistan recovers all
its capacites so that it can address all of its issues in a
sovereign and independent way.
We also welcome the efforts made by the Afghan
authorities to combat the scourge of drugs, although
there has been an increase in poppy cultivation.
Eradication is one area where there has been considerable
progress, despite the resistance of insurgent groups.
The cultivation of and trafficking in drugs continues to
be a key source of financing for the Taliban and other
criminal and terrorist groups.
We are concerned about the increase in the number
of attacks on the civilian population as a result of
internal conflict. The infant mortality rate has risen as
a result of armed clashes, with a high number of cases
involving explosives and landmines. We therefore
believe that there should be an increase in assistance
provided by the international community to help
remove such devices, which cause so much harm to
civilians, particularly children.
In conclusion, we hope that through a broad and
inclusive political process, peace and stability will
ultimately take root in Afghanistan. That will require
the joint efforts of the Afghan Government and people,
with the assistance and support of the international
community, in order to overcome the economic and
social conditions that fuel extremism and violence.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I would like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Nicholas Haysom, and Ambassador Tanin for their
briefings. My delegation expresses its appreciation
for all the important work that the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the
United Nations family are doing in Afghanistan.
Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to be
made on behalf of the European Union (EU).
Afghanistan is continuing its difficult transformation
towards peace and self-reliance. The deaths, caused
by an improvised explosive device, on 21 June of
16 civilians who were returning to their village in the
Marja district of Helmand province, and the attempted
attack on the Afghan Parliament earlier today, which
injured 31 civilians, are only a few of the many
reminders of how dramatically challenging the situation
remains. We firmly condemn all such attacks. Faced
with these daunting challenges, it is essential that the
Afghan Government continue demonstrating its firm
15-18715

22/06/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

determination to end the conflict and improve the lives
of its citizens.
We welcome the completion of the Cabinet
formation, which, due to the nature of the National
Unity Government, was a difficult yet absolutely
necessary event. We encourage Afghan leaders to
complete pending appointments of officials, including
in the justice sector and at the provincial level. The
new leaders have delivered on their promise to appoint
four women ministers. In addition, President Ghani has
nominated the first-ever female Supreme Court judge
in Afghanistan. I am sure that they will be a valuable
asset to the Government’s work and will also have a
real impact on the promotion of women’s rights across
the country.
It is crucial that the Unity Government create an
accountable, transparent and effective Government.
After decades of corruption and obscure dealings,
Afghanistan is in dire need of bold reforms. In that
regard, President Ghani’s agenda, entitled “Realizing
self-reliance”, as presented last year in London, is the
way forward. The President’s initiatives on reviewing
Government revenues and spending, formulating 100day action plans for each ministry and establishing an
independent anti-corruption commission are certainly
steps in the right direction. It is crucial not to lose
momentum and to persevere in their implementation,
as such reforms will improve service delivery, increase
citizens’ participation and strengthen their trust in
elected officials.
The need for progress on electoral reform deserves
a separate mention. While the establishment of the
Special Commission on Electoral Reform provided
a mechanism towards enhancing electoral integrity,
the Commission has yet to start its work. The current
mandate of the lower house of the National Assembly
expired and has been extended, but there is still no
electoral calendar. That must be urgently addressed,
along with the implementation of socioeconomic
policies and a development agenda. Counter-narcotics
policies should be promoted as well, including
through creating incentives for farmers to turn to legal
livelihoods.
At the same time, existing security concerns must
be addressed, since a continuing lack of security may
thwart progress in other areas. As the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2015/422) shows, the number of
civilian casualties in the reporting period increased by
almost a quarter compared with that in 2014, continuing

S/PV.7467

the trend of record high numbers. Improvised explosive
devices remain the second leading cause of civilian
casualties.
The anti-Government elements’ spring offensive
has been more intensive than the year before, with a
45 per cent increase in armed clashes. We condemn
the continuing attacks by anti-Government elements
and their deliberate targeting of civilians, including
the 13 May Taliban attack on a Kabul guesthouse and
on those working in the justice system. We call on all
parties to comply with international humanitarian law,
which prohibits attacks against civilians. In that regard,
it is vital that the Government push forward an Afghanled reconciliation and peace process.
More needs to be done to protect women’s rights
and expand their access to justice. Reports estimate that
up to 87 per cent of Afghan women have experienced
domestic abuse at least once. Domestic violence,
coupled with high maternal mortality, a lack of
economic rights and limited opportunities for justice,
makes Afghanistan one of the world’s most dangerous
countries for women. The latest UNAMA report on
violence against women shows that Afghanistan’s court
system is failing to provide adequate access for women
who are victims of violence. We encourage the Afghan
Government to strengthen access to the justice system
and increase women’s trust in legal proceedings, which
are often overshadowed by corrupt practices.
My delegation welcomes the first human-rights
dialogue between the European Union and Afghanistan,
which took place on 15 June in Kabul. We encourage
further discussions, in a cooperative spirit, on ways to
improve the human-rights situation in Afghanistan.
The future of Afghanistan depends not only on the
Afghans themselves, but also on the actions of their
neighbours. A peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan
is in the interest of all the countries of the region.
Lithuania commends the Government’s efforts aimed
at improving bilateral relations with its neighbours,
including Pakistan, and in multilateral cooperation
forums, such as activities carried out under the Heart of
Asia-Istanbul Process. Any positive steps on peace and
stability taken by Afghanistan should be reciprocated
with tangible actions by neighbouring countries. To cite
some practical examples, from 2012 to 2015 Lithuania
provided funding for a regional project involving
Afghanistan, Pakistan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan.
That initiative contributed to the development of a
compatible veterinary control system in the four Asian

15-1871519/34

S/PV.7467

The situation in Afghanistan

countries, in line with international standards and the
EU legal framework.
In June 2015, after 13 years of active participation
in Afghanistan, the Lithuanian Special Operations
Forces completed the longest-ever non-stop Lithuanian
international mission abroad. The mission’s success
was a result of effective cooperation between the
Government of Afghanistan and its allies. As a result,
the Afghan National Security Forces have gained the
useful experience they need to ensure their country’s
security on their own.
Lithuania remains engaged in the NATO-led
Resolute Support Mission in Afghanistan, which is
one of the major commitments of the Alliance in 2015
and 2016. The mission’s mandate will end in December
2016. With this in mind, we need to discuss the
further engagement of the international community in
Afghanistan after 2016. The international community
has to continue assisting and supporting Afghanistan
as it continues to build a secure and just future. We
welcome the establishment of a Tripartite Commission,
as per Security Council resolution 2210 (2015), to
conduct an examination of the role, structure and
activities of all United Nations entities in Afghanistan.
We encourage all participants to actively engage in that
process.
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful for the briefings given by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), Mr. Nicholas Haysom, and by
Ambassador Tanin.
Chile deplores and strongly condemns the attack
committed today against the Parliament of Afghanistan
and the use of force against unarmed civilians. We
would like to recall that it is of the utmost importance
that authorities ensure the protection of civilians and
prevent anti-Government forces from undermining
trust in the new Government and in the democratic
process.
The development of a modern, democratic and
prosperous Afghanistan will depend, to a large extent,
on the success of the process of reconciliation in the
framework of a broad-based strategy for the protection
and promotion of human rights that envisions access
to education, health care and jobs for all Afghans. In
order to achieve that, it is crucial that progress achieved
by Afghanistan in the area of human rights since 2001

20/34

22/06/2015

continue in an accelerated and consolidated manner. By
the same token, it is imperative to ensure the full and
effective participation of women in decision-making
processes. Accordingly, we urge the Government of
Afghanistan to implement resolution 1325 (2000) and
the law on the elimination of violence against women,
so as to ensure that the perpetrators of this type of
violence are held accountable for their actions. We are
concerned about the security situation in Afghanistan
and, particularly, the increase in the deaths of Afghan
women and children. We hope that the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict quickly reaches a
consensus regarding its conclusions and that those
are used to provide better protection to children in
Afghanistan.
We remain concerned about radical extremism in
Afghanistan and the fact that there are approximately
7,180 foreign terrorist fighters in that country,
according to estimates by the Ministry of the Interior.
We encourage the Government of Afghanistan and
neighbouring countries to implement the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council in order to slow
down the entry of foreign terrorist fighters. Regional
and international cooperation is essential in this area,
particularly in operations aimed at improving border
control. Similarly, it is crucial that the Government
prioritize inclusive development in order to address
the grievances of disaffected communities. It is vital to
implement preventative measures that counter extremist
rhetoric and recruitment by terrorists. We would like to
reiterate what President Michelle Bachelet said to the
Council last January:
“Social inclusion and inclusive development are
the conditions for peace [...]‘Over the longer term,
the biggest threat to terrorists is not the power
of missiles. It is the politics of inclusion [...]. It is
education, jobs and real opportunity.’” (S/PV.7361,
pp. 6-7).
We believe that it is essential to promote dialogue,
inclusion and consensus among Afghans, all of which
are necessary in building a country capable of standing
on its own, with strong democratic institutions and the
rule of law. We would like here to reiterate our support
for UNAMA’s important work in strengthening the
country’s capabilities. In conclusion, Chile calls once
again on the international community to continue its
support for the people of Afghanistan and strengthen
their capacities, thereby enabling the country to

15-18715

22/06/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

confront the security and development challenges that
it faces.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to thank Mr. Haysom, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
briefing.
Afghanistan is going through a crucial phase in its
history. It is facing a series of ongoing, new and renewed
challenges. Accordingly, the international community
must work towards providing the necessary assistance
to this country for a better future for its children. After
many years of war, which has torn Afghanistan apart
and destroyed its institutions — and during which the
country has taken up a great deal of the international
community’s efforts and attention — the concept of
threats to international peace and security and the our
way of handling them have changed forever. Today,
more than ever, Afghanistan needs the support of the
international community and of the United Nations.
That is the real challenge that we face in Afghanistan.
Jordan is extremely concerned at the security
situation in Afghanistan, exemplified by the terrorist
attack against the Parliament of Afghanistan this
morning. We recognize the difficulties that the Afghan
authorities are facing in maintaining security and
controlling the situation. Accordingly, the international
community and, particularly, neighbouring countries
must continue to provide support to Afghanistan
in its war against terrorism, and must support the
Government’s efforts in controlling the entire national
territory. We therefore encourage international partners
to reinforce and improve Afghanistan’s capacities, in
order to adequately address the situation. In the near
future, in cooperation with interested countries and
the Government of Afghanistan, we must carry out a
comprehensive analysis of the situation in determining
how the Council can help bolster security and stability
in that country.
Jordan welcomes the fact that the formation of
the new Afghan Government has been completed
in order to maintain the progress achieved thus far
through democracy. That ongoing process has seen the
involvement of all Afghans, political parties and national
partners in Afghanistan. We welcome the formation of
this new Government, and we hope that it marks the
start of positive change in the political landscape and in
the peacebuilding process in Afghanistan.

S/PV.7467

Resolving differences among the different components
within Afghan society, in order to ensure the stability
that the country so desires, will not be possible
unless there is national reconciliation throughout
Afghanistan, led by the Afghans themselves. Because
the use of force and violence by different elements will
hinder the achievement of those goals, bringing about a
comprehensive peace remains a great challenge in the
country. Taking that into account, we would stress the
importance of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan’s (UNAMA) role and that of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in deploying
their good offices to strengthen national reconciliation.
We call upon all the parties to participate
constructively in that process.
In view of the Afghan President’s announcement
that the current legislature will be extended until new
elections are held, we appeal to the Special Commission
on Electoral Reform to start work as soon as possible
and implement all the necessary reforms, avoiding the
mistakes of the past and thereby guaranteeing that
the electoral process will comply with international
standards. We hope that the progress made in that
area will be presented to the Security Council at its
meeting in September. We would like to emphasize
once again the need to expedite the implementation of
anti-corruption reform programmes so as to ensure that
human rights and the rule of law are upheld. We call
upon the Government to intensify its efforts to improve
the situation of vulnerable and marginalized groups
in the country, and we also emphasize that all matters
related to women’s rights must be an integral part of all
debates on peace, so that women can be more involved
in future progress.
Jordan is concerned about Afghanistan’s poor
economic situation, particularly in view of the fragile
security conditions following the terrorist attacks,
and we trust that the necessary steps will be taken to
improve the economic situation so that donors in the
international community regain confidence in the
country. One of the most important measures will
be the struggle against corruption at all levels of the
Government, as the United Nations and international
financial institutions have reiterated on various
occasions. We call upon the Government to assume
its responsibilities and reach that goal, and we urge
the donor community and countries in the region to
continue to support development and invest jointly
in Afghanistan. We welcome the efforts of UNAMA,

15-1871521/34

S/PV.7467

The situation in Afghanistan

which is working extremely effectively in various areas
under the difficult circumstances in the country, and
we encourage it to continue to play that role.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Malaysia.
I join other Security Council members in thanking
the Secretary-General’s Special Representative,
Nicholas Haysom, and Ambassador Tanin for their
briefings. My delegation would also like to take
this opportunity to express its appreciation to the
leadership and staff members of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their
unstinting assistance to the Government and people of
Afghanistan.
Malaysia deplores and condemns the heinous
attack against the Afghan Parliament building earlier
today, responsibility for which has been claimed by the
Taliban. We offer our condolences and deepest sympathy
to the families and loved ones of those killed. Malaysia
would emphasize that the only way forward is through
peaceful political negotiations. Despite the attack, we
hope that Afghanistan will stay the course in finalizing
the formation of a National Unity Government based on
a power-sharing framework. From our own experience
of nation-building through power-sharing and social
transformation, we fully understand the importance of
mutual respect and inclusiveness in such matters.
Malaysia looks forward to having all parties
support the implementation of the agenda set by
President Ashraf Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah
Abdullah. It is therefore our hope that those efforts
will demonstrate the strong commitment of the Afghan
people and Government to an Afghan-led and Afghanowned decade of transformation. Malaysia reiterates its
support for the Afghan Government’s efforts to achieve
peace and reconciliation, and we are heartened by the
extensive engagement between President Ghani and his
local and regional interlocutors. We further welcome
the progress made in instituting electoral reforms and
urge the Government to remain steadfast in introducing
those and other reforms.
In our view, the sustained positive atmosphere in
the region has become a catalyst for a more open and
constructive discourse, and we call on all parties to
continue to support that vital process. Key stakeholders
in the region should also intensify their efforts to
support and assist Afghanistan, including through more
substantive dialogues in such regional and multilateral

22/34

22/06/2015

cooperation forums as the Heart of Asia-Istanbul
Process.
While encouraged by the significant progress on
the political front, Malaysia notes that the security
situation remains precarious, as seen earlier today.
Malaysia joins other Council members in expressing
concern at the high number of civilian casualties in
the armed conflict, and we also strongly condemn the
deliberate targeting of civilians. It is deeply deplorable
that Afghan children continue to bear the brunt of the
violent conflict in the country, either through being
caught in the crossfire or through being caught in
attacks with improvised explosive devices or contact
with explosive remnants of war. We call on all parties
undertaking ground engagements to comply with
international humanitarian law and commit to the
protection of civilians, including women and children.
In that regard, my delegation takes note of the Afghan
Government’s progress report on its compliance with
the action plan it adopted pursuant to resolution 1612
(2005) on children and armed conflict.
We are also concerned by the large number of
foreign fighters present in Afghanistan, including those
associated with terrorist groups. My delegation further
notes that that presence has been a matter of great
concern for countries in the region as well, particularly
in Central Asia. While there may be an absence of hard
evidence to prove that certain terrorist and extremist
groups are operating in Afghanistan, that should not
prevent us from addressing the root causes of the
support for such groups.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
United Nations, the Security Council and the rest
of the international community should continue to
lend their support, encouragement and assistance to
Afghanistan through reconstruction and redevelopment
efforts designed to rebuild the country. As a friend and
partner of Afghanistan, Malaysia remains committed
to supporting the Afghan Government in its efforts to
achieve peace, security and stability.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Mukerji (India): At the outset, I would like
to express our strong condemnation of this morning’s
terrorist attack on the Afghan Parliament and express
our solidarity with the people and Government of
Afghanistan at this hour. Madam President, we thank
15-18715

22/06/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

your delegation for organizing this debate on the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
I would also like to thank the Secretary General for his
report on the situation in Afghanistan (S/2015/422),
his Special Representative, Nicholas Haysom, and
Ambassador Zahir Tanin for their briefings earlier this
morning.
The President of the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan, His Excellency Mr. Mohammad Ashraf
Ghani, paid a State visit to India from 27 to 29 April.
That visit further cemented the age-old historical,
cultural and geographical links between India and
Afghanistan. The leaders of our two countries
acknowledged that those links today provide the solid
foundation for our strategic partnership, which was in
turn forged on the two countries’ common perception
of challenges and shared interests. Prime Minister Modi
of India assured the President of Afghanistan of India’s
abiding support for Afghanistan’s ongoing crucial
transitions — political, economic and security — for
the decade 2015-2024 and beyond.
I wish, however, to express our concern at the
security situation in Afghanistan, as set out in the
latest report of the Secretary-General, which mentions
that the number of armed clashes has risen by 45 per
cent since 2014. The report also highlights the fact
that 71 per cent of the violence has been concentrated
in the southern, south-eastern and eastern regions of
the country. Those statistics are a matter of concern
for India and the international community. They only
reinforce our view that terrorism, not tribal differences
or ethnic rivalries, is the main source of insecurity and
instability in Afghanistan. That spurt in violence is
taking place at a time when Afghanistan is in the midst
of a sensitive and historic political transition under
the leadership of President Ashraf Ghani and Chief
Executive Abdullah Abdullah. Given the critical phase
that the political transition is in, and the deteriorating
security situation, we feel that there is a strong case
for ensuring that the international community takes a
fresh look at the manner in which the drawdown of the
international military presence in Afghanistan is being
planned.
We have also noted with concern the SecretaryGeneral’s reference to an Afghan Ministry of Interior
estimate that nearly 7,200 so-called foreign fighters
are now in Afghanistan. It is obvious that they could
not have entered Afghanistan or continued to sustain
their terror attacks there without support from beyond

S/PV.7467

the country’s borders. President Ghani has taken
exceptional steps to launch a reconciliation process to
bring peace to his country. Sadly, those efforts are being
repeatedly rebuffed by the Taliban and its supporters.
India will continue to support a truly Afghanled and Afghan-owned reconciliation process within
the framework of the Afghan Constitution and the
internationally accepted red lines.
I would also like to once again reiterate the
importance that we attach to enhancing Afghanistan’s
economic connectivity to markets in the region.
Afghanistan’s unique location makes it a natural
land bridge for connecting the people and markets of
Central Asia to rapidly growing regions in South Asia
and beyond. India has been taking steps to help achieve
that connectivity. We have indicated our willingness to
join an expanded Pakistan, Afghanistan and Tajikistan
trade and transit agreement; we are working with the
Government of Iran to see how the port of Chabahar
in Iran could be used to provide Afghanistan with
another way of accessing a sea route; and we have
unilaterally offered Afghanistan access to the facilities
of the integrated checkpoint at Attari at the WagahAttari border-crossing point on the international border
between India and Pakistan.
Finally, the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan must continue to play a leading role in
shaping and coordinating the international community’s
efforts to support Afghanistan’s political and economic
transition. We are ready to be part of that process, and
we look forward to further discussions of UNAMA’s
continued activities in Afghanistan.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): I would like to start by
thanking Special Representative Nicholas Haysom for
his perceptive briefing.
Today Afghanistan stands on the cusp of challenge
and opportunity. Its path into the Transformation
Decade is challenging on every front, dealing as it
must with insecurity, economic fragility and the illicit
economy, to name only a few issues. We are encouraged
to see that the process of forming a Government has
been completed, and we also welcome the nomination
of the first woman to the country’s Supreme Court.
All of that marks an auspicious beginning. But much
more needs to be done, and as Afghanistan negotiates
its many challenges, the international community must

15-1871523/34

S/PV.7467

The situation in Afghanistan

continue to stand by it. The United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) has a critical role in
that regard. Its work, in line with the priorities set by
the Afghan Government, is much valued. All of us have
a crucial stake in the stability of Afghanistan, and all of
us will have to contribute to that end.
As is noted in the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2015/422), during the last quarter, we
travelled further along a positive trajectory of enhanced
engagement between Afghanistan and Pakistan. Last
month, my Prime Minister visited Kabul for the second
time, his first since the advent of the Government
of National Unity. The two leaders agreed that our
bilateral relationship would continue to be guided by
three core principles, the first being adherence to the
policy of non-interference; the second, ensuring that
our respective territories are not used against each
other; and the third, seeing to it that the enemies of
Afghanistan are treated as enemies of Pakistan, and
vice versa. The two leaders also agreed to expand trade
and deepen regional cooperation, which we hope will
usher in a new era of peace and development in our
region — a win-win situation for everyone.
Pakistan has the highest possible stake in a
peaceful and stable Afghanistan. Terrorism remains a
challenge for both our countries and the entire region.
We have roundly condemned the recent rise in violence
in Afghanistan and the civilian casualties that have
been its grim consequence. Nothing justifies the killing
of innocent people, the atrocious attack this morning
on the Afghan Parliament or, as we saw last week, the
destruction of hospitals. We are committed to fighting
that menace together and are increasing our military
and intelligence cooperation with Kabul. For our part,
we have just completed a successful first year for our
military operation against terrorists and armed militants
in North Waziristan. We are committed to eliminating
all terrorists, without distinction. And let me be clear
that we will be relentless in rooting out terrorism,
whoever its sponsors are, external or internal. Any
attempt to destabilize parts of our country or attack its
territorial integrity will be responded to forcefully.
Pakistan can and will play a constructive role in
promoting peace and security in Afghanistan. That
can best be achieved through a process of national
reconciliation undertaken and led by the Afghans
themselves. We welcome the first tentative steps taken
in recent months to advance the reconciliation process,
and we hope they will lead to direct talks as well as to

24/34

22/06/2015

a de-escalation of violence. Pakistan will do everything
possible to encourage that process. Success will require
reciprocal accommodation and, above all, strategic
patience.
Sustainable peace in Afghanistan will lead to
regional stability, which is the cornerstone of the Heart
of Asia process. As co-Chair of the process, Pakistan
hosted a meeting of its senior officials in Islamabad in
May, providing an opportunity for in-depth discussions
on a range of issues, including trans-regional projects
such as the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-PakistanIndia gas pipeline and the China-Pakistan Economic
Corridor.
The Secretary-General’s report notes an increase
in the voluntary return of Afghan refugees from both
Pakistan and Iran. However, Pakistan continues to
be one of the top two countries hosting the world’s
largest refugee population. We welcome the Afghan
Government’s commitment to the refugees’ return and
reintegration and hope that UNAMA will continue to
assist in that regard. My Prime Minister has assured
President Ghani that Afghan refugees will not be
forcibly repatriated.
The Secretary-General’s report also states that
opiates still account for the equivalent of 13 per cent
of Afghanistan’s gross domestic product. While we
welcome efforts by the Afghan law-enforcement
authorities to counter that menace, more focused action
is required, with international support.
Finally, the ties between Pakistan and Afghanistan
transcend the boundaries of time and space. Our
destinies are intertwined. As our Prime Minister
Nawaz Sharif said in Kabul, “We have stood shoulder
to shoulder through every trial and tribulation” that the
people of Afghanistan have faced. I would therefore
like to assure Afghanistan of our continued resolve
to remain by its side and help the Afghan people in
whatever way we can to accomplish the goals of the
Transformation Decade and achieve lasting peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): We align ourselves with
the statement to be delivered later on behalf of the
European Union, and particularly with its emphasis on
the need for electoral reform in Afghanistan, which is
fundamental for safeguarding the country’s growing
political participation and stronger civil society. In
addition, I would like to make a few remarks.
15-18715

22/06/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

First of all, of course, we firmly condemn the
attack on the Parliament in Kabul, which is an attack on
democracy. Our support for those building a democratic
and peaceful Afghanistan must be unwavering.
I would like to thank Nicholas Haysom, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and his staff
for his briefing and for the work they are doing on the
ground; I also thank Ambassador Tanin for his remarks.
Sweden takes particular note of the horrific effects
of the conflict on the civilian population that their
statements highlight. The continuing rise in civilian
casualties is deplorable and worrying.
It has been said many times before, particularly in
this Chamber, that this is a critical year for Afghanistan
and the Afghan people. It is also a critical year for the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). The reduced presence of international
security forces in the country and the upcoming review
of the UNAMA mandate give us a unique chance to
strengthen it in the areas where it can have the greatest
effect in the years ahead, including ensuring broad
geographical outreach to Afghanistan and a meaningful
and successful peace process.
Our support for UNAMA remains strong. We
would like to express our gratitude to the women and
men employed by UNAMA in Kabul as well as in
Afghanistan’s more remote provinces. The importance
of an ambitious presence on the part of the international
community, particularly in remote areas of the country,
cannot be stressed enough. The situation demands that
the international community speak and act as one.
Effective multilateral cooperation and coordination
within the framework of the United Nations remain
vital.
The recent and reprehensible spiral of attacks on
aid workers operating in Afghanistan is appalling.
We are currently witnessing a shrinking of the
humanitarian space on a large and devastating scale,
where aid workers are being prevented from providing
basic humanitarian aid or seeking sustainable solutions
for the Afghan people. In order to stop that trend from
having severe and long-term effects and to end the
brutal and pointless violence, humanitarian access must
be regained and the safety of aid workers guaranteed.
The conflict can be solved only through peaceful
and meaningful dialogue. A peace process must
be carefully planned and implemented. There is no
room for compromise on the principles, rights and

S/PV.7467

freedoms that have already been agreed on and that
are enshrined in the Afghan Constitution. A successful
peace process should be inclusive and representative.
Excluding segments of the Afghan population, such as
women, from taking part would compromise the very
foundation of a peaceful society. We therefore call for
the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
for the Afghan Government to continue to pursue and
safeguard women’s full enjoyment of human rights.
An inclusive and meaningful peace process has the
potential to be transformative in enabling Afghans
to believe in an Afghanistan that can fully meet their
legitimate aspirations for a more prosperous and secure
life.
In 2001, we, the world, were uniquely united around
the idea of building a stable future for Afghanistan. In
the 14 years since, the world has become more unruly
in many ways. There are more conflicts demanding
the attention of the international community than ever.
Although a lot has been achieved in Afghanistan, much
remains to be done. It is therefore important that we
reaffirm our support for Afghanistan and honour our
commitments. At the same time, there must also be
tangible reforms and progress within the country. The
road map for the way ahead has already been agreed
on, most notably in the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework and in the Afghan Government’s reform
paper “Realizing self-reliance”.
Sweden’s support for Afghanistan has been
substantial and long-term. It began several decades ago,
and it will continue with our commitment of $1.2 billion
throughout the Transformation Decade. The Afghan
Government and people can count on our continued
support in this critical time, a time for reforms, for
keeping commitments made and realizing self-reliance.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Head of the delegation of the European
Union.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine and Armenia, align
themselves with this statement.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (S/2015/422) and Special

15-1871525/34

S/PV.7467

The situation in Afghanistan

Representative Haysom for his briefing. I would also
like to assure Mr. Haysom of our continued strong
support for his important mission, and to thank
Ambassador Tanin for his statement.
At the outset, let me reiterate how strongly we
condemn today’s horrendous terrorist attack in Kabul.
We offer our heartfelt condolences to the Government
and people of Afghanistan and to the families of the
victims. I would also like to reiterate the European
Union’s full support for the continuing role played by
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and all United Nations agencies in
supporting the Afghan people and coordinating the
international community’s assistance. The role of
the United Nations in helping the National Unity
Government to implement its priorities remains vitally
important, not least by ensuring that Afghans across
the country are able to benefit from the Government’s
programmes and the international assistance to them.
The Secretary-General’s report highlights the
continued callous disregard by the Taliban and other
insurgent groups for Afghan lives, of which the tragic
and dramatic events of this day are only the most recent
horrendous example. Despite empty protestations to the
contrary, the insurgency continues to plan and target
attacks against Afghan civilians. That has unfortunately
led to record numbers of Afghan civilians being killed.
The European Union continues to support the initiation
of an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process.
But it must be a peace that leads to a cessation of
violence, as well as ending any links with terrorism
and, importantly, respecting the rights of Afghans set
out in the Constitution, notably the rights of women and
girls.
The vision for reform set out by the National Unity
Government in its “Realizing self-reliance” paper at
the London Conference in December 2014 offers a
comprehensive programme that the European Union is
pleased to endorse and support. The European Union
welcomes the near-completion of the formation of the
National Unity Government, which must now urgently
develop a prioritized plan for undertaking the critical
reforms that Afghanistan needs in order to consolidate
the progress made to date and provide a foundation for
future gains. In particular, the Government must look
at immediate measures that can increase economic
confidence, generate revenue and enable the Special
Commission on Electoral Reform to really begin
its work, which is to study how the current electoral

26/34

22/06/2015

system can be reformed. Those measures are vital for
the political and economic stability that Afghanistan
needs in order to make progress in addressing longstanding societal issues. They include the prevalence of
corruption and the threats posed by drugs and organized
crime, the lack of the rule of law, as exemplified by the
dysfunctionality of the justice system, and the continued
shame of the mistreatment of women and children.
The European Union calls for those issues to
serve as the basis for a refreshed Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework (TMAF), to which both
the Government and the international community
committed at the London Conference. The upcoming
senior officials’ meeting in Kabul will provide a clear
opportunity for the Government to substantiate and
prioritize the vision that President Ghani Ahmadzai
outlined in London, generating a specific programme
for reform set out in a refreshed TMAF with which
all Afghans can identify. That Framework can be the
basis for the continued exceptional levels of assistance
provided by the international community, including the
European Union and its member States. The European
Union encourages Afghanistan to continue the active
engagement with its regional partners shown during
the past three months, given that regional cooperation
is a driver of stability and prosperity not only for
Afghanistan but also for the region at large.
In conclusion, the legitimate aspirations of Afghans
for greater prosperity and stability in Afghanistan
cannot be beholden to the whims of insurgent groups.
The EU will work with and support the National Unity
Government in establishing a reform programme that
addresses the critical issues that continue to be barriers
to progress in Afghanistan. This remains a situation in
which the United Nations will continue to be vitally
important in supporting the Government’s plans, and I
reiterate the European Union’s ongoing support for the
role of UNAMA.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): Allow me to express my
gratitude to Malaysia for convening this important
meeting. I would like to extend my sincere appreciation
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for his comprehensive briefing.
We are grateful to him and his dedicated team for
the laudable work they carry out under difficult
circumstances. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Zahir Tanin of Afghanistan for his statement.
15-18715

22/06/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

We strongly condemn the attack on the Afghan
Parliament this morning. We reiterate our solidarity
with the people of Afghanistan and express our
heartfelt sympathies to the victims of that crime and
their families.
When tens of millions of Afghan men and women
took to the polls last year, we knew that Afghanistan’s
path to self-reliance would present vast opportunities
and important challenges. As we approach the half-year
mark of Afghanistan’s Transformation Decade, we see
signs of both.
The National Unity Government is near completion
and is strengthening economic and political ties with
regional and international partners. On the other
hand, economic growth remains weak. We are also
witnessing an alarming uptick in violence, which has
claimed the lives of a record number of civilians. A
strong and inclusive political leadership is needed to
overcome these security challenges and pave the way
for economic sustainability.
In the light of that situation, we are concerned that
electoral reform has not yet commenced. Furthermore,
it is disconcerting that the schedule of parliamentary
elections, which were to take place before 21 May,
according to the Afghan Constitution, has yet to be
decided on.
Cognizant of the fact that political certainty
underpins security and economic growth, we call
for the timely implementation of electoral reforms
and parliamentary elections. We likewise look to
the Government led by President Ghani and Chief
Executive Officer Abdullah to accelerate its reform
process and address the immediate challenges,
including corruption, security and the economy. As
Afghanistan works towards peace, prosperity and
self-reliance, we consider the following issues to be
of continued importance: strengthening governance,
advancing political reconciliation and cementing the
foundations of a sustainable economy.
First, as Afghanistan takes its first steps towards
self-reliance, we see that the resolve and capabilities
of the Government are being tested. To that effect, we
welcome the fact that Afghanistan is making efforts to
strengthen governance. Of particular relevance is the
fight against corruption, which includes the judiciary
and local governments. As the Afghan Government has
rightly noted, corruption raises the costs of development
and damages its credibility in the eyes of its people.

S/PV.7467

We are also alarmed by the security situation and
the record high number of civilian casualties on the
ground, including in the northern provinces of Kunduz
and Badakhstan. We likewise note with concern the
presence of foreign fighters in the country. However, we
remain confident that Afghanistan’s law-enforcement
and security forces are up to the task. To that end, Japan
will continue to assist Afghanistan to strengthen its
law-enforcement capacity, principally through the Law
and Order Trust Fund for Afghanistan, to which Japan
has hitherto contributed more than $1 billion. Our
assistance has helped Afghanistan double the size of its
police force in four years. Furthermore, knowing that
effective law enforcement is contingent upon capable
and dedicated individuals, Japan has been providing
capacity-building in fields as diverse as literacy
education and legal training. For example, Japan,
in cooperation with Turkey and NATO, is currently
providing assistance for the training of 325 female
police officers in Turkey, in the light of the importance
of protecting women’s rights.
Secondly, political reconciliation is part and parcel
of Afghanistan’s long-term stability. In that regard, we
welcome the Government’s engagement with national
and regional actors in promoting reconciliation.
Furthermore, we welcome the facilitation by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan of civil
society-led dialogue towards that end. Japan, for its
part, has been supporting the peaceful reintegration
of ex-combatants into Afghan society. As a leading
contributor to the Afghanistan peace and reintegration
programme and other efforts, Japan has contributed to
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
approximately 60,000 ex-combatants, the disbandment
of 737 armed groups and the collection of 276,000
weapons. Japan looks forward to further progress and
to the consolidation of Afghanistan’s democratic path
to peace and prosperity.
Thirdly, economic opportunity and growth are
legitimate aspirations for all Afghans. We are therefore
concerned by the economic slowdown, which, among
other factors, has been attributed to political and
security uncertainties. Nonetheless, the long-term
drivers of growth, particularly human capital and
economic connectivity, are encouraging. Through
assistance from Japan and the international community,
the number of schoolchildren has increased nine-fold,
to 9.2 million in 12 years. Concerning economic
connectivity, we have helped lay more than 700
kilometres of new trunk roads that stretch throughout

15-1871527/34

S/PV.7467

The situation in Afghanistan

the country. Kabul International Airport, rehabilitated
with Japan’s assistance, has increased passenger traffic
by 150 per cent in a span of five years. Furthermore, on
2 June, quite recently, Japan approved the disbursement
of $25 million in counterpart funds to help the Afghan
Government to conclude a civil airspace management
contract. Furthermore, Japan, in cooperation with
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, among others, is also working to strengthen
productivity in agriculture, which is the largest source
of employment in the country. In order to maximize
the economic potential with which Afghanistan is
endowed, we look to the Government to implement its
reform programme entitled “Realizing self-reliance” to
address fiscal vulnerabilities and improve security and
political stability.
To conclude, Japan and the international community
will stand by Afghanistan as it overcomes its initial
challenges and cements its foundations towards selfreliance. We acknowledge and welcome the fact that
a Tripartite Commission with the participation of
donor countries has been set up to examine the role,
structure and activities of all United Nations entities in
Afghanistan. Regardless of its form, Japan would like
to reaffirm its strong solidarity with the Afghan people
and its firm commitment to assisting that country on its
path towards peace, prosperity and self-reliance under
the principle of mutual accountability.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Eler (Turkey): I would like start by strongly
condemning the heinous terrorist attack perpetrated
against the Afghan Parliament today. We express our
feelings of solidarity with the Government and the
people of Afghanistan and underline once again that
Turkey stands by Afghanistan in its struggle against
terrorism.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive report (S/2015/422), and his
Special Representative, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, and
Ambassador Zahir Tanin for their briefings.
We welcome the completion of the formation of
the Cabinet in Afghanistan and reiterate our wish for
success to the National Unity Government. Afghanistan
has achieved significant progress in every field for the
last 13 years. In order to maintain those achievements
and continue to build upon them, the international
community’s continuing support to Afghanistan,

28/34

22/06/2015

especially during the Transformation Decade, is of
great importance. We believe that the withdrawal of the
international presence from Afghanistan should not be
calendar-based, but condition-based.
Turkey fully supports the Afghan Government in
its efforts to bring peace, stability and prosperity to
Afghanistan. The peace and reconciliation process is
of utmost importance for achieving lasting peace and
stability in that country. We hope that Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation efforts yield
positive results.
Turkey’s commitment to Afghanistan is longterm. We make comprehensive contributions to
Afghanistan both at the bilateral level and through
the United Nations and NATO. In the field of security,
Turkey assumed framework-nation responsibility for
the Kabul region within NATO’s Resolute Support
Mission. Furthermore, as of 1 January, we took on the
management and security responsibilities for the Kabul
International Airport for two years.
We have confirmed our pledge of $60 million to
the Afghan national defence and security forces for
the period from 2015 to 2017, and have already put the
first year’s commitment into effect. The Turkish armed
forces have trained some 17,500 Afghan National Army
personnel since 2001. Furthermore, to date a total of
1,956 Afghan police cadets have been trained in four
six-month programmes, and 494 Afghan policewomen
cadets have also been trained in similar programmes.
Additionally, a total of 1,374 Afghan police cadets were
trained at the centre attached to the Wardak provincial
reconstruction team, until it ceased to function. In
addition, Turkey organized 82 specialized training
programmes for Afghan law-enforcement officials on
various law-enforcement subjects, including counternarcotics, and plans to continue to do so.
Our development aid programme for the Afghan
people is the most comprehensive such programme
directed to another country in Turkey’s history.
Through it, Turkey has completed around 800 projects
in Afghanistan, valued at more than $300 million, since
2001, and has done so in every province of Afghanistan
without giving priority to any particular ethnic group.
We have also committed $150 million to development
efforts in Afghanistan for the period from 2015 to
2017. With respect to humanitarian assistance, we have
completed 51 projects worth $1.7 million.

15-18715

22/06/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

Lasting peace and stability in Afghanistan can
be possible only within a regional framework that
taps the positive energy and increased cooperation
within its region. On that understanding, Turkey will
continue to support dialogue between Afghanistan and
its neighbours. We look forward to the next ministerial
meeting of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process, to be
held in Islamabad. While we welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the situation in Afghanistan
(S/2015/422), we would like to complement the section
on regional cooperation by adding that within the
Istanbul Process, Turkey, as co-leader of the counterterrorism confidence-building measures section,
organized a three-day course on defence against suicide
bombing in Ankara in April 2015. Turkey will continue
to carry out similar activities within the Process.
In conclusion, I would like to underline that we will
continue to contribute to the security, development and
capacity-building efforts of Afghanistan.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Braun (Germany): To start with, let me join
those who have thanked the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for his
comprehensive briefing today. I would also like to
thank Ambassador Zahir Tanin for his statement.
Germany aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union earlier in this
debate.
Last year, Afghanistan successfully held
presidential elections, resulting in the first peaceful
and democratic transfer of power in the country’s often
painful history. Those elections eventually led to the
formation of a National Unity Government. As the
legislative term of the Afghan Parliament ends today,
we strongly encourage the Government to continue
consolidating Afghan democracy and set a concrete
timeline for parliamentary and provincial-council
elections to be held in a timely manner.
It is of the utmost importance that the Afghan
people have their confidence and trust in democratic
election processes restored. The pending electoral
reforms have the potential to strengthen the election
system’s credibility and sustainability. They should be
based on a broad political consensus that includes the
various political camps as well as civil society. In that
context, we welcome the establishment of the Special
Commission on Election Reform and urge it to assume

S/PV.7467

its duties as quickly as possible. A fully operational
legislative body alongside an efficient National Unity
Government is a prerequisite for tackling the many
issues facing Afghanistan and for building on the
country’s numerous achievements of the past decade.
Now is the time to implement the ambitious
reform strategy, presented by President Ghani and
Chief Executive Abdullah under the title “Realizing
self-reliance”, for the benefit of the Afghan people.
Refreshing the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework will be the cornerstone of that process. The
Government is currently working with its partners to set
out new priorities that can put Afghanistan firmly on a
path of self-reliance, and that process must continue.
One already certain result is that the international
community will abide by its commitments and continue
to support Afghanistan during its Transformation
Decade. At the London Conference on Afghanistan
held last December, Germany renewed its commitment
to maintaining its extraordinary level of civilian
assistance, amounting to almost $500 million annually
up to 2016.
The United Nations and its funds and programmes,
and the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan, will continue to play a vital role in
the implementation of Afghanistan’s policy and
development priorities. As the role of the United Nations
may evolve over time, we welcome the establishment of
the Tripartite Commission, as mandated in resolution
2210 (2015). Any recommendation that can improve the
effectiveness of the cooperation between the Afghan
Government, the United Nations and donor countries
will benefit the Afghan people and is therefore welcome.
The current tragic record level of civilian
casualties is of great concern. As the Taliban and
other armed groups continue to deliberately target
civilians, including women, children and those actively
advocating for the rights of these most vulnerable
groups, it is the civilian population that pays the price
for the armed conflict. Today’s attack on the Parliament
building, disrupting the confirmation process for the
Acting Minister of Defence, is a stark reminder of the
Taliban’s outrageous actions. Our thoughts are with the
victims’ families.
In closing, I would like to say that an Afghan-led
and -owned peace process that upholds the gains in
human rights that have been made over the past decade,
in particular the rights of women, is key to alleviating
the suffering of the civilian population. We therefore

15-1871529/34

S/PV.7467

The situation in Afghanistan

fully support such a peace process and the instrumental
role that the United Nations will play in it.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Ms. Wilson (Australia): I would also like to
thank Special Representative Nicholas Haysom for his
briefing and to acknowledge Permanent Representative
Zahir Tanin’s continuing contribution.
After nine months in office, the National Unity
Government has committed to an ambitious reform
programme. Its release of the 100-day plans for
ministries has shown the global community and the
Afghan people the scope of the reform agenda. Australia
congratulates Afghanistan and its Government on
that initiative and urges them to continue to display
determination in carrying out reforms. Since taking over
responsibility for providing security for Afghanistan,
we note that the Afghan national defence and security
forces have demonstrated profound courage, resilience
and commitment to the protection of their country
and people. But while they are performing strongly
against a persistent insurgency, we can also expect the
Taliban to continue its campaign of fear. Along with
others before us, we condemn today’s attack on the
Parliament in Kabul and reaffirm our strong support
for Afghanistan’s legitimate institutions. It is vital that
the national forces continue to build their capabilities,
particularly in provincial areas, and Australia is
providing $300 million between 2015 and 2017 towards
that aim.
Among other things, Afghanistan’s economy and
its Government’s finances remain key concerns for
Australia. Economic sustainability is key to achieving
self-reliance, and we therefore welcome the Afghan
Government’s focus on improving revenue generation,
rationalizing spending and defeating corruption, which
must be a major priority. Everything that can be done
in that area will not only benefit the Afghan economy,
it will also build trust between the Afghan people and
the Government.
We see 2015 as the start of a critical decade for
Afghan women and girls. We support the National Unity
Government’s efforts to protect and build on the gains of
the past 14 years, which include the enrolment of more
than 3 million girls in school and women’s increased
participation in Afghan political life. Australia also
welcomes the recent appointment of four women to
ministerial roles and the nomination of the first-ever

30/34

22/06/2015

woman to the Supreme Court. We urge President Ghani
Ahmadzai and Chief Executive Abdullah to continue to
draw women into political life, which will help not only
Afghanistan’s women and girls but also the economy
and society as a whole.
As others have noted, achieving a political settlement
with the Taliban will be necessary if Afghanistan and
the region are to find lasting peace. The National Unity
Government has made good progress in strengthening
its regional relationships, which is a critical first step.
We urge Afghanistan and its partners to continue to
approach reconciliation with a sense of purpose and
pragmatism and to involve Afghan women in pivotal
discussions on Afghanistan’s future.
A sustainable future for Afghanistan must have
strong and sustainable democratic foundations. We
continue to urge the Afghan Government to prioritize
electoral reform so as to ensure that future elections
provide a sound foundation that can enable democracy
to mature.
Australia looks forward to continuing its work with
the Afghan Government, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan and our international partners
in order to help the people of Afghanistan deal with
the challenges they face in the areas of security, the
economy, governance, human rights and human
development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Ms. Samson (Netherlands): The Netherlands
aligns itself with the statement delivered earlier by
the observer of the European Union. I am grateful to
the Secretary-General for his detailed and thorough
report (S/2015/422) and would also like to thank
Special Representative Haysom for his briefing and
Ambassador Tanin for his statement.
The latest report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) describes the sharp increase in armed clashes
in a number of provinces resulting from the Taliban’s
spring offensive. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
offers its condolences to the Afghan Government on
the lives that have been lost in that offensive and in this
morning’s attack on the Afghan Parliament in Kabu, a
stark reminder of the threat that Afghan civilians face
on a daily basis. The Netherlands strongly condemns
that heinous assault, which, apart from the devastation

15-18715

22/06/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

and loss of human lives it has brought, is also an attack
on the democratic process in Afghanistan.
The Afghan national defence and security forces
have been able to push back the insurgents, but Taliban
pressure remains high in several provinces. In the long
run, lasting stability and peace can be possible only
through reconciliation. It is therefore laudable that the
National Unity Government has taken the initiative to
enter into peace talks with the Taliban. Important first
steps have been taken. The Netherlands supports the
National Unity Government’s regional approach. We
also hope to see the meaningful participation of Afghan
women in the peace talks. Peace is essential for any
further development in Afghanistan.
The National Unity Government presented its
ambitious reform agenda, “Realizing self-reliance”,
during the London Conference. Since then, its
appointment of a full Cabinet has progressed slowly but
steadily. However, with that now almost complete, we
hope to soon be able to see reforms come to fruition.
The Netherlands is looking forward to a draft of
the refreshed Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework
in the run-up to the senior officials’ meeting in Kabul
on 5 September. The Framework should include the
agreements from the 2012 Tokyo Declaration on
Afghanistan, the Government’s reform agenda and the
various ministries’ 100-day action plans.
As the UNAMA report highlights, the National
Unity Government is committed to sustainably
improving the lives of women in Afghanistan. It has
made some significant progress in furthering human
rights, including women’s rights, since its formation,
for example by prohibiting the recruitment of children
by the military and police forces and by addressing
corruption within the justice sector, as well as through
its nomination of the first female Supreme Court judge.
Continued commitment is vital. The Netherlands is
looking forward to the presentation of the Afghan
national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000) and to
the 100-day action plan of the Ministry of Women’s
Affairs.
The Netherlands has been a long-time partner of
Afghanistan, with a relationship stretching back more
than a decade. We have been contributing in the area
of security in the provinces of Baghlan, Uruzgan
and Kunduz, and currently in Balkh province. Since
2002, Afghanistan has been one of our most important
partners in development cooperation, particularly in

S/PV.7467

the areas of the rule of law, reconstruction and gender.
We have been a trusted contributor to the World Bank’s
Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund, supporting
Afghan economic development, education, health
care and governmental capacities. The Netherlands
also contributes troops to NATO’s Resolute Support
Mission for training, advising and assisting in northern
Afghanistan and Mazar-e-Sharif. We have sent staff
to the European Union Police Mission training effort
and to UNAMA, and we will continue to support the
Afghan National Army and the Afghan National Police.
As our Minister for Foreign Affairs said at the
London Conference, the Netherlands will stand by the
Afghan people in the years to come. Our continued
support must go hand in hand with critical and
meaningful reforms within the Afghan Government,
as agreed on in the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework, so that self-reliance can indeed be achieved
in this new era of increased Afghan ownership and
leadership.
In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to underline the continued support of the Netherlands
for the role played by UNAMA, and to thank it for
its ongoing constructive role in coordinating the
international community’s efforts and fulfilling its
political mandate.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
would like to express my appreciation to you, Madam
President, for holding this debate on the situation in
Afghanistan. I would also like to thank Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Afghanistan and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
for his briefing.
I offer my condolences to the people and Government
of Afghanistan for the losses they have incurred in
the terrorist attacks carried out by the Taliban against
them, including the attack on Parliament that took place
earlier today.
The Islamic Republic of Iran has always
supported peace, stability, security and socioeconomic
development in Afghanistan and considers that
country’s security tantamount to security within its
own borders. Our policy of steadfast support for the
Afghan Government has not changed, and will not. We
are confident that the National Unity Government is

15-1871531/34

S/PV.7467

The situation in Afghanistan

best positioned to face the major challenges to peace
and development in Afghanistan, and in that regard we
will spare no effort in lending it our support.
Once again, unfortunately, the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan
(S/2015/422) indicates a deterioration in the country’s
security situation, describing an increase in armed
attacks and violence that is 6 per cent higher than in the
same period in 2014 and 45 per cent higher than in 2013.
Those figures should be a matter of grave concern to all
of us in the region and beyond. Insecurity, instability
and poverty continue to provide fertile ground for the
continued presence in Afghanistan of violent extremist
groups such as the Taliban and Al-Qaida, as well as
of the more recently emerged Daesh and other foreign
terrorist fighters, as the Secretary-General mentions in
the report.
Unfortunately, the report also indicates that the
number of terrorist actions has increased. We regard
activities by all violent extremists in Afghanistan as a
security threat to Iran and the whole region. Iran has
always condemned all violent attacks committed by
terrorist groups, and we reject any cooperation with
them, since we believe that would be counterproductive
in establishing peace in Afghanistan.
On bilateral cooperation, Iran hosted President
Ghani on 19 and 20 April for his first official visit
to Iran and meetings with Supreme Leader Ayatollah
Ali Khamenei and President Hassan Rouhani, during
which the two countries pledged greater cooperation
in the areas of security information-sharing, counternarcotics operations, the sharing of water resources,
and refugees. The two presidents also underlined their
determination to cooperate in fighting extremism and
terrorism throughout the region by eliminating those
menaces.
In the view of the Iranian Government, trade and
transit are two main fields that are ripe for expansion in
Tehran-Kabul relations. The railroad project between
Herat and the city of Khaf in Iran and Iran’s readiness
to make its port facilities in Chahbahar available to
Afghanistan are two major and ongoing projects in
that field. As Afghanistan is a landlocked country, it
is agreed that those two projects are very important.
We need to move forward with those activities in the
framework of the tripartite agreement between India,
Afghanistan and Iran as soon as possible.

32/34

22/06/2015

On counter-narcotics efforts, we are particularly
concerned about the reports indicating an increase in
opium-poppy cultivation in Afghanistan during recent
years. It is a real warning sign for the region and beyond.
That threat should be addressed by the international
community in a very serious manner. In that regard, we
welcome the regional initiatives taken by the countries
of the region, including China, Pakistan, Tajikistan,
Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and Iran, to combat the
production and transfer of narcotics. At the same time,
strong support and commitment by the international
donors, Afghan authorities and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime is essential in order to deter
the menace of drug cultivation and drug trafficking.
Illicit drugs are not only a major social and publichealth challenge, but also, and more importantly, a main
source of income for extremist and terrorist groups.
Therefore, the international community should provide
special support to the triangular cooperation initiative
on countering narcotics agreed by Afghanistan, Iran
and Pakistan. That is a useful initiative that will benefit
Afghanistan as well as transit and destination countries.
Afghan refugees continue to live in Iran. Voluntary
repatriations of Afghan refugees and undocumented
Afghans must be supported through efforts to meet the
reasonable needs of repatriated and repatriating refugees
in Afghanistan, with a view to enabling them to be
permanently reintegrated into their home country. That
underscores the need to mobilize more international
support to ensure the success of repatriation efforts.
We support UNAMA and United Nations
agencies in their efforts to providing development
and reconstruction assistance to Afghanistan through
robust regional engagement. UNAMA should be
further strengthened, given its unique role and
multifaceted functions vis-à-vis the important political
and socioeconomic challenges facing Afghanistan.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Grant (Canada): Today we awoke to news of
the Afghan Parliament, the seat of Afghan democracy,
being under assault by gunmen. Those terrorists killed
Afghan civilians but were denied the ability to murder
Afghan legislators thanks to the brave efforts of Afghan
security forces. On this day, when Afghanistan was to
confirm its newest Defence Minister through its own
elected Parliament, the militants continued to wage their
war against the Afghan people. Yet they were not alone.

15-18715

22/06/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

They came from somewhere. They were sheltered,
trained, sponsored and deployed. In the face of such
violence, Canada continues to stand with the Afghan
people, the vast majority of whom choose modernity
and progress and reject terrorism and corruption.
With the appointment of a full Cabinet, save for
one minister, the formation of the Afghan National
Unity Government of President Ashraf Ghani and
Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah is almost complete.
Attention can now turn to securing Afghanistan’s
stability and sustainability. We understand the
complexities of working within the national unity
structure, but a Government must govern and provide
basic services to its citizenry within its territory.
While many issues must wait for security conditions to
improve, others can and should be addressed without
delay. Central to that, we encourage the President
and the Chief Executive to work together and ensure
effective implementation of vital reforms aimed
at eradicating corruption, improving governance,
reducing poverty, strengthening the economy,
protecting human rights — especially the rights of
women and girls — and improving participation in
politics and society, particularly as they concern women
and minority groups.
We also urge the National Unity Government
to embark on meaningful electoral reform in order
to restore the people’s faith in democracy and
representational government. The absence of reform
is what has caused the delay in the parliamentary
elections. We welcome the fact that the term length for
the lower house of Parliament will be prolonged so as to
maintain its legitimacy and constitutionality.
(spoke in French)
Canada is encouraged by certain signals that the
anti-corruption efforts of the Afghan Government
are beginning to take hold. The 26 April report of the
Independent Joint Anti-Corruption Monitoring and
Evaluation Committee demonstrates that progress
is being made in response to 323 recommendations.
Indeed, 53 recommendations have already been
implemented, and work has started on 149 others. We
encourage further work in that area, as it will assist
the international community in remaining engaged in
Afghanistan.
The law on the elimination of violence against
women was first enacted in 2009, but it is clear that
it falls short of providing the intended protections and

S/PV.7467

assistance to Afghan women and girls. The April 2015
report by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights entitled
“Justice through the Eyes of Women” demonstrates
that much work still remains to be done in order to
implement that law fully. Once final, and with the full
political will of the Afghan Government, the national
action plan for women and peace and security will
become another key piece that will require full and
effective implementation.
The rule of law and accountability must be applied
in Afghanistan. The Government can choose no better
goal than to focus on protecting the human rights of
the most vulnerable in the country. Afghan women and
girls must feel safe in their homes and empowered to
participate fully in their communities. That is especially
true when their rights are violated by Afghan security
forces, Government-affiliated militias or Government
officials.
(spoke in English)
Canada remains committed to Afghanistan. We
are contributing $330 million over three years, starting
in 2015, to help sustain the Afghan National Security
Forces in order to further the aims of stability and
security. Afghanistan remains a country of focus for
Canada’s international development efforts. Between
2014 and 2017, our $227 million investment in the future
of Afghanistan will consolidate and expand the gains
made in maternal, newborn and child health, assist in
providing access to high-quality basic education for
children and youth and embolden women’s civil and
political participation, human rights and economic
empowerment. It will also provide much-needed support
for mine-action activities and for efforts to help Afghan
actors better manage natural and man-made disasters.
We have expressed confidence in the Government’s
reform agenda by investing $20 million towards its fiscal
gap in 2014, of which $10 million were new funds and
$10 million had been re-profiled from the World Bank’s
Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund. We appreciate
the resolve and leadership taken by the National Unity
Government, in line with aid-effectiveness principles,
to prioritize a significant number of short-term reforms.
Canada looks forward to refreshing the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework, based on the reform
programme and the priorities of the National Unity
Government announced at the London Conference on
Afghanistan in December 2014.

15-1871533/34

S/PV.7467

The situation in Afghanistan

(spoke in French)
Canada also welcomed, on 1 January, the start of the
NATO-led Resolute Support Mission and endorsed the
principles of NATO’s enhanced Enduring Partnership
with Afghanistan aimed at extending our cooperation
further during Afghanistan’s Transformation Decade.
I must note, on behalf of Foreign Minister Nicholson
and the Government of Canada, the crucial need to put
an end to violations of Afghanistan’s sovereignty and
to the interference by foreign armed groups — directly
or through proxies, including through the support
of terrorist groups such as the Taliban, the Haqqani
Network, Al-Qaida or Daesh. It is foolish to claim
that the material support for those subversive elements
could ever be justified as a matter of legitimate policy.
Ultimately, in Afghanistan, it is the Afghans who are
paying the ultimate price for that folly.
In the last year we have witnessed the tragic
consequences that occur when a country, operating
behind a thin and flimsy smokescreen of denial, flouts
international law and interferes in the sovereignty of
another to annex territory and foment instability. The
safeguarding of Afghanistan’s sovereignty is no less
important.
(spoke in English)
Without rules, chaos will ensue. Without a
repudiation of the worst practices in foreign policy,
instability will prevail. Absent an end to interference
and violations of sovereignty, the economies of
Afghanistan and the region will remain shackled to
their self-perpetuating poverty.
(spoke in French)
India’s Prime Minister noted during his statement
to the General Assembly (see A/69/PV.15) that there was
no difference between “good terror” and “bad terror”.
Indeed, there is no place in the civilized world for
resorting to terror as a political tool and no cause that
justifies terror as a legitimate means. The promotion
of terror, which is encouraged by some States or that

34/34

22/06/2015

is deeply rooted there, is a betrayal of our international
order. The centres in Quetta, Peshawar and Chitral
where terrorist elements plan, train and deploy terrorist
attacks in Afghanistan cannot continue to be tolerated.
With regard to the region, the neighbouring
countries of Afghanistan must stop using terror for
questionable purposes. We must confront the threat of
terrorism and all its accomplices. Indeed, the countries
that support those groups are not friends of Afghanistan,
of the Afghan people or of those who have gathered in
this Chamber today to renew their efforts to enable the
Afghan people to experience freedom and prosperity.
(spoke in English)
Canada echoes UNAMA’s observation that
Afghans desperately want respite from the ever-present
violence that has such a damaging impact on their lives.
The Government of Afghanistan has committed itself
to achieving peace. We are encouraged by the steps that
the Afghan National Unity Government has taken to
include women in the peace process.
Terrorists can no longer claim to be fighting
foreigners in Afghanistan — instead they are fighting
and murdering Afghans and innocent civilians, like
those at the Afghan Parliament today. They are the main
victims of this conflict. The Taliban and its sponsors
must cease their armed opposition and join the Afghanled and Afghan-owned peace process without further
delay.
Canadians from all walks of life continue to support
Afghans in their aspiration for peace and security.
Canada takes this opportunity to assure the United
Nations that we will work with the Afghan National
Unity Government and the international community
to face the numerous challenges that continue to beset
Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

15-18715
