United Nations

S/PV.5523

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-first year

5523rd meeting
Thursday, 14 September 2006, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Vassilakis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Greece)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayoral
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Biaboroh-Iboro
Ms. Løj
Mr. De La Sablière
Mr. Christian
Mr. Oshima
Mr. Gallardo
Mr. Al-Bader
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Burian
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Mahiga
Mr. Bolton

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 30 of resolution 1546
(2004) (S/2006/706)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

06-52155 (E)

*0652155*

S/PV.5523

The meeting was called to order at 10.35 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 30 of resolution 1546 (2004)
(S/2006/706)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Iraq, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al Bayati
(Iraq), took a seat at the Council table.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Ashraf Jehangir
Qazi, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Iraq.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Qazi to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph
30 of resolution 1546 (2004), contained in document
S/2006/706.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Ashraf Jehangir Qazi, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq, and

2

by Mr. John Bolton, representative of the United
States, on behalf of the multinational force.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ashraf Jehangir Qazi,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Iraq.
Mr. Qazi: The Secretary-General’s report before
the Security Council comes at a time when the
challenges facing the Iraqi people have never appeared
more daunting. As emphasized in the report,
“the time has come for [Iraq’s] constitutionally
elected Government and the international
community to place the safety and welfare of the
Iraqi people at the front and centre of all their
collective efforts” (S/2006/706, para. 69).
The key challenge to the Government of Iraq is to
develop a truly national agenda that is responsive to
the needs and aspirations of all Iraqis. Prime Minister
Al-Maliki has laid out a range of initiatives in his
National Reconciliation Plan and has taken initial steps
to broaden the basis of support for his Government and
to increase the effectiveness of the Iraqi security
forces. The Prime Minister has included the Baghdad
peace initiative in his National Reconciliation Plan,
which is aimed at establishing a basis for mutual trust
and protection among Baghdad’s diverse communities.
It is also encouraging that the Government of Iraq is
seeking to establish a dialogue with those who have
hitherto remained outside the political process. Those
initiatives merit the widest possible support.
Ultimately, lasting improvements in security can
be achieved only through negotiated solutions to
complex political, economic, social and religious
issues that meet the legitimate needs and interests of all
Iraqis.
Although
Iraq’s
problems
have
been
overshadowed in recent months by crises elsewhere in
the region, Iraq today has become one of the most
violent conflict areas in the world. As highlighted in
the report, in many parts of the country insurgent,
militia and terrorist attacks, as well as gross violations
of human rights, have continued to inflict untold
suffering, particularly on innocent civilians, most
notably women, children and minorities. The Iraqi
people have every right to expect their elected leaders
to reverse those worrisome trends, which could
endanger the social and political fabric of the country.
Given Iraq’s importance and potential, its neighbours

06-52155

S/PV.5523

and the wider international community have a vital
stake in helping Iraq become a peaceful, stable and
prosperous partner, fully integrated within the region
and the international community.
The International Compact with Iraq could
become an important vehicle to that end. The Compact,
co-chaired by the Government of Iraq and the United
Nations, is an initiative for a new partnership between
Iraq and the international community. Considerable
preparatory work has been initiated to create an
effective framework for the Compact in which the
Government can develop its economic programme
according to clearly defined priorities, benchmarks and
commitments.
At the preparatory meeting held in Abu Dhabi on
10 September, the Government of Iraq outlined the key
priorities on which to form a Compact, such as
effective public resource management and economic
reform in private sector development and social sector
reforms. The Government of Iraq also pledged its
strong commitment to tackling corruption, creating a
transparent and efficient oil sector, developing a solid
budgetary framework, improving governance and
building and consolidating effective national
institutions. The Government recognized that good
governance and the resolution of security and political
challenges are interlinked and are prerequisites for
progress in all other areas. Participants welcomed the
commitments made by the Government and pledged
their support to work closely with the Government of
Iraq in further developing the Compact, with the
assistance of the United Nations and the World Bank.
For its part, the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) remains fully committed to
support and facilitate the development of the Compact
and to assist in its effective implementation. As the
Council is aware, the Secretary-General has taken the
initiative to convene a high-level meeting at United
Nations Headquarters on 18 September which, in
addition to reviewing progress in the implementation
of resolution 1546 (2004), will review the development
of the International Compact.
The commitments of the Government of Iraq to
make urgent progress on national reconciliation,
political inclusion and consensus-building, in addition
to the Compact, also deserve the full support of the
region and the wider international community.
Fostering national reconciliation and building effective

06-52155

national institutions must be an Iraqi-led and Iraqiowned process. As a key priority, Iraq’s elected
parliament, the Council of Representatives, will need
to decide on a range of legislation to make substantial
parts of Iraq’s Constitution operational. It must also
commence a constitutionally required review process
to strengthen the Constitution as a document that
reflects the national consensus.
The UNAMI Office of Constitutional Support has
facilitated very considerable preparatory work for a
constitutional review process through arranging several
multi-party dialogues between Iraqi political
representatives and constitutional experts, as well as
international experts and consultants on key
constitutional issues. I hope that a constitutional
review will be used as a vehicle to promote national
dialogue and reconciliation. Far from provoking
controversy,
a
well-prepared
and
managed
constitutional review can create a growing repository
of fundamental agreements that, if adhered to, will be a
solid foundation for Iraq’s developing democracy.
The members of the Council of Representatives
bear a historic responsibility to pursue their
constituency interests only in the framework of the
national interest. Their credibility rests on the extent to
which they are able to exercise their individual
judgement to protect Iraq’s newly established national
institutions from being influenced by particular
interests. In all our contacts, UNAMI has therefore
emphasized that Iraq’s new independent institutions
must be protected by effective laws and be enabled to
discharge their responsibilities independently and
impartially, without fear or favour.
Similarly,
good
governance
requires
a
professional and well-managed civil service. Above all,
the effective and transparent delivery of public services
will depend on public confidence in the competence
and accountability of those charged with their
implementation. The Government has initiated
important reforms in key ministries following public
and international concern over the activities of some of
their personnel. It is to be commended for those efforts
and encouraged to ensure that adequate internal
oversight and professional performance maintenance
mechanisms are put in place.
All of that may seem far removed from the daily
realities that face so many Iraqis. As the SecretaryGeneral’s report indicates, one of the key challenges

3

S/PV.5523

remains ensuring greater respect for human rights and
the rule of law. A priority for UNAMI is to assist the
Government in setting up a strong national human
rights protection system by establishing an independent
human rights commission, reinforcing the judiciary and
the capacity of key ministries to promote and protect
human rights, and by supporting non-governmental
organizations and the development of a culture of
human rights. Strengthening human rights and the rule
of law is necessary to create solid foundations for
development and reconstruction efforts. If effective
remedies for present and past crimes remain elusive,
more Iraqis might take the law into their own hands.
Action on transitional justice will complement those
efforts and help pursue with vigour the twin priorities
of national reconciliation and accountability for human
rights violations.
UNAMI is also providing advice to the
Government on the growing problem of internal
displacement, particularly with regard to shelter and
assistance. The report draws attention to the fact that
some 200,000 citizens have been forced to leave their
homes, mainly in Baghdad, since the Samarra incident
of 22 February this year. United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes have nearly depleted their
resources earmarked for emergency humanitarian
activities. Similarly, the Government is constrained in
its ability to adequately respond to the situation. There
is now an urgent need for new funding to meet the
needs of the displaced.
Highlighting those challenges is not to deny that
in a number of areas there has been measurable
progress in the delivery of services. But, as the
Secretary-General has stressed in his report,
“The Iraqi people and their leaders have arrived
at an important crossroads: if they are able to
build firm foundations for the common interest of
all Iraqis, the promise of peace and prosperity
will be within reach. However, if current patterns
of discord and violence prevail for much longer,
there is a grave danger of a breakdown of the
Iraqi State, and potentially of civil war”. (ibid.,
para. 69)
Whatever the challenges of the moment — and
there are many — there is still reason for optimism.
The demonstrated resilience of the Iraqi people in the
face of a succession of calamities and tribulations is
reason enough to know that they will not be defeated in

4

achieving their aspirations. The best option of the
international community is to prove the pessimists
wrong by assisting the people and Government of Iraq
in realizing their national vision.
Accordingly, the time has come to hold focused
discussions on how best to assist Iraq on its way
towards a stable, peaceful and prosperous State. Those
discussions should be as open and inclusive as
possible, to ensure win-win approaches to addressing
critical issues. The Government of Iraq has already
made a bold start in addressing major issues through its
initiatives, programmes and outreach efforts and
through security and economic reforms. The
international community must seize this opportunity to
provide real support for Iraq’s efforts to transform
itself into a participatory and institutionalized
democracy that ensures for all its people the full,
secure and prosperous lives they have struggled and
made sacrifices to achieve. There are few more noble
endeavours to which to devote our energies and
capacities.
UNAMI remains fully committed to play its part
pursuant to its mandates under resolutions 1546 (2004)
and 1700 (2006). I am grateful for the continued
support of the Security Council for UNAMI’s role in
Iraq. A strong consensus in the Council in support of
the new Government of Iraq and the United Nations
role remains essential. While the United Nations
presence and ability to operate effectively remain
severely constrained by the security environment,
UNAMI is exploring how it can maximize its impact
and which tasks can be prioritized. In that regard, I
would like to reiterate my appreciation to Member
States, from both within and outside the Multinational
Force, who support the United Nations in Iraq by
providing military advisers, guard forces and
movement and aviation support. UNAMI will continue
to stand by the people of Iraq and will make every
effort to help generate tangible progress for a
democratic and prosperous Iraq that is at peace with
itself, its neighbours and the wider international
community.
The President: I thank Special Representative
Qazi for his briefing.
Mr. Bolton (United States): As requested by the
Security Council in resolutions 1546 (2004) and 1637
(2005), I am pleased to report on behalf of the 29
countries making up the Multinational Forces-Iraq

06-52155

S/PV.5523

(MNF-I) on the Force’s progress towards fulfilling its
mandate.
This most recent reporting period coincides with
the first 90 days of a democratically elected,
representative unity Government — a substantial break
from Iraq’s past. In early June, the formation of a
national unity Government was completed with the
appointments of the Ministers of Interior, Defence and
State for National Security. On 25 June, Prime Minister
al-Maliki presented a national reconciliation and
dialogue project to the Council of Representatives.
This project seeks to reconcile past inequities and rally
Iraqis around the principle of equality without
sectarian divisions. It looks to establish the basis for
national unity through the democratic process and
create the conditions for Iraq to assume a leading
regional and international role. In addition, the Council
of Representatives adopted an accelerated schedule of
sessions. Most of the 24 Council committees have
formed and named chairs. The Council is making
progress on key legislation required to implement the
provisions of the Iraqi Constitution.
In late July, the Government of Iraq and the
United Nations, with the strong support of the United
States, the United Kingdom and other donor States and
international financial institutions, launched an
International Compact with Iraq. The International
Compact will, over the next five years, bring together
the international community and multilateral
organizations to help Iraq achieve its vision of a united,
federal and democratic country, at peace with its
neighbours and itself, and economically self-sufficient
and prosperous.
Since 2003, there have been significant successes
in the development of legitimate political, economic
and governmental institutions in Iraq. The unfolding of
the democratic electoral process that we have
witnessed in recent years has been a crucial success in
building the foundations of a new, free and democratic
Iraq.
Despite these achievements, obstacles remain.
Setbacks in the level and nature of violence in Iraq
continue to create significant challenges to stability,
reconstruction and transition. Sectarian tensions,
purposely incited by insurgents and extremists,
increased over the last quarter, resulting in increased
killings, kidnappings, attacks on civilians and
increasing numbers of internally displaced persons.

06-52155

Extremists are increasingly interlocked in retaliatory
violence and are seeking to expand their existing areas
of influence. The sustained level of ethno-sectarian
violence is one of the most significant threats to
security and stability in Iraq.
Nonetheless, the Iraqi people continue to reject
overwhelmingly violence as a mean to drive political
change. The international community remains steadfast
with the people of Iraq in their determined drive for a
secure, stable and democratic country. We honour the
memory and sacrifice of all who have lost their lives in
the struggle for a federal, democratic, pluralist and
unified Iraq.
The insurgents, extremists and terrorists remain
capable of and intent on carrying out attacks against
Iraqi civilians, officials and security forces, with the
goal of destabilizing the legitimately elected
Government of Iraq and denying the Iraqi people the
democracy and promise of a better future that they
have chosen the through free and fair elections.
During this period, four of Iraq’s 18 provinces —
Baghdad, Al-Anbar, Salah ad Din and Diyala —
continued to experience more than 81 per cent of all
attacks. Al-Anbar and Baghdad are the most seriously
affected, accounting for 55 per cent of all attacks.
Ninewa and Tamim provinces also saw significant
increases in attacks over the previous quarter. Twelve
provinces, containing more than 50 per cent of the
population, experienced only five per cent of all
attacks.
Attacks and civilian casualties, characterized by
ethno-sectarian attacks and reprisals, have arisen.
Violence escalated, notably in Baghdad, which, as the
political, population and media centre of the country, is
a high-value target for the terrorists. Nonetheless,
terrorists have failed to advance their primary
objectives, which include derailing Iraq’s political
process and widening their political support among the
Iraqi people. The Iraqi people continue to express
confidence in the Iraqi army to provide for their
security and to reject the extremists’ vision of Iraq’s
future.
The average number of weekly attacks increased
15 per cent over the previous reporting period’s
average, and Iraqi casualties increased by 51 per cent
compared to the previous quarter.

5

S/PV.5523

MNF-I and the Iraqi Government continued to
make progress, improving the security environment in
Fallujah and some parts of northern Iraq. The Iraqi
army has taken the lead in more counter-insurgency
operations and assumed security responsibility in more
areas.
The insurgency remains potent and viable,
although its visibility has been overshadowed by the
increase in sectarian violence it has sought foment. The
rising sectarian strife defines the emerging nature of
violence in mid-2006.
On 14 June, Iraqi Prime Minister al-Maliki
announced the Government’s plan to provide improved
security conditions in Baghdad. Operation Together
Forward is an Iraqi-planned and led operation to ensure
the security of Baghdad against attacks designed to
uproot democracy and derail Iraq’s commitment to
progress. As part of this operation, Iraqi police, the
Iraqi army and the national police, supported by the
Multinational
Forces,
increased
patrols
and
checkpoints in all areas of Baghdad, while
concentrating on areas of the city that have witnessed
increases in violence and sectarian killings. Security
forces also worked to block terrorist entry into the
capital city.
In July, during his first visit to the United States,
Prime Minister al-Maliki and President Bush
announced an adjustment to the Baghdad security plan.
Multinational and Iraqi units were repositioned from
less active areas of the country. Although in progress
only a short time, this effort appears to have reduced
Baghdad violence in the month of August. Initial press
reports indicate that these adjustments to the Baghdad
security plan have been welcomed by many Baghdad
residents.
Attacks on Iraq’s infrastructure continue to
adversely affect oil revenues and the availability of
electricity. The average weekly number of attacks on
critical infrastructure continued to decline, decreasing
from five per week to two per week. Although the
number of attacks is decreasing, the essential services
infrastructure will continue to be a high-value target
for enemy elements. The Multinational Force will
continue to work with the Iraqi Government and other
international
partners
to
strengthen
further
infrastructure security.
Although Baghdad remains the focus for
sectarian and terrorist violence in Iraq, violence tied to

6

the rejectionist insurgency, terrorist intimidation,
political and tribal tensions and criminality continues
in other regions. Sectarian violence is gradually
spreading north into Diyala province and Kirkuk, as
Sunni, Shia and Kurdish groups compete for provincial
influence. Conflict in Al-Anbar province remains
centred on the Sunni insurgency. Al-Qaida in Iraq
continues its intimidation to coerce passive Sunni
support, although tribes are pushing back to eject
Al-Qaida and re-establish their dominant role. In the
southern, predominantly Shia region of the country,
political and tribal rivalries are a growing motive
behind violence, particularly in Basra, with limited
anti-Coalition attacks likely undertaken by rogue Shia
militia with Iranian support.
Iraqi security forces continue to grow and
improve and to conduct more and more independent
operations each day. Multinational Forces continue to
train, equip and mentor the ISF and to transition
security responsibilities of areas to the Iraqi forces as
proficiency allows and conditions permit. Transitions
are evaluated area by area and region by region and are
incremental to ensure an effective and successful
transition of security responsibilities.
Iraq achieved another historic milestone on
13 July with the transfer of security responsibility in
Al-Muthana province from MNF-I to the provincial
Governor and civilian-controlled Iraqi police services.
Moreover, since May of 2006, MNF-I has transferred
an additional 10 forward operating bases to the
Government of Iraq. Fifty-one of 110 such bases are
now under Iraqi control. Dhi Qar province appears
ready to assume security independence shortly, and
several other provinces should meet the transition
criteria before the end of the year.
In August, the Fourth Iraqi Army Division
headquarters officially assumed the lead in its area of
responsibility from the 101st Airborne Division. This
achievement represents the halfway mark of our joint
goal of putting all Iraqi security forces in the lead of
coordinating, planning and conducting security
operations in Iraq.
Iraqi security forces are increasingly taking the
lead in operations and assuming primary responsibility
for Iraq’s security, as Iraqi army and police forces
demonstrate an increased capability to plan and
execute counter-insurgency operations.

06-52155

S/PV.5523

As of 4 September, five Iraqi army divisions, 26
brigades, 85 battalions and two national police
battalions assumed lead responsibility for security in
their areas of operation. One hundred and six Iraqi
army combat battalions and 17 strategic infrastructure
battalions are conducting operations at varying levels
of capability. Another three combat battalions are in
the process of forming. In addition, 27 national police
battalions are now operational and active. Although
these units lead security operations, most still receive
support from the multinational forces for their logistics
and operations.
Institutional capability within the ministries of
defence and interior is an increasingly important factor
in the transition to Iraqi security self-reliance. As these
ministries continue to staff, train and equip forces,
efforts are focused on strengthening their capacity to
direct, support and sustain themselves. With more than
two thirds of the Iraqi army combat units now in the
lead, the Multinational Force in Iraq’s focus is shifting
towards helping the Iraqis develop stronger logistics
and command and control capabilities. MNFI will also
continue to help develop and mentor the capacity of the
Ministry of Defence to organize, train, equip and
modernize its forces.
In the first week of September, the Ministry of
Defence and the joint headquarters assumed
operational control of the Iraqi ground forces
command, the Iraqi navy and the Iraqi air force. The
Iraqi ground forces command assumed operational
control of the eighth Iraqi army division. The
Government of Iraq will determine when the command
is ready to assume more control, but the transfer
demonstrates Iraq’s increasing capabilities.
Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Interior
forces now total more than 298,000 trained personnel.
That includes over 115,000 Ministry of Defence
personnel, over 118,000 police and over 65,000 other
Ministry of Interior forces.
The Joint Committee to Achieve Iraqi Security
Self-reliance announced by Prime Minister al-Maliki
and President Bush on 25 July will develop a
conditions-based road map for full transition of
security responsibility.
The United Nations contributions in Iraq are
vital. We urge the United Nations to continue to fulfil
its mandate under resolution 1546 (2004). On
10 August, the Security Council adopted resolution

06-52155

1700 (2006) renewing the mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) for
another 12 months and reaffirming its commitment to
assisting the Iraqi people and Government in building a
productive and prosperous nation.
The role of the United Nations in supporting and
co-chairing the International Compact with Iraq is a
key new component of the role of the United Nations
which was noted in this resolution. The United Nations
now has representatives in its compound in Irbil, and a
United Nations military liaison adviser is currently in
Kirkuk.
Multinational forces, notably the Georgian,
Romanian and South Korean contingents continue to
provide security for the United Nations in Baghdad,
Basra and Irbil, respectively. These troops provide
static site security, reconnaissance, security patrols,
convoy escorts, checkpoints, and, when necessary,
Medevac and emergency evacuation. In addition, Fijian
troops provide static and close-in protection for United
Nations personnel and facilities in Baghdad.
In conclusion, the evolution of a fully free, secure
and prosperous Iraq remains a work in progress.
Training Iraqi security forces to assume primary
responsibility for security is essential. Since taking the
reins of Government in June, Prime Minister
al-Maliki’s Government has taken promising steps
towards national reconciliation as well as economic
development reform and reconstruction through the
launch of the International Compact with Iraq. The
Multinational Force and the international community
stand with the Iraqi people as Prime Minister
al-Maliki’s Government continues its efforts to
promote national dialogue and inclusion and strive
tirelessly to deliver improvements in security, stability,
and quality of life to the Iraqi people.
Iraq’s neighbours share some responsibility for
Iraq’s internal security. Syria should prevent financial
and material support, particularly arms, from entering
Iraq. Iran should stop providing munitions and other
support to extremist groups in Iraq. Iraq’s regional
neighbours should do more to help Iraq’s
democratically elected Government by following
through on pledges to provide economic assistance and
debt relief.
We applaud the Kingdom of Jordan for having
recently sent an ambassador to Baghdad and hope that
other Arab States will soon do the same. Moreover, we

7

S/PV.5523

renew our call to the entire international community to
support Iraq’s sovereign Government and redouble its
assistance efforts.
The Multinational Force and combined MNFInternational Stabilization Force (ISF) efforts continue
to support an environment that will allow Iraq’s
democratically elected Government to succeed and the
Iraqi people to realize a brighter, secure and more
prosperous future.
Mr. Al-Bader (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me first and foremost to thank both Mr. Ashraf Qazi,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Iraq, and Ambassador John Bolton, Permanent
Representative of the United States of America, for
their briefings to the Security Council. Allow me also
to welcome the presence among us of the Ambassador
of Iraq this morning.
Iraq is witnessing considerable progress at the
political, constitutional and democratic levels. The first
Iraqi Government elected under the new Constitution
was formed last June. This represents a culmination of
the transitional political process which is in keeping
with the transitional administrative law approved by
the Security Council in resolution 1546 (2004).
However, this progress has been overshadowed by the
seriousness of the tense internal situation, a lack of
security and widespread violations of human rights due
to intensive violence and grave terrorist acts, making it
incumbent on the Government, indeed the entire Iraqi
people, to make a national dialogue a top priority so as
to promote national reconciliation and overcome the
intercommunal strife and escalating violence which
afflict Iraq and have led to one of the worst
humanitarian crises in the world today.
Nearly 3,000 innocent civilians are falling victim
to violence every month, and thousands more are
wounded. The number of displaced persons this year
has so far reached 200,000. As a result, national,
regional and international efforts must be mobilized in
order to address this priority issue. In that regard, we
look forward to the holding of the Iraq reconciliation
conference, to be held under the auspices of the League
of Arab States and which the United Nations is
currently helping to prepare.
We also hope that the national reconciliation plan
announced by the Iraqi Government in June will be
crowned with success. We are confident that our
brothers in Iraq will overcome the obstacles on the

8

road to stability, because that is the best way to set Iraq
on an irreversible course towards a future of peace and
democracy that allows for the withdrawal of foreign
troops.
In addition to promoting a comprehensive,
participatory and transparent political process that
responds to the aspirations of all communities in Iraq,
the current deteriorating security situation must be
brought under control so as to enable the Iraqi security
forces to take over responsibility for security in the
country, a responsibility now being discharged
primarily by the Multinational Force.
Ensuring that the basic living conditions of the
Iraqi people improve and addressing the deteriorating
humanitarian situation is no less important than
national reconciliation or, indeed, than strengthening
security forces to ensure the stability of Iraq.
In that regard, last July the Iraqi Government and
the United Nations signed the International Compact
with Iraq, headed jointly by the Government of Iraq
and the United Nations. The ministerial meeting to be
convened by the Secretary-General in New York next
week will be an opportunity for the Iraqi Government
to set out its economic programme as well as specific
frameworks for agreement, which we hope will bolster
the Iraqi economy and thereby benefit the Iraqi people.
Such an agreement must be as comprehensive as
possible so as to ensure constructive and interactive
regional and international participation.
In the light of the difficult situation prevailing in
Iraq, the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
has an important and commendable role to play in
providing support, advice and electoral assistance. It
also provides reconstruction, development and
humanitarian assistance, as well as assistance in the
area of human rights. The Mission is also providing the
necessary assistance Iraq needs to enable it to achieve
the fundamental goals of resolution 1546 (2004).
Finally, let me stress the importance of the unity and
cohesion of Iraq.
Mr. Christian (Ghana): I wish to begin by
thanking the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Iraq, Mr. Ashraf Jehangir Qazi, for his
introduction of the report on United Nations activities
in Iraq (S/2006/706). I also thank Ambassador Bolton
for his briefing.

06-52155

S/PV.5523

My delegation notes that further to the launching
of the security plan for Baghdad in June 2006, a second
phase was initiated at the beginning of August 2006
with the redeployment of additional troops of the
Multinational Force to the capital. In addition, the
Government of Iraq made efforts to promote national
reconciliation and dialogue through the unveiling of
the National Reconciliation Plan which, inter alia,
called for a qualified amnesty, the release of detainees
and the reform of the legal and judicial systems. We
hope that those measures will yield positive results and
reduce the level of violence and insecurity that
continues to afflict Iraq.
We welcome the launching of the International
Compact with Iraq, which should provide an effective
framework for Iraq’s economic transformation and its
integration into the regional and global economy. The
Compact
must,
of
necessity,
reflect
the
interconnectedness
of
political
and
security
developments and Iraq’s recovery, which is deemed a
prerequisite for sustainable regional investment. The
active involvement of the United Nations Development
Group, United Nations agencies and other international
multinational
financial
institutions
is
very
commendable; we expect that their guidance and
support will make a large contribution to the
sustainability of the Compact.
It is our expectation that the meeting of Foreign
Ministers on 18 September 2006 to review progress in
the implementation of Security Council resolution
1546 (2004) and to engage in a strategy dialogue on
the future of Iraq will come off successfully. The
meeting should enable the Government of Iraq to
present its programme for the reconstruction of the
country within the framework of the International
Compact and for the United Nations to make concrete
proposals for the consolidation of its assistance to Iraq.
My delegation is pleased to note the ongoing
efforts by the Office of Constitutional Support of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
to play a leading role in promoting dialogue and
building consensus on the constitution of Iraq. It
successfully completed its programme to promote
multiparty dialogue, which engaged senior political
leaders, technocrats and members of civil society in
discussions on critical and relevant issues. Further, we
note that it continued to provide advice and assistance
to the Government and the Council of Representatives

06-52155

on issues relating to the establishment of the
constitutional review committees.
UNAMI’s activities in providing the Government
of Iraq with guidance in addressing the needs of
internally displaced persons as regards shelter and
assistance are commendable. We are also gratified to
note that UNAMI has, through numerous missions and
regular dialogue, helped address the specific needs of
communities in various regions and has enhanced
coordination and interaction between the provincial
and central authorities in meeting reconstruction and
development challenges.
We note with concern, however, that United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes have heavily
depleted the resources earmarked for emergency
humanitarian
activities.
That
inadequacy
is
compounded by the inability of the Government of Iraq
to respond effectively to the plight of the rapidly
increasing number of internally displaced persons. The
request by the Secretary-General for substantial new
funding to meet the needs of those persons should
therefore be urgently addressed to enable the United
Nations to contribute effectively to lessening the
suffering of those persons.
The acute human rights and humanitarian crisis in
Iraq, characterized by indiscriminate killings, targeted
attacks, crime and corruption, is indeed very worrying
and of great concern to my delegation. It is apparent
that State institutions are unable to protect individuals
or address the needs of victims of gross human rights
violations, who include women, children and members
of ethnic and religious minorities. Indeed, the
Secretary-General’s report notes that the impact of
violence on those vulnerable persons has been
particularly alarming.
We acknowledge the work done by UNAMI in
the development of a strong human rights system and
wish to encourage it to sustain its support for the Iraqi
authorities in the drafting of a law for the
establishment of a national human rights commission,
and also to the Rule of Law Sector Working Group to
develop a comprehensive strategy on the rule of law.
We wish to place on record the exemplary work
being done in Iraq by the United Nations, whose staff
are often exposed to considerable risks. The presence
of the United Nations and its ability to operate
effectively in Iraq remain constrained, but the
Organization has been able to provide assistance to the

9

S/PV.5523

Government of Iraq in the several key areas I have
mentioned. We hope that UNAMI will soon develop
adequate self-reliance mechanisms that will enable it to
operate safely and therefore more effectively in Iraq.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq,
Mr. Qazi, and Ambassador Bolton of the United States
for their briefings. We have carefully read the report
submitted by Secretary-General Annan (S/2006/706),
which contains comprehensive information and
profound analysis. We endorse his observations.
Over the past three years, the Iraqi people have
achieved important results in the process of political
transition. Within three years, they have held two
national
elections,
formulated
a
permanent
constitution, carried out a constitutional referendum
and established a democratically elected Government.
That series of achievements has fully demonstrated the
Iraqi people’s strong aspirations and firm commitment
to peace, democracy and prosperity. We hope that the
hard-working and courageous Iraqi people can, through
their tireless efforts, overcome all of the obstacles in
their path and achieve peace and stability at an early
date.
As noted in the report of the Secretary-General,
Iraq is currently at a critical crossroads and is still
faced with formidable political, security and economic
challenges. In the political field, the new Iraqi
Government should do all it can to continue to enhance
the inclusiveness of the political process, promote
national reconciliation and appropriately settle
outstanding problems concerning the constitution.
We welcome the National Reconciliation Plan
promulgated by Prime Minister al-Maliki and hope that
Iraq’s various sectarian factions and ethnic groups will
unite and cooperate with the Government in effectively
implementing the Plan, and that they will settle their
differences and deepen their common understanding
through dialogue. In that respect, we support the
initiative of the League of Arab States to convene a
conference on Iraqi national accord.
In the area of security, the Iraqi Government and
the Multinational Force must try hard to eradicate the
root causes of instability. Security and stability
represent the biggest challenges now facing the Iraqi
Government. They are also fundamental for the future
political, economic and social development of Iraq.

10

Military means alone cannot deal with the root causes
of the problem. They rather tend to exacerbate the
vicious cycle of violence and produce more terror and
instability. We note that the Iraqi Government and the
Multinational Force have taken some measures to
improve the security situation. We hope that the new
Government of Iraq will gradually take more
responsibility for maintaining security within the
country, creating an environment that is favourable to
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
militias and improving law and order so as to win the
support of the people. In the economic area, the Iraqi
Government must try hard to achieve early results in
economic reconstruction and to effectively improve the
living standards of the Iraqi people.
We welcome the International Compact with Iraq
jointly launched by Iraq and the United Nations. We
hope that the process will enable Iraq and the
international community to establish a new kind of
cooperative partnership. The International Compact
should be broadly inclusive and should ensure that all
parties participate in the economic reconstruction of
Iraq in an equal and fair manner in order to jointly help
Iraq resolve its practical difficulties in a constructive
spirit.
There can be no political and economic
reconstruction of Iraq without the support and
assistance of the international community. We
appreciate the important role played by the United
Nations in Iraq and we welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s initiative of convening a ministerial meeting
on the question of Iraq. We hope that that meeting will
help consolidate the common understanding of the
international community and speed up the political and
economic reconstruction of Iraq in a joint effort to help
Iraq build a better future.
Mr. Biaboroh-Iboro (Congo) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, my delegation would like to thank you
for having organized today’s debate on the situation in
Iraq, in the light of recent developments and of the
activities undertaken by the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and the Multinational Force
(MNF). We should also like to extend our thanks to
Mr. Qazi for his presentation and to the delegation of
the United States of America, speaking on behalf of the
MNF.
The security situation in Iraq remains essentially
very worrying, in spite of developments in the political

06-52155

S/PV.5523

process in this country, in particular with regard to the
establishment of the institutional framework and of the
organs that are charged with leading the various
institutions. It is true that encouraging initiatives have
been undertaken by the constitutionally elected Iraqi
Government with the support of Iraq’s partners at both
regional and international level. My delegation
welcomed the complete formation of the Iraqi
Government and, in particular, the allocation of key
posts in the Ministries of Defence, the Interior and
National Security. We also welcomed the launching of
the Baghdad security plan which is currently in the
second phase of its implementation.
However, and unfortunately, violence and
violation of human rights among the Iraqi population
remain endemic. Today, Iraq is one of the most
dangerous places in the world. Each day brings its
share of murders, assassinations, abductions and acts of
intercommunity violence. In terms of violence, horror
vies with fanaticism to a point where the country is on
the brink of a widespread civil war which would,
without any doubt, undermine all the efforts
undertaken for Iraq’s recovery and may well
discourage the international community.
That is precisely the aim sought by the
proponents of terror and of chaos. At this crucial
moment in Iraq’s history, the international community
must provide itself with the means to support the
efforts undertaken by the Iraqi Government to gain
control over the situation as a whole, including
national reconciliation.
Only national reconciliation, particularly through
the seeking of consensus and by way of inclusive
dialogue, can offer a way out of this crisis, as no
military solution will bring peace or security to Iraq.
All the champions of peace and security in Iraq must
be fully involved and must engage fully and in good
faith in seeking to build national reconciliation and the
essential confidence-building measures. To that end,
my delegation urges the League of Arab States to
convene as soon as possible the proposed conference
on Iraqi national reconciliation.
The development and the presentation of the
International Compact for Iraq must also contribute
towards the restoration of peace and security. That
ambitious plan, co-sponsored by the Iraqi Government
and by the United Nations, deserves the firm and
resolved support of the international community for its

06-52155

implementation. We look forward with interest to the
conclusions of the meeting on 18 September, convened
to that effect by the Secretary-General.
To conclude, my delegation commends the efforts
undertaken by the UNAMI and by the soldiers of the
MNF working in a very difficult situation.
Mr. De La Sablière (France) (spoke in French): I
should like to thank Mr. Ashraf Qazi for his
presentation of the Secretary-General’s report and
Ambassador John Bolton for his briefing on the
activities of the Multinational Force (MNF). I should
like to make the following comments.
My delegation fully shares the observation of the
Secretary-General that Iraq remains at a crossroads.
The security situation is of deep concern and the risk of
its deterioration cannot be ruled out. But the prospects
for an improvement still exist and, in spite of
considerable difficulties, it is not too late to get out of
the spiral and to chart a course for emergency from the
crisis.
The Government of Iraq, whose establishment we
welcomed last May, has undertaken significant and
commendable efforts, at the political level with the
National Reconciliation Plan, at the security level with
its plan to re-establish security in Baghdad, in terms of
reform, with its resolve to undertake substantial
legislative work in parliament and also, now, with the
initiative for the International Compact for Iraq.
Still, as I have already indicated, the challenges
remain huge. As was noted by the Secretary-General,
Iraq has become one of the most violent conflict zones
in the world. Intercommunity tensions have risen to a
dangerous level to the point of breeding fears of a civil
war in the country. The number of civilian casualties
has grown considerably — more than 100 per day —
almost 6,500 killed in June and July 2006 alone, and
the number of displaced persons has also increased
substantially.
In this context, France wishes to reiterate its
support for the Government of Iraq and for its Prime
Minister, and to say once again that we are prepared to
develop cooperation with him and to remain at Iraq’s
side.
We welcome Iraq’s will to provide a
comprehensive response to the challenges posed and,
as the Secretary-General said, there will not just be a
single military response to the challenges, but several

11

S/PV.5523

types of responses to be found. At first, there will be a
political response, which is the purpose of the National
Reconciliation Plan launched by the Prime Minister. In
that regard, we believe that only a truly inclusive
process will help isolate extremist groups and bring
back into the political arena those communities that
have been excluded from it. I also note the SecretaryGeneral’s appeal to undertake a constitutional review
process well aware though we are of the difficulty of
the exercise.
And then there is the response to the legitimate
security needs of Iraqis. There must be an end to the
violence that has increased and that my country
condemns in the firmest possible fashion. The training
of Iraqi security forces remains a priority, as does the
handling of the phenomenon of militia which, the
Secretary-General’s report notes, continues to grow.
My delegation likewise remains convinced that a
clear and agreed timeline for the withdrawal of foreign
forces is indispensable to allow the Iraqis to persevere
in a context of responsibility and sovereignty.
There is also the response to the challenges of
reconstruction and the expectations of the population.
That is the purpose of the International Compact with
Iraq. France, with the European Union, welcomed the
launching of that project and expressed our willingness
to support it. It was in that spirit that the French
Minister for Foreign Affairs attended the meeting of
the preparatory group in Abu Dhabi.
But my country also stressed the importance of
establishing this project around a number of principles.
This process must be conducted by Iraqis and be based
on the mobilization of their efforts and their resources,
in particular, their natural resources; the political and
security conditions necessary for any substantial
reform must be created; and this new contract must
establish a genuine partnership on the basis of wellidentified criteria and the implementation of the
principle of conditionality.
Furthermore, there must be the support of the
regional and international communities. Any political
solution presupposes that the major players involved,
particularly among Iraq’s neighbours, should be
associated in one way or other with the efforts to
promote the unity and integrity of that country. In that
regard, my delegation thanks the Secretary-General for
his willingness to convene a meeting on those items on
18 September.

12

To conclude, I should like to commend UNAMI
for its remarkable work and to recall our support for
United Nations action in Iraq, not only at the political
level, to support the process of dialogue and national
reconciliation and to contribute to full respect for
human rights in the country, but also at the economic
level, to coordinate international assistance and to
promote implementation of the Compact initiative.
The Secretary-General’s report usefully recalls
both the difficulties and the hopes and outlines the
prospects. The priority remains re-establishing an
independent, sovereign, pluralistic and united Iraq that
is able to find its way back to the path of stability and
regain its standing in the community of nations. The
international community must continue to play its role
of helping Iraq and its leaders move forward in that
direction. France intends to do its utmost in support of
those efforts.
In that connection, my country expresses the hope
that the initiative undertaken by the League of Arab
States with the support of the United Nations will soon
lead to the convening of a conference on an inter-Iraqi
national accord.
Ms. Løj (Denmark): I would like to thank Special
Representative Qazi for his statement, and Ambassador
Bolton for his statement on behalf of the Multinational
Force.
As described in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2006/706), the situation in Iraq continues to present
challenges to the international community on several
fronts. However, we remain convinced that the visions
and the political initiative of the new Government,
combined with the continued commitment of the
international community, will make the International
Compact with Iraq a success and will provide the
people of Iraq with a fresh start.
The security situation remains very serious in
several parts of Iraq. Indeed, the Secretary-General
mentions “growing violence and insecurity”,
particularly in Baghdad and in the southern and
western regions. In the Secretary-General’s view, the
current level of violence is likely to continue for some
time. The sectarian nature of much of the violence is a
cause for particular concern. In addition, the report
describes an acute human rights and humanitarian
crisis and State institutions unable to protect
individuals from gross human rights violations. The

06-52155

S/PV.5523

number of internally displaced Iraqis more than
doubled during the reporting period.
Humanitarian needs must be urgently addressed.
Human rights must be respected, and the Iraqi
Government should give due attention to the situation.
Clearly, the influence of sectarian-based militias
cannot be curbed by security operations alone.
Reconciliation, economic development and a wellfunctioning independent police force and justice
system must form part of the solution.
We welcome the fact that the Iraqi Government is
determined to improve the situation through a series of
political initiatives, notably the peace and
reconciliation plan launched in June. The plan contains
the right elements, but implementation remains key. In
the national reconciliation process, the United Nations
and the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) should play a pivotal role.
We are pleased to see the increasing capabilities
among the Iraqi security forces, which made possible
the transfer of security responsibility in Al-Muthana
province this summer. With stronger and more
confident national forces, and with the continued
support of the Multinational Force, we hope that the
level of violence will decrease and that the main focus
will be directed towards the reconstruction of Iraq.
The launch of the Iraq Compact, on 27 July,
marks a new departure for international support for the
realization of the Iraqi Government’s plans for a
united, federal and democratic society at peace with its
neighbours. Denmark stands ready to contribute to that
process.
Denmark intends to maintain its presence in Iraq
as long as our support is requested by the Iraqi
Government and the United Nations and as long as we
believe that our presence is meaningful. This spring,
the Danish Parliament decided to extend the mandate
of the Danish troops in Iraq until the end of June 2007.
Denmark’s involvement in Iraq also comprises
reconstruction and humanitarian assistance; we have
committed approximately $90 million.
As I have mentioned, Denmark supports an
expansion of the United Nations role in Iraq. Denmark
continues to provide direct support to UNAMI.
Effective in mid-November, we have decided to
comply with a UNAMI request to deploy a C-130
aircraft suitable for both passengers and cargo.

06-52155

Iraq is at a critical juncture. The political process
mapped out in resolution 1546 (2004) is almost
complete, and a broad-based and constitutionally
elected Government has been formed. However, many
serious challenges remain. With the full backing of the
international community, the Iraq Compact will, in the
coming weeks and months, provide vital support for
the development of a peaceful, democratic and
prosperous Iraq.
Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom thanks Special Representative Qazi
and Ambassador Bolton for the updates they provided
to the Council this morning. It is also a pleasure to
welcome the presence of Ambassador Al Bayati at this
meeting.
We commend the ongoing work of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) on the
ground in support of the Government and the people of
Iraq. The importance of that work across the political,
reconstruction and human rights spheres cannot be
overstated. As the latest report on UNAMI’s activities
(S/2006/706) notes, the Iraqi people, through their
active participation in two elections, concerning the
constitutional
process
and
the
constitutional
referendum, have made clear their commitment to a
peaceful, democratic and prosperous Iraq.
But while there has been impressive political
progress, culminating in the formation of a
Government of National Unity, there remain serious
challenges on the ground. The UNAMI report
highlights some of those concerns: cementing national
reconciliation, curbing the influence of militias,
tackling sectarian violence and terrorism, promoting
reconstruction and development and improving human
rights.
Tackling the high level of violence and the grave
human toll it inflicts must be the top priority. We
welcome Prime Minister al-Maliki’s Baghdad security
plan, implemented in conjunction with the
Multinational Force, which is beginning to have an
impact on the ground. We also welcome the progress
made in training and equipping Iraqi forces, as well as
the historic handover of security responsibilities in
Al-Muthana and the decision to transfer responsibility
in Dhi Qar. We look forward to the Iraqi Government
building on that progress, in particular by beginning
rapidly to tackle militia issues.

13

S/PV.5523

Together with measures to improve security
directly, there must be parallel progress on the
political, economic and human rights tracks. The
United Kingdom welcomes Prime Minister al-Maliki’s
National Reconciliation Plan, as well as the United
Nations contribution in support of it. It is crucial that
Iraq’s political leaders of all communities should come
together to promote stability, security and economic
development. It is also crucial that the international
community continue and intensify its support for Iraq’s
Government at this critical juncture. The International
Compact provides such a vehicle, allowing the Iraqi
Government to set out a compelling vision for the
country and permitting the international community to
lend concrete assistance in implementing that vision.
We therefore look forward to the high-level
meeting to be held in New York on 18 September to
help take this work forward. We hope that the Compact
in turn will lead to the international community and the
region deepening their engagement with Iraq.
We also look forward to the planned Arab League
conference in support of Prime Minister al-Maliki’s
efforts to promote reconciliation. We hope it might be
possible for it to take place soon, and so we call on
Iraq’s neighbours, in particular Syria and Iran, to do
more to prevent the flow into Iraq of arms and materiel
that promote the insurgency inside Iraq.
Iraq’s future is our shared concern. Helping Iraq
achieve a stable, democratic and prosperous future is in
all our interests.
Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, on behalf of my delegation, we would like
to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Iraq, Mr. Ashraf Jehangir Qazi, for his
presentation and to take this opportunity to convey to
him our deep appreciation for his work and that of all
the personnel of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq, who are working in extremely difficult
conditions. I also thank Ambassador Bolton for his
presentation on behalf of the Multinational Force.
We regret to note once again that, in spite of the
conclusion of the political transition process and the
formation of a constitutional Iraqi Government, the
security and human rights situation in Iraq continues to
deteriorate. There is nothing to indicate that the
violence will not continue over forthcoming months,
and we believe that there have been serious warnings
regarding the risk of a civil war. We are convinced that

14

there are no military solutions to the many challenges
facing Iraq and that any strategy aimed at rebuilding
and stabilizing the situation in this country must
address the root causes of the crisis. The Government
of Iraq must work with a sense of urgency to overcome
the increasingly apparent divisions among Iraqi ethnic
and other groups.
The national reconciliation process is of utmost
urgency and priority. In this context, we reiterate our
support for the National Reconciliation Plan put
forward by Prime Minister al-Maliki. Likewise, we
support the initiative of the League of Arab States to
convene a conference on Iraqi national accord, which
unfortunately has been postponed on several occasions.
We also feel it is essential that the constitutional
review process be launched; and in this regard we also
have to note that almost four months after the
inauguration of the Government there has been no
progress. On this point, I would like to ask Mr. Qazi if
this delay will affect the time line envisaged in article
137 of the Iraqi constitution. I would like to know his
views on the prospects for constitutional reform, in
particular taking into account the latest developments
in the Iraqi Council of Representatives.
The main victims of violence in Iraq are innocent
civilians. As the Secretary-General highlights in his
report (S/2006/706), an average of 100 individuals are
killed per day, and Iraq has thus become one of the
most violent conflict zones in the world.
I would like to reiterate Argentina’s serious
concern regarding the human rights situation in Iraq.
There is evidence of a pattern of generalized violations
of human rights throughout the territory of that
country. Sectarian violence is an increasing threat to
the people of Iraq and has reached alarming levels.
Armed militia activity is a cause for particular concern,
because it breeds a vicious cycle of attacks, reprisals
and revenge, which largely contribute to the current
climate of insecurity and fear among the civilian
population. The Government of Iraq should take
decisive measures to confront this problem and to
protect the lives of civilians. It should also foster an
environment
conducive
to
the
disarming,
demobilization and reintegration of all militias.
We recall what we have said on previous
occasions: the Multinational Force and the Iraqi
security forces bear primary responsibility for fully
respecting the provisions of human rights law and of

06-52155

S/PV.5523

international humanitarian law. Thousands of detainees
are being held without due process, and conditions in
many prisons are unacceptable. We expect all these
matters to be fully investigated and those responsible
for these human rights violations to be brought to
justice.
Argentina also welcomes the progress that has
been made in developing the International Compact
with Iraq, and we hope that this will be formally
presented before the end of 2006. We also welcome the
Secretary-General’s announcement of the conference to
take place on 18 September 2006.
To conclude, I would like to underline that, after
the conclusion of the transitional process, efforts aimed
at stabilizing the situation in Iraq have reached an
important juncture. The options are clear: either the
solid foundation is established for a democratic,
sovereign and unified Iraq at peace with itself, or we
may witness the disintegration of the Iraqi State and,
possibly, civil war. That would be extremely
detrimental not only to the Iraqi people but also to the
region and the international community in general.
Argentina will continue to support long-term solutions
in this respect that will help to prevent the latter
scenario from occurring.
Mr. Burian (Slovakia): At the outset, I would
like to join previous speakers in thanking Mr. Qazi for
his briefing and for introducing the current report of
the Secretary-General (S/2006/706). I wish to take this
opportunity to commend him in person, and to
commend all United Nations staff and United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq personnel for the
outstanding work they are carrying out in and for Iraq
under truly difficult circumstances. I also thank
Ambassador Bolton for his report on behalf of the
countries that make up the Multinational Force, among
them my own country, Slovakia.
As we heard in the briefing, the situation in Iraq
remains complex and requires thorough attention, as
well as the unconditional support and assistance of the
international community. This is crucial, particularly at
this critical time when the Iraqi people and their
leaders have arrived at an important crossroads that
could lead the country either to peace and prosperity
or, as a worst case scenario, towards dangerous State
breakdown and potential civil war.
During the past three years, the people and the
leaders of Iraq have clearly demonstrated their

06-52155

commitment and support to their country’s political
transition and have made many sacrifices to achieve
that goal. As a result, Iraq has successfully met the
benchmarks endorsed by resolution 1546 (2004), and
the first constitutionally elected Government is now in
place, complete and fully operational. Such an historic
achievement should not be wasted. We deem as top
priorities for the Government of Iraq the further
strengthening of democratic institutions; effective
implementation of governmental programmes, mainly
in the security and human rights areas; and the
adoption of concrete measures aimed at addressing the
basic needs, concerns and aspirations of all Iraq’s
communities and constituencies and at the rapid
improvement of their welfare and basic living
conditions. Such steps towards stabilization are
urgently needed in order to foster the further successful
transition of Iraq. We remain convinced that a
sustained
inter-communal
and
intra-communal
dialogue, national reconciliation, constitutional review
and implementation of the constitution represent
important confidence-building measures that can help
Iraq to tackle its many challenges.
Furthermore,
the
Secretary-General
has
emphasized in his report that the Iraqi Government
must do everything possible to progressively foster an
environment conducive to the demobilization,
disarming and reintegration of militias. In our view,
strong United Nations involvement in Iraq’s
transitional process remains instrumental. We therefore
welcome the recent initiative of the Government of
Iraq to launch the International Compact for a new
partnership with the international community, as well
as the United Nations decision to provide strong
support in developing it.
Along with the European Union, Slovakia
expresses its readiness to participate actively and
constructively in the process. We also stress the
importance of Iraqi ownership of the process of
developing the Compact and the broad involvement of
the international community and the active
participation of neighbours and partners in the region.
We also welcome and support the Secretary-General’s
initiative to convene a meeting of the foreign ministers
of relevant parties in New York on 18 September to
engage in a strategy dialogue on the future of Iraq.
Regrettably, the level of violence and insecurity
continues to rise in many areas of Iraq, and the
mounting civilian casualties remain a source of our

15

S/PV.5523

constant concern. The tangible improvement of the
overall security situation in the country thus remains a
key objective.
Similarly, we remain deeply concerned about the
human rights situation in Iraq. The effects of the
ongoing insurgency, sectarian violence, revenge attacks
and militia activities are alarming. We feel that further
measures are needed to reinforce the justice and
security systems and to develop a robust human rights
agenda in order not only to protect the lives of innocent
civilians, but also to hold fully accountable those
responsible for violent acts.
In that regard, we
welcome the ongoing efforts of the Government of Iraq
to take concrete measures to improve security, such as
the Baghdad security plan, as well as Prime Minister
Al-Maliki’s
decision
to
launch
a
National
Reconciliation Plan.
We also fully support and encourage effective
regional engagement between Iraq and its neighbours.
We welcome the continuing efforts and progress made
by the League of Arab States to convene a conference
on Iraqi national accord. Contributing to and
promoting durable peace and stability will benefit not
only that country, but also its immediate neighbours, as
well as the wider region. In that regard, we feel that
mainly Iraq’s immediate neighbours could and should
play a more active role in promoting and supporting its
peace and stability, including by preventing the flow of
arms into Iraq and also by cutting off support for
various militias. We regard their contribution to the
success of Iraq’s stabilization as instrumental and
decisive. Hence, we hope that Iraq will receive from its
neighbours the required cooperation and assistance,
and we encourage Iraq’s neighbours to act in that
positive direction, which will ultimately be useful to
them as well as to the wider region.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that Slovakia
remains fully committed to the political and economic
transition of Iraq. We are one of the troop-contributing
countries to the Multinational Force and we stand
ready to assist Iraq in financial and material ways and
means as well.
Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): I
thank Mr. Qazi, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Iraq, for his quarterly report on
the activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI), and Ambassador Bolton of the

16

United States for the update on the operations of the
Multinational Force.
My delegation wishes to commend UNAMI,
together with the other United Nations agencies, on
their dedicated service in Iraq under very challenging
circumstances. We are particularly grateful to the
Governments of Japan and Denmark, which have
provided much needed logistical support to UNAMI.
We are grateful to note that UNAMI and other United
Nations agencies have been able to continue to provide
and coordinate access and delivery of basic services,
including trying to restore public infrastructure and
offering much needed assistance to internally displaced
persons, whose numbers have been increasing as the
violence continues to escalate.
The high level of violence in Iraq is very
worrying, as it has affected all sections of the
population and resulted in death, damage to property,
extreme hardship and suffering. Particularly disturbing
to us is the fact that innocent civilians, including
women and children, have fallen victim to the attacks.
The violence bears all the hallmarks of both terrorism
and anarchism. Reports of the police picking up many
bodies in Baghdad and its suburbs that have been
bound, tortured and shot execution-style are now a
daily affair. The urgency of restoring order, especially
in Baghdad, cannot be overemphasized. Iraqis
are
desperate for peace. Every action possible must be
taken to help them prevent what is now sectarian strife
from degenerating into anarchy and civil war.
We commend the Iraqi security forces, in
collaboration with the Multinational Force, for recently
launching a major security crackdown in Baghdad that
has resulted in a slight decrease in violence. Deliberate
and determined efforts must continue in order to free
the country from the armed gangs and militias that are
roaming around, terrorizing, kidnapping and killing
innocent people.
There is an urgent need to stand up to and
eradicate the extreme violence in Iraq and to replace it
with democracy, liberty and the rule of law. That will
require sustained engagement by the security forces.
We must also pay tribute to the resilience of the Iraqi
people and to the manner in which they are bearing
their current trials and tribulations.
As for the Government of Iraq, it has to continue
to demonstrate that it is effective, and it must be
applauded for some of its valiant performances on the

06-52155

S/PV.5523

security front. We also welcome and encourage the
political efforts that Prime Minister Nouri Al-Maliki
has been making in the search for peace in Iraq,
including paying visits to neighbouring countries to
seek their support. Of particular significance was his
very recent visit to Iran, which ended in important
pronouncements on and commitments to goodneighbourliness and peace. On the domestic front, the
need for national reconciliation through inclusive
dialogue cannot be overemphasized. It is the linchpin
of a political solution and future stability.
The preparatory work for the International
Compact for Iraq, under the auspices of the
Government of Iraq and the United Nations, is timely
and deserves full support from funding institutions and
donor countries. In spite of its economic focus, the Iraq
Compact may turn out to be an effective engine for the
restoration of peace and stability in the country. The
restoration of Iraq’s war-torn and shattered
infrastructure will require an enabling environment
addressing the underlying causes of violence,
insecurity and gross violations of human rights.
Prime
Minister
Al-Maliki’s
National
Reconciliation Plan also deserves support. There is a
need for genuine efforts at consensus-building among
the many diverse communities in the country. An Iraqiled initiative can make an important contribution to the
Plan and has the potential to make it a real success.
Care must be taken to fully involve community and
religious leaders in promoting reconciliation.
We appreciate the support that the Multinational
Force is providing to the United Nations in Iraq
through the provision of military advisers, guard forces
and movement and aviation support. We also commend
the efforts of the Arab countries, which have been
organizing vital meetings aimed at restoring peace and
development in Iraq.
Iraq continues to face formidable political,
security and economic challenges at a time of new
political and security crises in the region, which
invariably have a negative impact on the internal
situation in Iraq. It is necessary for the building of
security forces that they continue to receive outside
assistance until they are ready to take full control of
the security of their country. Iraq shall also continue to
rely heavily on varied forms of support from the
international community. We urge generous and timely

06-52155

support from all those in a position to assist the warravaged country.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2006/706) on the work of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), which
provides a detailed analysis of the situation in Iraq and
the complex highs and lows of the Iraqi political
process at the current stage. We fully share the
assessments and conclusions of the Secretary-General.
I should also like to thank Mr. Qazi, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq, for
the briefing he has given us clarifying events in the
country. We should also like to express our
appreciation to Ambassador Bolton for his report on
the security situation in Iraq.
The process of transforming Iraq is indeed very
complex and is being pursued against a backdrop of
continuous violence, extremist attacks and a lack of
consensus in society on most key issues of significance
there. We support the efforts of the Government of Iraq
to normalize the situation. Along with the SecretaryGeneral, we therefore welcome such actions on the part
of the Government of Iraq as the peace initiative for
Baghdad and the National Reconciliation Plan
proposed by Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki, both of
which are designed to ensure the unity of Iraqi society.
We are closely following the discussion in Iraq on
federalizing the country. It is our view that Iraq can
select the form of government that meets the interests
of its multi-ethnic people, including a federal State.
Another important issue is the foreign military
presence in the territory of Iraq. We are convinced that
that presence must not be permanent or indefinite. In
the end, all foreign troops must completely leave Iraqi
territory and transfer responsibility for events there to
the national army and the police.
Combating terrorism in Iraq solely through the
use of force is short-sighted. A much more realistic
approach is to achieve national consensus and
reconciliation through a broad-based political dialogue.
We welcome the assistance that the United Nations is
providing in that regard to political factions in the
country. We believe it is necessary to continue to have
the most active participation of the United Nations and
UNAMI in the Iraqi political process.

17

S/PV.5523

With regard to the International Compact, in
principle we agree with the relevant provisions
contained in the report of the Secretary-General on that
matter. We believe the Compact should serve the longterm work of economic recovery and rehabilitation of
an independent Iraq.
Mr. Gallardo (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to thank Mr. Qazi, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq, for
his presentation. We also thank Ambassador John
Bolton, Permanent Representative of the United States,
for his report on the Multinational Force.
Security and instability problems continue to be
fundamental issues for the new Iraqi Government. The
Government’s recent decisions and plans to expand
dialogue and encourage reconciliation are positive
steps. We hope that they will be effective in addressing
the current challenges in Iraq.
We support efforts conducive to the restoration of
trust among all groups in Iraq, whether domestic
initiatives or efforts by organizations such as the
League of Arab States, including those that may be
made by the Organization of the Islamic Conference.
All such initiatives can contribute to an inclusive
dialogue, help to reduce internal tensions in Iraq and
strengthen national reconciliation. Cooperation among
neighbouring countries to improve Iraq’s stability is
also important.
With regard to the security situation, Peru rejects
all terrorist attacks carried out in Iraq. We also
condemn sectarian violence and acts of intolerance. We
are confident that the Government of Iraq can make
progress in implementing policies that will strengthen
the central control of the public authorities and provide
security and protection for all its citizens. In that
connection, we believe that those responsible for
security in Iraq must carry out their duties by
protecting civilians and respecting the rule of law and
human rights. We also hope to see the speedy
establishment of such institutions as a national human
rights commission, which will help to strengthen the
rule of law and the judicial system.
The task of rebuilding Iraq is another core
challenge for the Iraqi Government. The international
community must continue its support and efforts to
achieve substantial progress in Iraq’s economic
recovery and reintegration into the global economy. In

18

that connection, there is no doubt that the Compact
with Iraq is the most solid initiative to that end.
Finally, my delegation would like to express its
support for the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI). We believe that UNAMI must continue
to provide support — in accordance with its mandates
and as the situation on the ground permits — in all
areas that can contribute to strengthening political and
legal stability and institutional and economic recovery,
as well as to provide humanitarian assistance and
promote the observance of human rights in Iraq.
Mr. Oshima (Japan): I join others in thanking
Mr. Qazi, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Iraq, and Mr. John Bolton for their
informative briefings on the activities of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and the
Multinational Force (MNF), respectively.
Over the past several months, we have witnessed
serious developments and crises in the Middle East,
including in Lebanon and Gaza. However, those
challenges in no way diminish the importance of Iraq
for the overall stability of the region and beyond.
Iraq has completed the political process
prescribed in resolution 1546 (2004). It is our hope that
Iraq will continue on the path towards a free,
democratic and stable State promoting national
reconciliation and development as a prosperous and
responsible member of the international community
under a democratically elected Government.
Meanwhile, the Iraqi Government and people are
confronted daily with mounting complex internal
challenges in achieving national reconciliation,
ensuring security in communities and promoting the
country’s reconstruction and development. Of
particularly serious concern is the continuing
widespread violence, sectarian and inter-communal
tensions and clashes and terrorist attacks and
insurgency, with many civilian and other killings and
casualties compounding instability and causing largescale displacement of people. As Iraqi society
undergoes such a severe and difficult phase, and while
acknowledging the importance of respecting ownership
of the process by the Iraqi people themselves in
establishing responsible governance in the pursuit of
its new nation-building, the broader international
community must also continue to provide the necessary
support, in partnership with the Iraqi Government and
people, to assist them in their efforts. In that regard, we

06-52155

S/PV.5523

welcome the ministerial-level meeting on Iraq to be
held on 18 September under the auspices of the United
Nations.
Japan commends the important role that UNAMI
has been playing in the Iraq process in the current
challenging circumstances and expresses once again its
strong support for the Mission’s activities.
In the current situation, we place importance on
three areas of UNAMI’s activities, based on its
mandate: first, the promotion of national dialogue;
secondly, assistance in the constitutional and electoral
processes; and, thirdly, facilitation of coordination and
delivery of reconstruction and development assistance.
We believe that combined efforts in those three areas
will help promote national reconciliation and improve
the living conditions of the Iraqi people, which, in turn,
will lead to a de-escalation of tensions in society.
Political stability and an improvement in security
are prerequisites for economic reconstruction, and
these elements are closely interlinked. We therefore
appreciate the efforts made by the Iraqi Government to
promote the national reconciliation plan and the
Baghdad security plan. We welcome the fact that Iraqi
forces are gradually assuming responsibility for
security in substantial areas of the country thanks to
the progress being made in the training of the Iraqi
security forces by the Multinational Force.
Furthermore, Japan appreciates the growing ability of
those two forces to work together to ensure security in
the country.
We welcome the fact that the Iraqi Government
played a lead role in convening the conference on
national reconciliation in Baghdad, recognizing the
need for regional support to achieve peace and stability
in the country. We welcome also the initiative and
efforts of the Arab League for the convening of a
conference on Iraqi national accord.
In addition, we welcome, as another positive step,
the visit of Prime Minister Al-Maliki of Iraq to some of
the neighbouring countries, namely Saudi Arabia,
Kuwait, the United Arab Emirates and Iran, with a
view to ensuring good-neighbourliness and stability in
the country and the region.
Japan fully supports the International Compact
with Iraq. We support the strong role that the United
Nations, through UNAMI, has been playing as co-chair

06-52155

of the Compact process. Japan hopes that the Compact
will be finalized and adopted by the end of this year.
After determining that the expected goals had
been achieved, with the formation of the new
Government in Iraq, Japan concluded its humanitarian
and reconstruction support activities through the
deployment of its Self-Defence Force contingents as
part of the Multinational Force. Japan, however,
maintains its commitment and engagement to provide
the needed support in Iraq, mainly in the following
three areas.
The first area is airlift support activities through
Japan’s air Self-Defence Force assets, for the benefit of
the United Nations and the Multinational Force. We are
pleased to report that the airlift services for the
transportation of United Nations personnel and cargo
began recently, and we hope that it will be useful in
supporting the expansion of UNAMI’s presence and its
activities inside Iraq.
The second area is support for Iraqi
reconstruction. To date, various projects worth $1.5
billion in grant aid have been completed, mainly for
reconstruction of basic infrastructure and improvement
of security. Additional aid of up to $3.5 billion through
a soft loan window, largely for further improvement of
infrastructure and other economic and social projects,
is in the pipeline for steady implementation.
The third and final area involves engagement in
the Iraq Compact. We believe that the success of this
process requires the following three elements: first,
that the Iraqi Government should assume full
ownership of the process and clearly articulate its
national vision; secondly, major donors and regional
partners should be fully engaged in the Compact, so
that the broader international community can assist
Iraq effectively and in close partnership and
coordination; and, thirdly, a framework should be
established under the Compact that will set tangible
goals towards political and economic stability.
To that end, Japan will continue to actively and
continuously engage itself in the Compact process, in
cooperation with the United Nations and other parties.
Japan’s policy on support and assistance to Iraq
was conveyed recently to Prime Minister Al-Maliki and
Foreign Minister Zebari by Foreign Minister Aso
during his visit to Baghdad last month.

19

S/PV.5523

In conclusion, let me reiterate that Japan stands
ready to continue to work with the people and the
Government of Iraq and the rest of the international
community so that Iraq can overcome its present
difficulties and make strides towards becoming a
democratic and stable State.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Greece.
I, too, would like to thank Mr. Qazi, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
comprehensive briefing on the latest developments in
Iraq and for presenting the Secretary-General’s latest
report on the activities of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). I should like
also to thank Ambassador John Bolton for having
provided us with an update on the activities of the
Multinational Force in Iraq.
The Secretary-General’s report and Ambassador
Qazi’s briefing are a stark reminder that a great deal
remains to be done in Iraq. Indeed, we see that the
significant achievements of the political transition
process have not yet been translated into an improved
security and human rights situation. The levels of
violence in Iraq and their devastating toll on the
civilian population is cause for alarm.
The Government of Iraq, with the help of the
international community and with the constructive
support of its neighbours, should do all it can to
address the needs of the Iraqi people, in terms of both
living conditions and also, and more importantly, of
safeguarding their security and fundamental human
rights.
We fully support the tremendous work that is
being done by Ambassador Qazi and by the United
Nations in Iraq and are aware of the very difficult
circumstances within which they are operating. We
agree with many of the observations contained in the
Secretary-General’s report and concur with the
recommendations contained therein regarding the role
of the United Nations in Iraq.
Greece will continue to support Iraq’s efforts,
both bilaterally and through the European Union, and
will work towards the establishment of a peaceful,
stable, democratic, pluralist and unified Iraq in which
there is full respect for human rights and the rule of
law.

20

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I call on the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ashraf Qazi, for his presentation and
Ambassador Bolton for his report on behalf of the
Multinational Force. I thank also the members of the
Council for their statements regarding the situation in
Iraq.
At the outset, allow me to express the
appreciation of the Iraqi Government and the Iraqi
people for the efforts of the United Nations, through
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ashraf Qazi, and the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) in providing humanitarian
assistance in the field of development and
reconstruction. We value the important role of UNAMI
and its assistance in promoting the success of the
political and constitutional process in Iraq, which
ended with the election of a constitutional Government
that is to lead Iraq for the next four years.
Based on the important role of UNAMI, the Iraqi
Government had requested the extension of its
mandate, and on 10 August 2006 the Security Council
adopted resolution 1700 (2006), which extended the
mandate of UNAMI for another year. The Iraqi
Government and the Iraqi people still need the efforts
of the Mission, and we look forward to seeing a vital
role for UNAMI during the next constitutional review
in enhancing the dialogue and national reconciliation
and in developing the Iraqi election institutions. That
would require an effective presence of the United
Nations and an increase in its working staff in Iraq. We
continue to believe that the number of United Nations
staff members working in Iraq is too low, despite our
understanding of the reasons underlying the hesitation
of the United Nations.
With the full formation of the elected Iraqi
Government on 8 June 2006, Iraq has entered a new
phase, having achieved a milestone in the political and
constitutional process, pursuant to the time frame
determined by resolution 1546 (2004). The Iraqi
Government has determined that its priority is to
confront the enormous challenges in the political,
economic and security fields. Due to the fact that those
fields are strongly interrelated, it is not possible to
focus on one field while overlooking the others. The

06-52155

S/PV.5523

Iraqi Government therefore decided without any
hesitation to address those fields on equal footing.
In the political field, the Iraqi Government
believes that the political process should be
comprehensive and should include all components of
Iraqi society. The Government announced on 25 June
2006 a National Reconciliation Plan aimed at
addressing the most important issues that are
preventing the achievement of internal peace. It will
secure the integration of the entire Iraqi people and all
its entities into the core of the political process. The
Government has established the High Committee for
National Reconciliation to meet that responsibility and
to provide all the requirements necessary for its
success.
In the security field, and parallel to the process of
national reconciliation, the Iraqi Government has
adopted a security plan which aims at securing the
capital, Baghdad. Iraqi forces, with the support of the
Multinational Force, are responsible for implementing
the plan. The past 30 days have witnessed a decrease in
the level of violence and crime in comparison to the
two months of June and July 2006.
As for development and reconstruction, it is
necessary to give more importance to the International
Compact with Iraq. The Iraqi Government has
requested the support of the United Nations in that
regard, because the International Compact is based on
a sustainable partnership between the Iraqi
Government and the international community in
overcoming the challenges that emerged during the
political and economic transitional phase.
Iraq expects a commitment from the international
community to provide the resources required to address
the main priorities. Iraq also requires the support of the
international community to rebuild its economy and
link it to the regional and international economy. That
would assist Iraq in achieving its national perspective
during the next five years. According to the Compact,
Iraq is committed to combat corruption, to establish an
effective and transparent oil sector and to enhance its
national institutions. Towards that end, a preparatory
group has been established, co-chaired by Iraq and the
United Nations, to prepare for a high-level
international conference to endorse the partnership and
secure its fulfilment. The preparatory group met on
10 September in Abu Dhabi.

06-52155

The Secretary-General will hold a meeting for the
ministers of foreign affairs of the concerned countries
on 18 September to review progress in the
implementation of resolution 1546 (2004), and to
review the development of the International Compact
with Iraq. During that meeting, Iraq will present its
national perspective within the framework of the
International Compact. The Compact will add
additional obligations for UNAMI and the agencies
operating in Iraq. There is no doubt that the
International Reconstruction Fund Facility for Iraq and
the donors will play a fundamental role in assisting the
Government of Iraq to achieve its national perspective.
My Government believes that the International
Compact with Iraq provides an opportunity for donor
countries to fulfil the commitments which they have
taken upon themselves at the Madrid and other
conferences. We urge the friendly and brotherly
countries that have not yet supported the reconstruction
of Iraq to do so through initiatives to support the
International Compact with Iraq.
Much has been said lately of Iraq sliding into a
civil war. We must admit that Iraq witnessed an
increase in violent activities and sectarian tension
during the period prior to the launching of the security
plan that was adopted by the Iraqi Government. Those
criminal acts might have caused a kind of internal
displacement, which, in fact, is the objective of the
terrorists and the remnants of the previous regime who
seek the failure of the building of a new democratic
Iraqi State based on good governance and respect for
human rights.
The aim of the terrorists is to return to the
dictatorship period and to confiscate the freedom of the
Iraqi people. However, the Government and the people
of Iraq are determined to defeat the terrorists. Those
who are familiar with the heritage, social solidarity and
interrelated familial ties among the components of
Iraqi society will realize that the terrorist objective is
not achievable. The Iraqi people have succeeded in
recent years in completing the political and
constitutional
process,
despite
the
difficult
circumstances. They will also succeed in their battle
for dialogue, national reconciliation and the defeat of
the terrorists, and in maintaining their unity.
The report of the Secretary-General before the
Council (S/2006/706) refers to the critical crisis in
human rights in Iraq, which has also been referred to

21

S/PV.5523

by several human rights organizations and the media.
The reports have received careful attention from my
Government, as well as from the political and religious
leadership in Iraq.
Yes, there have been several incidents that prove
the violation of human rights in Iraq, but we believe
that we should look at them within the context of the
security situation as a whole. Those incidents do not
indicate, by any means, a systematic violation; rather,
they are individual, separate incidents that take place
due to the sectarian tension in the country. The
Government of Iraq is attempting to put an end to those
incidents, investigate the causes and bring the
perpetrators to justice. Finally, we have to take into
consideration the fact that the political leaders and the
Iraqi people in all sectors were victims of grave
systematic violations of human rights during the
previous regime. That fact would certainly compel the
Government to put the issue of the promotion and
protection of human rights in Iraq at the top of its
priorities.
Let me conclude by saying that, while we
commend the role of the United Nations in Iraq
through UNAMI and have requested the extension of
the Mission’s mandate, Iraq is still bound by other
mandates, the justification of which no longer exists
due to changes in the circumstances that led to their
establishment. Here, I refer to the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC). Thus, we believe, along with many
others, including all the members of the Security
Council, that the time has come to revisit or review the
mandate of UNMOVIC with the objective of ending it
fully.
The President: I shall now give the floor to
Mr. Qazi to respond to comments that have been made.
Mr. Qazi: First of all I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and the representatives of countries
members of the Security Council and of the
Government of Iraq for their very constructive
contributions, and for their very encouraging remarks
with regard to the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI).
I would like to say that we are at a very critical
time. It is always a critical time in Iraq, but right now
the possibilities for progress in a challenging
environment are there, and we need to avail ourselves
of them. It is true that many achievements of the

22

benchmarks of resolution 1546 (2004) — in fact, they
were all achieved — have not yet translated into the
security situation that we all aspire to achieve. But the
newly elected Government, headed by Prime Minister
al-Maliki, has indeed taken a number of extremely
important initiatives, not least, the National
Reconciliation Plan and the decision to launch, in
partnership with the United Nations, the International
Compact with Iraq.
Those are comprehensive initiatives and it is our
privilege to be associated with them — with the
National Reconciliation Plan and the individual
programmes that comprise it, including the Baghdad
peace initiative and the International Compact with
Iraq.
The first preparatory group meeting, which took
place in Abu Dhabi recently, was a very constructive
event. We look forward to the high-level meeting on
18 September, to enable a broader range of
participation from countries which were not at Abu
Dhabi and whose views will be valued and taken into
account.
There is no doubt that the major challenge that
confronts Iraq today is the degree of violence which
comes from a number of sources — the sectarian
violence, insurgency and terrorist violence, and,
indeed, organized criminal violence. Collectively, they
add up to an extremely challenging environment, to put
it mildly, for the average Iraqi in those areas where this
violence is particularly acute. I say that because one
often loses sight that there are many areas in Iraq
which, mercifully, are free from significant levels of
violence. Nonetheless, the fact that this violence does
affect Baghdad impacts upon the perceptions with
respect to Iraq. The United Nations will always be
ready to lend support, at the request of the Government
of Iraq and with the support of the international
community as expressed by the Security Council, and
to continue its work.
We are now under the extended mandate which
includes responsibilities for the International Compact,
looking for the realization of an Iraqi national vision
which will entail its transformation and integration into
the global and regional economy. The regional
countries will have a critically important role here. It is
very encouraging to see the emphasis that has been
placed on this fact and on the extremely important role
that regional countries and organizations like the

06-52155

S/PV.5523

League of Arab States and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference have to play with respect to future
developments in Iraq.
The United Nations was proud to assist the
League of Arab States in its preparatory conference in
Cairo last November and will continue to associate
itself with those efforts.
It remains for me to thank all participants for
their constructive comments and advice. I would like
also to thank the Government of Iraq for all the
assistance that it has extended to the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Iraq (UNAMI) in order to make
our work possible. I would also like to thank all the

member countries of the Multinational Force in Iraq,
which have also enabled us to do our work in Iraq. We
also wish to thank the Governments of Japan and of
Denmark, which have assisted us with respect to
aircraft, because mobility has been an issue which has
hampered us. Their contributions are valued and
appreciated and will facilitate our work.
The President: I thank Mr. Qazi for the
clarifications he has provided.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m.

06-52155

23
