TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

nd
MEETING: 30 JUNE 1969
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1482) . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . , . , . , . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda , . . . . . . . , . . . . I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . , . . I . . . .
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 26 June 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/9284) . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1482

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , ,) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of fhe Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in whkh it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Secutity Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-SECOND MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 30 June 1969, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. Miguel SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay).

proposed by the representative of Jordan in his letter of 26
June 1969 [S/9284], in. which he requests an urgent
meeting of the Security Council to consider matters
concerning Jerusalem.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.

4. In this connexion I should like to remind the Council
that on 11 April 1969 the Secretary-General submitted to
the Security Council a report under Security Council
resolution 252 (1968) of 21 May 1968. The Secretary
General’s report was circulated as document S/9149.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l482)
1. Adoption of the agenda.

5. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): Mr. President, permit me at
the very outset to express the gratitude of the Government
of Jordan to you and to the members of the Security
Council for holding this urgent meeting to consider a
situation threatening not only the political, social and
economic Iife of Christian and Moslem Jordanian citizens in
Jerusalem, but also international peace and security.

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 26 June 1969 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/9284).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

6. We have had many legitimate reasons for coming to the
Security Council during recent weeks and months because
of repeated Israeli violations of the Armistice Agreement
and the cease-fire. We have not done so, owing to our
genuine desire to create conditions conducive to the success
of the peaceful efforts of the four permanent members of
the Security Council. This attitude on the part of Jordan
has in no way deterred the Israelis from committing acts of
aggression nor diminished their determination to achieve
their plan for expansion.

The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 26 June IQ69 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/9284)
1. PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): In accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the normal
practice I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the representatives of Jordan and Israel to participate
in this debate, without the right to vote.

7. However, we are compelled to come to the Council now
over the issue of Jerusalem.
8. At this stage we shall ‘not put before the Council a
summary of the daily Israeli attacks on Jordan. All of YOU
are acquainted with that picture. You know that the
shellingof our villages,whether in the north or in the
south, deepinside the eastbank of Jordan,hasbecomea
daily practice of the Israeliarmedforces. YOU are aware
that hardly a day passesin which the peoplesof the
occupied territories do not experienceacts of imprisonment, torture and bloodshed.With every passingday there
1smore destruction andinsecurity, and every Israeli act of
lawlessness
warrantsSecurity Councilaction.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. H. El-Farra
(Jordan) and Mr. Y Tekoah (Israel) took places ut the
Security Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I wish to
inform the Council that I have just received a request from
the representative of the United Arab Republic that he be
permitted to participate in this debate, without the right to
vote. Following the normal practice, and with the consent
of the Council, I propose to invite,the representative of the
United Arab Republic to take a place at the Security
Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. MA. El KOV
(United Arab Republic) took a place at the Security
Council table.

9. But it is not my intention today to deal with those
problems,important asthey are. Rather, the complaintI
am bringing to the Council dealsonly with the Jerusalem
area.

3. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): The L&urity Council will now begin its consideration of the item

lo. On 21 May 1968 the Security Council adopted
resolution 252 (1968) declaringall legislativeand adminis1

trative measures and actions taken by Israel, including
expropriation of land and properties thereon, which tend to
change the legal status of Jerusalem as invalid.and calling
urgently upon Israel to rescind all such measures already
taken and to desist forthwith from taking any further
action which would tend to change the status of Jerusalem.

provision which stated that the area to be part of Israeli
jurisdiction should cover the Old City, Sur Baher, all the
way up to Kdandia Airport, together with Mount S~copus
and its vicinity, as well as Hanina and Shufat. This was
affirmed by the Secretary-General’s personal represent:ative,
Mr. Thalmann, in document S/8146, paragraph 35 of which
reads as follows: “The Israeli authorities stated unequivocally that the process of integration wasirreversible and
not negotiable.”

11. The Security Council action on this question followed
the Assembly resolutions 2253 (ES-V) and 2254 (ES-V),
which were adopted by a vote of 99 members of the
General Assembly in favour.

18. That previous legislation paved the way to the total
annexation of Jerusalem. I hardly need to remind this body
that all these laws were declared invalid on 4 and 14 July
1967 by the Assembly in its resolution 2253 (ES-V) and
2254 (ES-V). That was the legislation dealing with the
geographic annexation of Arab Jerusalem. The new ilegislation, therefore, waspromulgated to accomplish yet another
phase of annexation. It deals with the casesof the property
and residence as well as the economic life of the Arab
citizens of Jerusalem. The new law tends to subordinate all
previous Arab life to Israeli laws and gradually to liqluidate
the whole Arab character of the city.

12. What has been the Israeli reaction to the first part of
the Security Council resolution? The Israeli authorities
have not rescinded any of the steps taken. Their defiance
has continued and more violations have been committed.
13. When the British writer Michael Adams asked a senior
Israeli diplomat whether he felt any alarm at the fact that
by imposing Jewish rule on Arab Jerusalelil they were
defying the almost unanimous weight of the world community, the Israeli diplomat replied: “Not at all. What does
a United Nations resolution amount to? Ninety-nine votes,
ninety-nine speeches.What else? “’

19. It may be helpful at this stage to examine some of the
provisions of the new law. Article 2, concerning the holy
places, makes no reference to Waqf-a Waqf is a charitable
endowment-and thus subjects Waqf property to the
provisions of the new law and makes it liable t.o the
arbitrary measures contained therein. Al-Waqf is a Moslem
religious institution, which owns much of East Jerusalem’s
land, By not expressly placing Waqf outside the jurisdiction
of the Absentee Law, the Israeli authorities are leaving all
these properties subject to confiscation. This is all the more
the case since they are not inhabited by the owners.

14. The Secretary-General, in his report /S/9149] presented to the Council on 11 April 1969, informed the
Council that he had addressed a note to the Permanent
Representative of Israel requesting the information necessary in the discharge of the reporting responsibilities placed
upon the Secretary-General under resolution 252 (1968).
The Israeli reply wasnegative.
15. In the second part of the resolution, the Israeli
authorities were requested to desist forthwith from taking
any further action which would tend to change the status
of Jerusalem. On 23 August 1968, the Israeli authorities
passed and published the so-called “Legal and Administrative Matters (Regulation) Law” [S/9149], the clear
object of which is to complete the process of Israel’s
unilateral annexation of Jerusalem and other surrounding
areas. Thus the Israeli reaction to the Security Council
decision and to the Assembly resolutions was-contemptuous of the Organ&ration and of world public opinon.

20. Articles 3 to 5 deal with the status of non-ablsentee‘*‘;
property in Arab Jerusalem. This has been applied with a
double standard: one for the Arabs-and indeed for all the *
Gentiles-and another for the Israelis of the Jewish1faith.
The provisions of the 1950 Israeli Absentee Law are still
applicable to the Arabs of Jerusalem and those outside the
City, It may be recalled that under that law, anyone not
living in Israel in 1950 was classed as legally absent, and his
movable and immovable property was placed under the
“Custodian of Absentee Property”.

16. It will be recalled that on 28 June 1967 the Israeli
Minister of the Interior issued a decree illegally extending
the municipal boundaries of Jerusaleni to include many
villages and neighbouring areas totally inhabited and owned
by Christian and Moslem Jordanians. The clear intention
behind that decree wasto create a greater Jerusalem to be
part of a greater Israel, in conformity with Israeli plans. The
new law confirmed the previous territorial annexation and
the Israeli objective to absorb the Arab population and
institutions of Jerusalem into Israeli life, to change the
character of Jerusalem completely and to create another
fait accompli.

21. With eviction on political grounds a daily occurrence
in occupied Jerusalem, the Israelis are able to confiscate
Jordanian property under the law. Israel is using the same
law which allowed it to take over land and property of the
1948 refugeesto take the property of people who currently
own land or businesses in Jerusalem but reside in towns
adjacent to it.
22. On the other hand, Israelis are no longer regalrded as
absentees. Articles 2 to 5 permit Israelis in Jerusalem or
anywhere in Israel to possessproperty they owned in Arab
Jerusalem prior to 1948. However, no similar provision was
made to safeguard the rights of the Arab citizens in the
Israeli sector of the City and some of their property has
actually been confiscated. Such measures show clear religious discrimination and emphasize that many privileges
accorded to a person of the Jewish faith are denied to a
Christian or a Moslem. It must be emphasized at this

17. The new law cannot be separated from the law of 27
June 1967, called “The Law and Administration Ordinance”, which provided that the law, jurisdiction and
administration of Israel should apply in any area of the
State designated by order of the Government. It should not
and cannot be isolated from the order issued under that
2

juncture that Jewish ownership in the Old City of Jerusalem is not more then 26 per cent and the rest is legally
Arab.

against the will of the people and forced upon them; it
contravenes the Security Council jurisprudence on the
subject, violates international law and utterly disregards the
Geneva Convention. It is null and void and has no legal
basis.

23. Articles 6 to 11 are designed to make it impossible for
Arab, business to maintain its independence and identity:
instead they are intended to subjugate Arab business to
discriminatory Israeli legislation and to forcible amalgamation with Israeli firms and institutions. It is apparent that
the Israelis will settle for nothing less than the complete
absorption of the political, economic, cultural and other
aspects of the Holy City into Israeli life.

28. As I said earlier, it was not our intention to come to
the Council at this stage. We certainly did not want to
prejudice the peaceful efforts of the four permanent
members of this body. I want to emphasize again that it has
been the policy of my Government to support any peaceful
efforts and it is for this reason that my Government has
never hesitated to co-operate with the United Nations
efforts. We have certainly co-operated with the four
permanent members of the Security Council, whose efforts
so far, unfortunately, have not led to any,promising results,
and we have encouraged every effort intended to bring
about peace in our troubled area. This is in marked contrast
to the attitude of Israel. The Prime Minister, Mrs. Meir, has
repeatedly said, and I am quoting here from The JerusuZem
Post, weekly edition, of 2 June 1969: “Israel must be the
sole judge of what is best for its security. We must live
within borders that we, and we alone, consider secure.” It is
fpr this reason that Israel has done everything to try to
undermine United Nations efforts to achieve peace and it
has even used these efforts to commit one aggression after
another, in order to present the world with a fait accompli.
Indeed, what is the use of talking about peace when Israel
has been violating the cease-fire every day, defying the will
of the Council and ignoring the United Nations directives?
The Powers that have special responsibilities under the
Charter must insist on putting an end to this contemptuous
Israeli behaviour. Peace efforts have been used as a shield
for continued Israeli aggression.

24. Thus, while difficulties confront the Arab businessman, amalgamation, affiliation or transfer to Israeli firms is
made so easy as to be routine. In other words, the
Jordanian citizens of Jerusalem are expected under the law
to substitute a vested right derived from legislation under
Jordanian laws for a mere privilege which may be denied at
the discretion of the Israeli authorities.
25. There are more than 180 Arab companies and firms in
Jerusalem, employing more than 4,000 persons. According
to the articles in question, these firms, which represent the
economic life of Arab Jerusalem, are faced with two
alternatives: either to be totally absorbed into the Israeli
economy, which wasrejected repeatedly by the owners and
shareholders and declared invalid by United Nations resolutions, or to be automatically liquidated. Many of these
companies to be registered in Jerusalem have branches, as
well as owners and shareholders, in different parts of
Jordan. The effect of this law could accomplish complete
severance of those ielations and isolate Jerusalem from the
.rest of Jordan. The ultimate objective is to force the
/ non-Jews to leave their homes and their beloved and sacred
city. Many prominent members of the businesscommunity,
including members of the boards of directors of Jerusalem
firms, have already been expelled or forced to leave on
flimsy pretexts so that they could be considered absentees.

29. Immediately after the Israeli occupation of Jerusalem,
a special United Nations effort for peace began. At the
same time, however, Israel began its wanton course of
destruction to change the whole character of the Old City
and the way of life of its inhabitants. Leaders including the
Mayor of Jerusalem, doctors, lawyers and businessmen,
have been expelied, hundreds of houses have been razed,
thousands of persons evicted.

26. Articles 12-14 apply these provisions to Arab cooperative societies and their conversion into IsraeIi societies. Article 15 denies to professionals and craftsmen the
right to practise their professions and vocations unless they
have submitted to the requirement of the Labour Organization Law of 1968 and obtained an Israeli licence. According
t,o the new law, no man will be able to earn income through
his profession unless his ties are not with his Arab brothers
but with Israel. The loyalty of these Jordanian citizens to
their country will thus cost them their means of livelihood.

30. According to information received this week, the
Israeli authorities have given notice to the occupants of
Anata refugee camp, located north of Jerusalem, to the
effect that they should prepare for being moved to the
vicinity of Jericho within a few days. Our information is
that this second forced evacuation of these people is a
prelude to their expulsion to the east bank of Jordan. More
evictions, more deportations and more destruction are
going on-and they talk about bringing peace to the land of
peace.

27. I could go on citing more examples about the vicious
designs behind these invalid provisions enacted by Israel in
utter disregard of the will of the Security Council. I could
cite Article 16, which forces lawyers and judges against
their own free will to become members of the Israeli Bar
Association. This measure is mainly intended to extract
loyalty to Israeli objectives. I could cite article 17, which
requires any patent, whether pertaining to an invention or
to a commercial enterprise, to be registered in accordance
with Israeli laws-an article which is designed to obliterate
the Arab character in favour of an Israeli one and, above all,
to protect Israeli patents. However, I will not dwell on this
analysis any further. Suffice it to say that this whole law is

31. On 18 June 1968 my Government sent a strong letter
of protest [S/8642] to the Secretary-General about the
expropriation by Israel of land and buildings within the old
city. At that time this blitzkrieg on this small community
-and it is worth remembering that the whole of the old
walled city of Jerusalem is less than one square miIe in
area-accounted for the destruction of over 100 buildings
and the expropriation of some 116 dunums of land,
including 700 buildings varying from two to four storeys
3

hi&i. The Arabs owned 595 of those buildings. The
expropriated real estate included 437 places of businessand
1,048 apartments housing over 5,000 people.

more than 8000 units will be built in the eastern-Arabpart of Jerusalem. The Israeli newspaper Lamerhav of 2,4
June 196%so far I have been quoting Only Israeli
sources-reported that in a meeting which went on until the
early hours of the morning, the Israeli Municipal Council of
Jerusalem approved a new zoning map projecting the city’s
development up to the year 1985. That new map envisions
Jerusalem as the centre of a district extending from
Bethlehem to Ramallah. It includes plans for a new
transportation network, a central commercial district, the
preservation of natural sites and a projected population of
half a million Israelis.

32. Recently the pace has begun to quicken again. Only
this week The New York Tz’mes reported that the Israelis
were in the process of evicting more people living in
buildings near the Wailing Wall. Those buildings include a
mosque, a religious court and a Moslem school, which
apparently are now to be used as billets for the Israeli
security forces.
33. The arrogance with which the Israeli ,authorities have
gone about their destructive work is unbelievable. Whole
families have been evicted with little or no warning;
journalists have been barred from the scene;force has been
used; and then, to add insult to injury, the most patently
bogus reasons have been given to cloak those illegal acts.
There is talk of the buildings being “threats to public
security” because of cracks in their foundations, and SOon.
But I ask you: is it not surprising that houses which have
been standing for centuries-some of them since the
thirteenth century-should suddenly, after two years of
Israeli occupation, develop large cracks and be declared a
threat to public safety? The truth of the matter is that the
Israelis wanted to raze those buildings in order to lay bare a
possible extension of the Wailing Wall and they used
trumped-up excusesto get their way. It is the same with the
digging which is at present going on near the Al Aqsa
Mosque. What will happen, may I ask, when cracks are
discovered there too-as doubtless, if permitted, they will
be? Will this unique mosque, Al Aqsa, the third holiest in
all Islam, be condemned and demolished as well? Where
will the line be drawn? Or will Israel be left to continue
unhampered its “excavations”, its looting and wanton
destruction, its desecration of holy places and its gross
disregard for the rights of others? Only the members
around this table can answerthose questions. And time, I
remind you, gentlemen, is running short. Even while we
talk bulldozers are at work in the old city of Jerusalem. I
have submitted in a letter [S/9289/ this morning some
pictures showing the process of Israeli bulldozing of Arab
houses and Moslem shrines in Jerusalem adjacent to the
western wall of Al Aqsa. This is a processstarting with the
old Maghrabi quarter and ending with the plaza facing the
Walling Wall. These pictures speak for themselves. They will
be before members within a short time-if not today,
perhaps tomorrow morning. This is a living example of
cruelty and injustice. While we talk, bulldozers are at work
in the old city of Jerusalem. The Israelis talk of “restoration”. But restoration of what? Jerusalem at the time of
Iting Solomon? If they continue with this mad, wholly
illegal enterprise, they will not only wreak havoc in the lives
of thousands but also destroy the essential character of one
of the most beautiful and holy places in the world.

35. May I remind the members of the Council that :in
1964 the same City Council had approved a zoning map
which included the Arab sector of the city-even before the
occupation of June 1967. Now Israel is making plans for
the whole area extending from Bethlehem to Ramallah.
And the Israelis do not hide the fact that Jewish habitation
in the Old City will one day extend beyond their quarter.
The Israeli Mayor spoke openly of “thinning out”-those
are his words-the population of the Old City. What is
indicated in those declarations is that deportation, expul.
sion and demolition of Arab houses lie within a planned
policy that is being systematically applied by the Israeli
authorities.
36. It is not only Arab lands that have been affected in
this area by those vicious Israeli designs. Members of the
World Lutheran Federation were faced with an Israeli
attempt to seize a large slice of their property near the
Augusta Victoria Hospital. They protested and resisted, but
the problem is still there. Certainly, the Israelis can hardly
plead the case of public safety or historical restoration in
this instance.
37. It is worth noting at this point that Israel’s destructive
actions in East Jerusalem have not gone without protest by
the inhabitants. There have been strikes and demonstrations, and even more violent acts of resistance which make
a mockery of Mr. Eban’s statement in a letter to the
Security Council dated 30 April 1968, that “where there
has been hostile separation there is now harmonious union;
where there has been constant threat of violence there is
now civic peace.” /S/8.565/ The Israeli Mayor, Mr. Kollek,
was more revealing of the reality of the situation when he
admitted that the integration of the two sectors of
Jerusalem had been “a total failure”.

Council the Israelis’ expropriation of 827 acres in east

38. In June 1967 Israel, after enlarging the municipal area
of Jerusalem, adopted legislation for the annexation of the
city; and although the United Nations condemned this act,
declared it invalid and asked Israel to rescind it, Israel failed
to do so. In May of last year the Security Council
considered this matter, deplored the Israeli non-compliance,
declared all Israeli measures invalid and called for compliance. Israel’s answer was more violations, more acts of
defiance and the new legislation I have mentioned.

Jerusalem and its northern suburbs. The Israelis are now
speeding up the completion of their project-and here I am
quoting from an article entitled “The Re-Peopling of
Jerusalem” published in east Jerusalem-to add 40,000
Jewish settlers to the population in the next four years. The
Israeli newspaperHnuretz of 24 March 1969 reported that

39. The new law aims at destroying the Arab character of
the city, absorbing Arab life and institutions into Israeli life
and obliterating all traces of Arab economic independence.
We submit that it is not possible to create the necessary
precondition for peace-I repeat, with all due respect, we

34. Earlier I brought to the attention of the Security

4

submit that it is not possible to create the necessary
precondition for peace-if the Israeli actions intended to
create a fait accompli remain unchecked.

(f) We urge the Council, as an interim measure, to appeal
to all Member States to refrain from sending arms and
military equipment to Israel until it complies with the
above-mentioned requests of this body,

40. The action of the Security Council today will determine the way to the future. If no action is taken now, the
Security Council will face more conflict in our troubled
area. This is predicted because the Council is dealing with
Zionists who appear to be intoxicated by their victory. YOU
gentlemen are dealing with people whose arrogance of
power has blinded their minds. Ironically, they even seem
proud of their acts, which offend the basic freedom of man
and his human decency.

(g) We call upon the Council to reaffirm its resolution
252 (1968) of 21 May 1968, as well as General Assembly
resolutions 2253 (ES-V) and 2254 (ES-V) of 4 July 1967
and 14 July 1967, respectively, on Jerusalem, and to
declare the new Israeli legislation dated 23 August 1968
and the subsequent decrees and legislation null and void.
(h) We appreciate the efforts of our distinguished and
dedicated Secretary-General and we hope that the Council
will call upon him to submit a report to the Council on the
implementation of its resolution.

41. Nothing apparently impedes Israeli’s colossal conceit.
They can get away with all these acts of aggression
unchecked. Their actions with regard to Jerusalem have
been in defiance of world opinion, of international law and
of the United Nations resolutions. It may be recalled that
the Israeli representative, Mr. Tekoah, here in this august
body, called the Security Council-and these are his
words-“normally,
juridically and politically bankrupt”.

45. Mr. President, I must admit that it was not the desire
of the Government of Jordan to come before the Security
Council. It is not a pleasure for Jordan to knock at the door
of the Security Council seeking remedy. It is not a pleasure,
because we know that after 11 months of hard work
members of the Council had hoped that July would be a
month of rest and holiday. It is not a pleasure, because the
present time is not the right time, since this is the campaign
season of the United Jewish Appeal for tax-exempt
donations; it is the season when situations are created in
order to help Zionist groups everywhere to campaign for
tax-exempt donations. It is not a pleasure, because I know
that Mr. Tekoah welcomes this forum today and will use it
to speak to the gallery, to the television channels and to
other information media, but not on the issue now before
the Council. It is not a pleasure for Jordan to come before
the Council, because we would like to see peace in our area,
peace with justice, and not have to complain about
continued Israeli aggression. But Jordan cannot afford that
luxury, and therefore I am appearing before the Council to
request a remedy for the situation, in the hope that we shall
get the right remedy.

42. The Israelis show no sign either of changing or even of
moderating their attitude. In fact, matters are becoming
much worse and, unless they are checked soon, will
certainly produce dire results, I predict that if something is
not done soon-and surely something can be done-the City
of Peace may very well become a city of real conflict.
43. We do not subscribe to the Israeli view in the matter,
and the Council’s action on the issue at hand will determine
the amount of truth in the Israeli statements. We feel that
positive action is needed for the Council to reinforce belief
in its effectiveness and to restore confidence and prestige to
its image,
i; 44. In view of the critical nature of the problem:
(a) We urge the Council to take note of the Secretary
General’s report [S/9149] ; to deplore the failure of Israel
to show any regard for Security Council resolution 252
(1968); and to condemn in the strongest terms the
non-compliance of Israel with that resolution.

46. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Israel, to whom 1
now give the floor.
47. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): It is significant that on the very
day that the Security Council meets on the Jordanian
complaint directed against Jerusalem’s life, tranquillity and
development, another meeting is taking place in Jerusalem
itself. Some 60 internationally outstanding personalities in
the humanities, arts and sciences, who have agreed to serve
as members of the “Jerusalem Committee” initiated by
Jerusalem’s Mayor, are opening a conference to consider
plans and projects for the preservation of the city’s
historical monuments and religious shrines. Among these
are the Reverend T. M. Hesburgh, President of Notre Dame
University; Thomas Hoving, Director of the Metropolitan
Museum of Art in New York; Vittorio Veronese, former
Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and Chairman of the Italian
Commission for Human Rights; the Reverend W. Brandful,
President of the Christian Council of Ghana; Carlos Garcia,
former President of the Philippines; Dr. B. Betancur, Chairman of the Writers Association of Colombia; Jorge Amado
of Brazil; Sir Robert Menzies; the sculptors Henry Moore,

(b) We urge the Council to emphasize once more the
established principle that acquisition of territory by military conquest is inadmissible.
(c) We urge the Council, as an interim measure, once
more to call urgently upon Israel to rescind all measures
taken by it that have resulted or may result in changing the
status of the City of Jerusalem and, in the future, to refrain
from all actions likely to have such effect.
(d/ We urge the Council to issue a solemn warning to
Israel that unless the above-mentioned illegal acts of
legislation are rescinded the Council will reconvene without
delay to take action, including the application of Article 41
of the Charter.
(e) We urge the Council to request that Israel inform it,
within a fortnight, of its intentions with regard to the
implementation of the provisions of the resolution.
5

52. Israeli villages are being shelled and Israeli citizens
murderedby terror squadswhose avowed aimis to destroy
Israel, but the Security Council is asked to deal with the
registration of companies,Arab Governments openly fi.
nance, organize and encourage military terror operations
againstIsraelin breach of the Security Council cease-fire
resolutions,but Jordan suggests
.that licensingregulations
constitute a threat to peace. President Nasserexpresses
public approval of the terror organizations’rejection. of the
22 November 196’7resolution, Syria repudiatesthe resolution, Iraq declaresits opposition to any peacefulsolution of
the conflict with Israel, but the Security Council ia called
upon to delve into administrativeformalities. The intensifi.
cation of Jordanian and Egyptian armed attacksis widely
condemnedas prejudicing the search for peace in the
Middle East, but an attempt is made to focus attentipn
insteadon how businesspermits are granted to merchants.

Jacques Lipchitz and Jsonnu Noguchi; Mrs. Marietta Tree;
John Pope-Hennessy, Director of the Victoria and Albert
Museum, London; Pastor Marc Roegner, Past President Of
the World Council of Churches; Manuel Aguilar, publisher
from Madrid; Professor T. Segerstoedt, Rector of the
University of Upsala, Sweden; Ignazio Silone; and representatives of religious and cultural institutions from Africa,
Asia and Latin America.
48. If any illustration were required of the difference
between Israel’s attitude to Jerusalem and that of Jordan it
is to be found in the juxtaposition of these two meetings
convened on the same day, one here by Jordan and the
other in Jerusalem by Israel.
49. Two years have elapsed since Jerusalem became one
again; two years since the city threw off the shackles of
war, chased away the invader who had bisected it and
defiled its peace and sacredness and unity for 19 years. Two
years have gone by since the sombre walls that tore into the
city’s heart were brought down, the barbed wire and field
mines cleared away, And today Jordan comes before the
Security Council to plead the cause of its 1948 invasion, to
speak with nostalgia of Jerusalem’s past amputation, to put
forward the absurd suggestion that the rights of the
population’s majority be disregarded and violated.

53. It is obvious that the Jordanian complaint is a
manoeuvreTVdivert attention from the fact that the Arab
Governmentshave hardened even further their refusal to
concludepeacewith Israeland that Arab aggressive
warfare
againstIsraelcontinuesunabated.
54. The pretext for Jordan’s call for an emergency
meetingis a year-old law which provides for the issuanceof
licencesand permits for the exercise of commerce and
professions,Modern society is largely dependent on the
regulation of its life through the processof licensing.
Vehicles must be registered, and their mechanical state
checked from time to time; drivers’ licences must b’c
renewed;taxes and rates must be paid. Of even greater
importanceare suchaspectsof daily life as,for instancethe
need to ensurethat only recognized pharmacieshandle
medical prescriptionsand only diplomad doctors practise
medicine.Standardsof products and consumergoodsand
of construction must be assuredto meet requirementsof
quality and safety. It is a simple,fundamental rule in every
society that new enterprisesand professionalworkers must
receive authorization before they start their occupations.
The welfare of the population, Jewish and Arab alike,
requiressuchregulations;and this is the objective of the
provisionsin question. Most important of all, the regulations which are the subject of the Jordanian complaint
provide for the automatic recognition of licencesissuedby
the Jordanianauthorities. They thus simply facilitate the
continued and lawful conduct of Arab businessand
professionsin the city. No flight of imagination could
portray those regulationsas being injurious to Jerusalem’s
population. The true nature of the Jordanian cornplaInt is
best demonstratedby the Jordanian representative’scriti.
cism today of a regulation which guaranteesthe rights of
Arab absenteeowners of property in Jerusalem. What
matters to Jordan is not what Israel does,but that it is
Israel that doesit, even if the objective is to protect the
interestsof Arab inhabitants.

50. Let there be no confusion. Jordan does not speak even
for the Arab minority of Jerusalem. Two decades of
occupation of the city’s eastern part, achieved by aggression
in defiance of the United Nations, cannot bestow that right
upon the Government of Jordan. Moreover, that Government can scarcely be regarded as being solicitous of the
welfare of the Arab inhabitants of east Jerusalem or the
west bank. The stagnation, the oppression and discrimination which characterized Jordanian rule west of the Jordan
River have not been forgotten by the local Arab population. A Government whose regular army forces are even
now
capable of carrying out armed attacks against Arab
localities, such as the shelling of the Arab town of Jericho
on the night of 27/28 May and of the Arab Developmenl
Society’s farm and orphanage on 14 and 26 May; a
Government whose irregular saboteur forces explode dynamite charges in the Arab-populated streets of east Jerusalem
or throw grenades into crowds in Gaza and Nablus is surely
not concerned about the fate and welfare of Arab inhabitants.
51. The perfidy of the Jordanian complaint is illustrated
by the specific questions it raises. First, there are the
regulations concerning registration of business enterprises in
Jerusalem. An old proverb says: “Malice seldom wants a
mark to shoot at.” Jordan and other Arab States are openly
pursuing warfare against Israel. There are daily acts of
aggression along the Suez Canal and the Jordan River in
violation of the cease-fire, necessitating Israel defence
measures. President Nasser has proclaimed that this is only
the beginning. The Jordanian regular army and the Iraqi
forces stationed in Jordan are actively involved in terror
operations. In Arab countries innocent Jews are still
lingering in concentration camps and prisons. To seize the
Security Council of technicalities of registration of cornmercial enterprises in these circumstances is the height of
frivolity and irresponsible malice.

55. The Jordaniancomplaint mentions alsothe demolition
of houses and, in particular, a number of structures
adjacent to the Western (Wailing) Wall. For Jordan to
complainabout this is to add insult to injury. For 19years
Jordan had barbarically desecrated Judaism’s holiest
shrines.The tombstonesof the ancient cemetery on the
Mount of Oliveswere completely uprooted and usedin the
6

construction of barracks and latrines for the Jordanian
Army or for paving roads. All the synagogues in the Old
City were destroyed or turned into stables, warehouses &r
chicken coops. The Wailing Wall itself was kept in a state of
shameful and apparently intentional neglect and filth. The
pavement in front of it ‘was used for stationing donkeys.
Access to the Wall was barred to all Jews. And now Jordan
has the audacity to object that two structures, one of them
containing a public latrine purposely constructed by the
Jordanians to defile the holiest of Jewry’s ancient sites,
were removed SO as to restore to the Wall its majesty and
sacredness.
56. Those two structures were uninhabited. In addition to
profaning the Wailing Wall, they were in a state of neglect
and near collapse, which endangered visitors to the site.
Nevertheless, meticulous care was taken to compensate the
holders of titles to those buildings and to transfer the few
pieces of furniture which remained in one of them, though
it too was uninhabited. Jordan is not satisfied with having
desecrated the Western Wall for 19 years. It now raises its
voice against measures aimed at ensuring the beauty, the
safety and the dignity of the Holy Place. The Government
which today expresses a grievance because of the demolition of a few slum structures in danger of collapse is the
self-same Government which, upon capture of the Jewish
Quarter of Jerusalem in 1948, razed to the ground and
wantonly destroyed 34 out of its 35 houses of worship, all
its institutes of learning, and hundreds of private homes. If
there is a question on which the Jordanian Government is
certainly not entitled to speak, it is the question of the
demolition of houses.
57. The Jordanian representative has also referred to the
transfer of the tenants of five small buildings in a narrow,
three-metre-wide
lane leading to the Wall, to premises
provided by the municipal authorities elsewhere. Seventeen
families were thus relocated, The lane in question is the one
in which saboteur squads from Jordan set off, on the
Sabbath eve of 20 June, three explosive charges with the
clear intention of catching the crowds on their way to the
Sabbath prayers at the Western Wall. Only a chance delay in
the detonation of the charges limited the casualties; three
Arabs and one Israeli were wounded and severe damage was
caused to several Arab houses. All three of the charges were
placed inside houses situated in the lane. The following day
the Jordan-based Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine issued a communiqu6 admitting responsibility for
this dastardly attack. The communiquC was immediately
disseminated by the official Jordanian media of communication and broadcast by Amman Government radio. The
Jordan Government’s participation in terror warfare waged
frorn its territory against Israel is, of course, a matter of
common knowledge.
58. This was not the first Jordanian attempt to SOW
murder at the Western Wall. On 1 October 1968, and again
on 20 December 1968, two saboteur squads on their way
from Jordan were intercepted by the Israel Defence Forces.
The interrogation of the saboteurs captured in clashes in
which some of their accomplices were killed revealed that
they were dispatched with clear instructions to perpetrate
sabotage attacks against worshippers at the Wailing Wall.
The people of Israel and the world at large will follow with

interest the views of members of the Security Cou~lcil
on
such outrageous assaults on peaceful worshippers at a holy
place in the City of Jerusalem.
59. The attempt at mass murder on 20 June left the Israel
authorjties with no choice but to take precautionary
measures to protect the Western Wall and ensure the safety
of Jews and non-Jews who flock to it daily in the
thousands; and the vacated houses will serve these security
needs. One of those buildings housed a school attended by
20 students. None contained, however, a religious court or
a mosque, as falsely alleged by the Jordanian representative.
By complaining about this step to the Security Council, the
Government of Jordan adopts an odd attitude. In its view,
the killing of Arab and Jewish civilians and the wanton
destruction of Arab houses by Jordanian saboteurs is
permissible, but measures by Israel to protect Jewish and
Arab lives and the lives of foreign visitors are not. Is there
no limit to absurdity? If Jordan would abide scrupulously
by the cease-fire and refrain frorn actions designed to
disturb the peace and serenity of the city, Israeli security
measures would be superfluous. Jordan is mistaken, however, if it believes that having by force of its occupation
barred free access to the Western Wall for 19 years it will
succeed in doing it now by means of sabotage and murder.
60. Mr. President, the Jordanian representative has allowed fantasy to dominate his description of life in the
Jerusalem of today. However, the Security Council and
world public opinion are not dependent in this matter on
material fabricated in Amman. On any one day there are
thousands of foreign visitors in the city, including numerous
representatives of foreign governments, international
organizations and the press. They would attest to the fact
that Jerusalem is basically content and flourishing in its
integrity. New commercial and industrial enterprises are
springing up all over the city. There is an economic boom,
with a shortage of manpower. Joint Jewish-Arab commercial ventures are multiplying. Joint cultural activities are on
the increase. Jewish-Arab youth clubs are devoting themselves to creating greater understanding between the two
peoples. A combined Arab-Jewish song-and-dance ensemble
has already toured Europe. Nearly all Arab workers of east
Jerusalem are members of Histadrut, the Israel Federation
of Labour, and of its medical insurance fund. They now
enjoy the same social benefits as their Jewish colleagues.
There is freedom of movement to and from the Arab
States. Thousands of students and others from Arab
countries visited Jerusalem last summer. Many thousands
have already applied and are expected this year. One can
take a taxi or a bus and travel to Amman and beyond. Two
Arabic language dailies are published in the city, one of
them outspolcenly critical of Israel. There is free access to
all the holy places without distinction.
61, On 3 February 1969 the well-known liberal American
weekly me Nation described daily life in the united city as
follows:
“Every morning, between 6.30 and 9.00, hundreds of
Arab workers from east Jerusalem flow across the old
boundaries to their jobs in west Jerusalem. Shops 011both
sides of town display the most modem Israeli goods.
Intra-city bus lines clog the roads. BUS services connect

mutual adaptation in Jerusalem has reached a point where
the city might never have been divided.”

the city with all points in the country, from Haifa to
Hebron. And many of the Arab taxis promise even
more-a trip to Amman across the Allenby Bridge, and
from there to Damascus, Baghdad, Beirut, Kuwait.

“Tension in Jerusalem is beneath a peaceful surface.
This is a bi-cultural, bi-national city in which two
populations live in 99 per cent peace. A woman can walk
alone at night on either side of town. One has the feeling
that Jerusalemites, left alone, could solve their own
problems.

62. Certainly an incident does sometimes occur. Which
city in the world is free from it? Indeed, since June 1967,
in accordance with law, incidentally in force under Jordan
rule as well as in Israel, several houses used as terrorist bases
and arms caches were blown up in Jerusalem. During this
period 16 agents of the Jordanian Government, who had
engaged in fostering and organizing violence, were asked to
leave town and return to their employers in Amman. In the
meantime one of them has been allowed to come back,
after having signed an undertaking not to pursue activities
undermining public welfare and security. Certainly some of
Jerusalem’s inhabitants may not be entirely happy. IS this
an unusual situation in the life of dties? Is this reason for
summoning the Security Council to an emergency session?

“Incredibly enough, in the war-pocked world of the
Middle East, Jerusalem Arabs like to spend long weekends in Amman, They get their passes from the Israeli
authorities, travel down to Jericho, cross the Allenby
Bridge, and then spend a few days shopping in Amman
(it’s cheaper there) and seeing relatives. I know people
who had never before been to Amman who decided they
must make the trip. It’s easy for Jerusalem Arabs to make
the trip east; they must pass a rather innocuous security
test, wisely based not on a person’s political opinion but
on his possible association with terrorist organizations.

63. The representative of Jordan has arrogated to himself
the right to speak of the Christian inhabitants of Jerus:alem.
The records of the debate held in the Security Council in
May 1968 contain a long list of public pronouncements by
Christian leaders expressing full satisfaction with the
situation of Christian communities and their holy places.
Among these are statements by the Greek Orthodox
Patriarch of Jerusalem, the Armenian Patriarch of Jerusalem, the Patriarch of the Church of Ethiopia, Catholic
and Protestant theologians and the latin Custos of the Holy
Land.

“The ‘open border’ policy applies to goods as well as to
people. A very great trade in agricultural produce and
other west bank goods has been crossing the border
regularly. The terroris’t organizations bitterly oppose this
evident accommodation and collusion with the enemy,
since it encourages the normalcy of life which they, as
good guerrillas, would like to destroy. But to a great
many Arabs the trade is essential to life. When Israel shut
the border briefly after the (Jerusalem) Mahane Yehuda
bombing, in which 12 persons were killed, Arabs throughout the west bank pleaded that trade be restored.

64. Today I should like to add a more recent testimony.
On 9 December 1968 Dr. G. Douglas Young, President of
the Institute of Holy Land Studies, stated:

“The city’s main problems have little to do with war;
much more to do with the fact that, before June 1967,
both sides of the then divided city were little more than
large villages. Today, the cosmopolitan Jerusalem of
pre-1948 is again a reality.

“It is also erroneous to say ‘Jerusalem has been
overwhelmingly Arab from the seventh century until the
modern influx . . .‘. Historically the opposite is true. The
Jewish population has been the majority in Jerusa1e.m for
many, many years; long before modern times. To unify a
Jewish majority city after 20 y:ars of its being divided by
others is surely no cause for antagonism abroad. Our
churches damaged by wars since 1948 are being repaired
by Israeli compensation funds. The extremely stringent
laws protecting holy places and worshippers at them have
been consistently and strictly enforced, We feel at peace
and at ease in our united city as Christians, with actually
less fear of personal assault than in other cities in which
we have lived abroad, such is the force of Israeli law and
order being maintained. This may be said in spite IDf the
border incidents and occasional Arab terrorist acts.”

“In Jerusalem, 200 or 300 women and children engaged
in a moderately heated shouting match with some
Arabic-speaking Israeli police. There seemed to be none
of that fierce antagonism and hatred which can mark a
civil rights demonstration in the States. . . ,
“Quiet prevails. One has the feeling that it is possible
for Arabs and Jews to live together in the same city-if
not in friendship, then at least in tolerance and harmony.
Today it is winter in the city, a particularly mild winter
with occasional down bursts of fierce rain, but with many
bright and warm days. Dramatic clouds form over the
hills, sweep and linger, dance over the harsh rock-landscape and disappear.

65. Two weeks, later, Christmas was celebrated in Jerusalem by local Christian inhabitants and thousands of
pilgrims and visitors from abroad. Among them was Angelo
Cardinal Rossi of SZo Paulo who, on his return to Brazil,
expressed his gratification with conditions in the city. The
traditional Catholic Christmas procession in Jerusalem was
led by the Latin Patriarch Albert0 Tori. Similarly, the
Easter holidays last April were celebrated in a spirit of
traditional piety and ceremony.

“I believe that peace is a difficult but possible goal,
because no one-at least no one in Jerusalem-wants war,
The dangers are from outside Jerusalem, from across the
borders. It is only from out there that war could come
again in Jerusalem.”

66. As for the state of Moslem religious life, it would seem
appropriate to rely less on Jordanian Government ap.
pointees and more on objective Moslem sources. Thus

As far back as a year ago, on 29 June 1968, The Economist
of London wrote: “With no overt clashes to speak of,
8

Sheikh Ibn Issa, Adviser on Moslem Affairs to the President
of the Malagasy Republic, stated following a recent visit to
the Dome of the Rock in Jerusalem:
“One must come to Israel to see for oneself to what
great extent peace and tranquillity reign there, and how
false is the picture disseminated by Arab propaganda.”
The President of the All-Moslem Congress of Sierra Leone
broadcast the following message after his visit to the Al
Aqsa Mosque:
“From this Holy Place I declare frankly and with
conviction that places holy and consecrated to Islam, the
mosques and the chapels are properly guarded and there
is no violation of them. The gates of the El-Ghazar
Mosque as well as the mosques of all towns and villages
are wide open and filled with worshippers who fulfil their
religious obligations in complete freedom.”
The Kadi, the Moslem religious judge of Jaffa, Sheikh
’ Muhmad Tewfiq Asbya, declared on 29 June 1968:

19 years, the scars of tragic division have been removed,
holy places, desecrated under Jordanian occupation, have
been resanctified, freedom bf access and worship have been
granted for the first time to adherents of all reIi@ons, and
coexistence between Arab and Israel has been proved
possible.
69. For two decades Jerusalem had been a frontline town
under the mercy of Arab guns, its peace menaced and
violated at the whim of the Jordanian invader, its economy
stultified by artificial barriers, its majesty trampled by hate,
hostility and fratricide. It was a grim and joyless city, its
eternal glory sadly tarnished, its natural splendor mutilated.
70. Today, the city is free from the chains of division,
destruction and desecretion. Its people again enjoy the
fulness and integrity of their metropolis. They can live and
work in peace; at least they can think of co-operation, not
of constant hostility and warfare.
71. The Jordanian Government would have it otherwise.
Jordan would rather have a city tom apart and permeated
with enmity, stagnation and tragedy as in the 19 years of its
occupation. Jordan is obviously motivated not by concern
for Jerusalem’s welfare but by continued belligerence
against Israel. Perhaps this should not be surprising. Those
who would not shirk from inflicting further ordeals on the
Holy City and more sorrow on its people have their hands
soaked in Jerusalem’s blood. They are the ones who turned
the city into a battlefield in 1948. It was their artillery that
in June 1967 unleashed the merciless bombardment of
Jerusalem’s residential quarters, causing numerous casualties among the civilian population and deliberately damaging one of the foremost holy places, the Church of
Dormition. The Jordanian attitude callously disregards the
basic precepts of international law and morality. Jordan
occupied the eastern part of the city in a war of aggression.
Its occupation had never been recognized by any Government, not even by the Arab States, as constituting more
than a military presence. The Jordanian attitude is in
violation of the rights of the city’s population. Jerusalem is
inhabited by more than 200,000 Jews, 60,000 Arabs and
5,000 persons of other nationality. It is evident that the
great majority of the city’s population categoricalIy rejects
any Jordanian claims or attempts to intervene in its life.
This applies obviously to the Jewish inhabitants. It also
applies to the other non-Arab inhabitants. Even as far as the
Arab citizens are concerned, as I have already observed,
Jordan can hardly claim to represent them merely because
it happened to be the occupying Power for 19 years.

“As a Kadi in Jaff'd and a native of this country who has
in the past fulfilled various religious posts, I would like to
put your mind and the minds of the Moslems of your
country at rest by assuring you that the Government of
Israel is assiduously safeguarding all the holy places in the
country without distinction of religion or community . . .
“A year has passed since Jerusalem was reunited and I
should like to declare that thousands of Moslems from
Jerusalem and from other towns in this and the :ieighbouring countries visit these holy places and regularly
recite their prayers in them without encountering any
interference whatsoever. The Moslem festivals have been
celebrated with the usual pomp and ceremony.
“Those in charge of the Moslem holy places are Moslem
notables and dignitaries who see to it that decorum and
cleanliness are maintained there.
“The Government of Israel has appointed guards for
these places. These ask visitors to conduct themselves in a
manner fitting the holy character of the sites. The many
Moslems living in Israel have fulfilled one of the five rulr?
(pillars) of Islam this year by making the pilgrimage to
Mecca.
“From all the foregoing you will see that the Government of Israel keeps a watchful and solicitous eye over all
the Moslem holy places as well as over all the holy places
belonging to the other religious communities.”

72. Naturally there are some who still act on behalf of
Jordanian interests. There are still some who foster discord
and hostility. They are the ones who would object to slum
clearing and to the construction of new housing by IsraeI
even if carried out in accordance with Jordanian town-planning projects. They are the ones who would like Jerusalem
today to have at least as many demonstrations, incidents
and arrests as during Jordanian rule. They are the ones who
cannot accept the thought that today’s situation is no
worse even for the Arab inhabitants and generally much
better than before the reunification of the city. These
people, however, are not representative of the Arab
minority of Jerusalem.

67. Only lack of understanding of Jewish reverence for
Jerusalem and Jewish respect for religion and human rights
could create any doubt whatever that the Government of
Israel is guided in its policies and actions by its concern for
the welfare of the city and its inhabitants and by the
determination to give full recognition and protection to the
universal interests in it.
68. During the two years since Jerusalem was restored to
life, and freed from the nightmare that had enveloped it for
9

73. A recently published sociological study, “The Administration of United Jerusalem”, expresses this as follows:

79. Certain points, however, do relate to Jerusalem and I
feel they should be answered, I shall take them up not in
the order as presented by Mr. Tekoah, but rather in the
order which I think is consistent with the issues embodied
in the complaint.

“Under the Jordanian rdgime, about 40 members and
ex-members of the Jordanian Parliament lived in and
around Jerusalem, together with ten Cabinet Ministers
and ex-Ministers, as well as many religious leaders. This
group has now lost most of its influence , . . With the
blow to its standing, there is also a deterioration in its
financial status. On the other hand, the man in the street,
on passing from Jordanian to Israeli rule, suddenly feels
that he is important, that he is somebody. He sees free
competition in every walk of life, and he begins to realize
that, if he is talented and hard-working, he may one day
reach a social eminence that he never dreamed of under
Jordanian rule. He begins to doubt whether his former
leaders should be followed blindly in their hostiIity to
Israeli rule.”

80. Mr. Tekoah said that the majority of the people of
Jerusalem were Israelis. That is not true. I have the stat.istics
from the Survey of Palestine prepared by the Secretary of
Information for Palestine of the Anglo-American Committee of Enquiry, a British-American body. They speak
about the censuses of 1922 and 1931, when there were
56,346 and 34,431 Jews. At the same time they give the
figures for the total settled population in Jerusalem for the
end of 1944, when there were 140,532 Arabs and 100,200
Jews. Those are the figures of the Palestine Anglo-American
Committee and they are embodied in the Palestine .Yearbook for 1947-1948. SO it is not true that the majority
consisted of Israelis. What the Israelis did after their
invasionand illegal occupation of Jerusalemis something
else.

74. In any event, the generally accepted principles of
human rights and political democracy cannot be suspended
in the case of Jerusalem. A small minority, in fact a group
of foreign appointees and agents, cannot impose on the
majority demands contrary to reason and justice. Jerusalem’s unity and integrity will never again be upset by
wanton hatred and hostility. Jerusalem will forever be
united. Its citizens can look to the future with confidence
and calm. Its friends, the world over, can rest assured, Israel
will maintain and protect the city’s growth, welfare and
security: Israel will make certain that Jerusalem, holy to so
many, remains a source of light and pride to all religions.

81. Mr. Tekoah spokeabout the unity of the city. I Ithink
it is a settled principle, a recognizedprinciple, that n.aked
actsof annexationthrough military occupation amount to
usurpationandconfer no rights on the Israelis.They cannot
be camouflagedas “unity”. When the forces of Zionism
take Jerusalemby force, they cannot come here and say
that by the useof force Jerusalembecameunited. This is
exactly what Hitler said. When the forces of nazism
occupiedCzechoslovakiaand Poland, what did Hitler say?
These are his exact words: “Now our unity has been
accomplished”.That is what Hitler said. But the mernbers
of the world community said otherwise;they said: “Unity
by force, annexationby force confersno right but imposes
a duty.” The world community said that Hitler’s occupation of Czechoslovakiaand Poland and the so-calledunity
did not confer any title or give any rights, but conferred
insteada duty on the world community to seeto it that the
aggressionshould come to an end. And this is the same
thing: the Israelis, through the use of force, took Arab
Jerusalem.This Council,in its resolution 252 (1968), stated
expresslythat “acquisition of territory by military conquestis inadmissible”.Those are your words, the wo.rdsof
this Council, adopted in resolution 252 (1968) of 21 May
1968. You said no to annexation, no to force, no to
military occupation, no to usurpation. This is the issue
before you. I comebefore you with your resolution, t.elling
the Council with all due respect, that the Israelis have
defied the will of the world community and that some
action has to be taken to save the prestige, the great
imagine and the effectiveness of the machinery of this
body, the Security Council.

75. Let us, therefore, turn our thoughts to bringing to
Jerusalem bliss, not grief, Let us address ourselves to the
wishes of its population, not to the designs of foreign
Governments. Let us strive for peace and understanding
within its walls, not chaos and discord. Let us repeat after
the Prophet :
“Rejoice ye with Jerusalem,
“And be glad with her, all ye that love her;
‘Rejoice for joy with her . . .
“That ye may drink deeply with delight on the abundance of her glory.”
76. The PRESlDENT (translated from Spanishj: I now
give the floor to the representative of Jordan.
77. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): The applause we have just
heard from the gallery does not seem surprising to my
delegation, at least, because those invitees have come for a
purpose, and the speech was aimed more at the audience
than at this august body,

82. Mr. Tekoah spokeabout unity. This is unity by force,
unity by aggression.
This is aggression,
this is not unity, and
aggressioncalls for action by the Security Council.
Mr. Tekoah said that everything was sweet and nice and
beautiful betweenthe Israelisand the Jordaniancitizens in
occupied Jerusalem.He stated that what I had said had
beenfabricatedin Amman. But I do not recall having cited
a singlequotation from one Arab source.Yet Mr. Tekoah
had the nerve-I shall not use another word, I shall not
follow his example-to say that what I had saidhad been

78. At the very outset, lest there be confusion on this
score, I should like to mention, to reiterate and re-emphasize the one single issue I am presenting to the Council.
What is before the Council is the resolution adopted by the
Council and defied by Israel, together with the continued
defiance and the further violations that have been committed. We have come to the Council to say: What are you
goihg to do about that defiance? That is the issue, that is
the complaint of Jordan.
10

fabricated in Amman. Every single quotation presented by
me was taken from Israeli sources, either the Je;usaZem Post
of 2 June 1969-that is this month-or the official Jewish
Yearbook of 1968-1969. Those are not Amman authorities
nor Amman newspapers nor the official Yearbook of the
Government of Jordan. The Jewish Yearbook is the
Government Yearbook: it is an official document of the
Israeli Government.

Jerusalem to hear evidence? What was the evidence? What
was
the claim of the Jews at that time? Dr. Eliash was
representing the Jewish Agency and Jewry at large. He said
to the Tribunal that they claimed no title. In its verdict the
Tribunal emphasized that the “Jews do not claim any
proprietorship to the Wail or to the pavement in front of
it”. They came before the Tribunal and they said: “We are
not claiming any title to the Wall or anything near it”. They
simply said that they would like the right to visit, just the
right to go there. That was the first stage. What was the
second stage? Did they not claim the Wall itself after the
creation of the State? We now hear about something called
restoration and we now see bulldozers destroying Moslem
shrines and houses, calling them a threat to public safety.
They are called a threat after two years of occupationalthough those houses have been standing for 600 years,
since the thirteenth century. They speak of the temple
now, but tomorrow they may discover that another temple
was in Iraq. The whole thing may end up with the idea:
From the Euphrates to the Nile,

83. With respect to the relationship between the Israelis
and the Jordanians in Jerusalem, if Mr. Tekoah does not
believe his own sources, Israeli sources, let me quote from
an American source, the Christian Science Monitor of 21
May 1969, which is last month. I shall quote what the
Mayor of Jerusalem, Mr. Kollek, said about the relationship
between the Israelis and the Arabs in Jerusalem. This is a
quotation from the Christian Science Monitor, a respectable
newspaper. According to Mr. John K. Cooley, Mayor KolIek had told several foreign reporters recently that perhaps
there should be, after all, two ‘separate and equal cities-an
Arab one and a Jewish one’. Then the Mayor said-and here
comes the expansionist design, that vicious design aiming at
more expansion, acquiring more land and displacing more
people : “Both the completely Arab and the completely
Jewish cities should be ruled by Israel.” He started all right,
but he ended by saying that both should be ruled by Israel.
Why on earth should a completely and purely Arab
city-and
by Arab I mean Christian Arabs and Moslem
Arabs; I speak on behalf of both, since they are Jordanian
citizens-not
be part of the Arab homeland? Why should it
be part of Israel?

86. Israeli manoeuvres today cannot possibly mislead
anybody. After the occupation of the west bank and Sinai
and Gaza and the Golan Heights, they cannot now appear
as that little oppressed State looking for peace. I think the
big lie is now clear and that more effective measures are
needed to put an end to Israeli arrogance.
87. Mr. Tekoah said that the structures were not inhabited. We know that the journalists who were talking to
the inhabitants were subjected to rough treatment by the
Israelis; they were not permitted to go near the people to
talk to them and then they had to go and submit a protest
to the Israeli authorities about that treatment by the
Israelis. And why is this done? Because the Israelis want to
maintain a blockade against the penetration of truthful
information, because the penetration of accurate information would reach the fair-minded American, would reach
other areas and places, and would belie every statement by
Mr. Tekoah. This Security Council unanimously requested
Israel to accept a commission that would investigate, look
into, and see the conditions of the people in the occupied
areas. If the Israelis really want to convey the truth, why
are they saying no to our investigation in Jerusalem, to the
sending of a visiting mission to the Holy City of Jerusalem?
But they keep saying no so that they can maintain this
information blockade, and so that Mr, Tekoah can distort
the truth in any way he deems fit.

84. “Oh”, it is said, “we are better guardians.” I have
already in the past made clear who it is that is not for
freedom of access to the holy places. I have mentioned
before in the Security Council that we offered to the
Palestine Conciliation Commission in November 1949 an
undertaking that we would permit free access to every
individual from Israel, provided that Israel did the same
thing. Let Mr. Tekoah state right here whether his Government did do the same thing. It is the Israelis who have been
refusing to do that, and we know what the purpose has
been: complete annexation. They had in mind expansion
by stages, and what is happening to Jerusalem is a typical
example of what has been going on vis-l-vis the rest of
Palestine. Let us make a comparison. What was the plan at
the beginning? Let us look at the past, for it will guide us
in seeing what the Israelis are aiming at now and for the
future. Did they not meet in 1897 to say, “We want only a
national homeland”? Did they not ask for only a homeland
and get a promise in 1917? Did they not proceed from
there to a call for a State at a later stage? Did they not
come here in 1947 and say, “Well, all right, partition is
what we want”? But the following year did they not
expand? And where are they now? Are they not occupying part of the United Arab Republic and part of Jordan
and part of Syria and all the Gaza Strip?

88. Mr. Tekoah said something about the explosives in
Jerusalem, I do not know anything about the explosives
except what was stated by the Israeli authorities to the
press and information media. But I do know one thing-one
thing which expressed a human feeling: “When you destroy
my house, I may react in any manner I deem fit. I may
resist you. It is my God-given right to live in my home.” SO
if those people who lost their homes-and I mentioned the
figures earlier-were kicked out and their houses bulldozed
and razed to the ground, I think it is only legitimate for
them to resist. This is a defensive measure, a God-given
right, not unique to the people of Jerusalem: it has been
experienced by all occupiers. It continues to be the case,
because occupation and resistance go together. Occupation,
as I said earlier, brings oppression, and oppression brings

85. And with respect to Jerusalem, did not the very same
thing happen? Did they not come before. a British
Tribunal-and
I should like Lord Caradon to correct me if I
am wrong-a Tribunal appointed by Britain and consisting
of three members, a jurist from Switzerland, a jurist from
Holland and a jurist from Sweden? Did those jurists not go to
11

General Bull were: ‘I proposed a cease-fire together with
no further movement of troops to be effective at 1630
hours GMT, 10 June . . .’ “. /Ibid., para. 2O4./

resistance. We have no apology to make to the Israelis if the
people resist them. The answer lies in getting out. And this,
by the way, is what was intended by the Security Council
when it adopted a unanimous resolution calling for a
cease-fire.

90. I need not dwell on these points, but 1 wished to
clarify them. The issue is very clear: it is very simple: the
question of defiance of the Council’s own resoIution.
Violations continue, more acts of aggression are committed,
and we come here to ask for effective measures. Those were
the points I wished to present at this stage, reserving my
right to speak again in answer to any other point which I
have failed to cover this afternoon.

89. What does the cease-fire mean? I do not think the
Council meant the cease-fire to give Israel the right to
destroy part of the Holy City. That is not a cease-fire; that
is a violation of the cease-fire. I do not think the council
intended by a cease-fire to give Israel extra rights and
privileges. A cease-fire means a cease-fire; and the only
movement after a cease-fire is movement back to where
they came from. This is something the Security Council
should emphasize. This is our understanding of the ceasefire. It means cease fire. We should not move troops into
the houses of 17 families and say, “We are putting them
there for security.” The movement must be back to where
they came from. That is not only my understanding but
also the understanding of the Security Council, as this
question was raised by Mr. Iyalla, a member of the Council
at that time, who explained what a cease-fire was. Luckily,
a distinguished colleague, the representative of a permanent
member of the Security Council, Lord Caradon, confirmed
that understanding by another member of the Council. This
was the understanding of the cease-fire, stated very clearly
by Mr. Iyalla:

91, The PRESIDENT (trurulatcd ./km Sparzish): The
representative of Israel wishes to make a statement.
92. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): It is strange that the reprlasentative of Jordan should insist on portraying the Arab acts of
sabotage committed in Israel and in Israel-contrmolled
territory as being carried out by allegedly wronged 10cd
inhabitants, when his own Government disseminates IcornmuniquCs of terror through organizations financed, organized, harboured and trained by it, operating from Jordanian
territory, organizations which take full credit for Ithese
wanton acts of murder for murder’s sake. It is even more
strange that the representative of Jordan should come
before the Security Council to pride himself on such
assaults against innocent men, women and children.

“A cease-fire, as we understand it, must mean that the
guns must be silenced and that the troop movements
must be halted wherever they are. Any attempt to gain
legal and geographical advantages from the current
situation must therefore be deplored.” [1357th meeting,
para. 176. /

93. Jerusalem is, however, too sacred, and its happiness
too precious, for me to be drawn into a verbal skirmish over
it with someone to whom Jerusalem appears to be merely
another instrument of hostility toward Israel, I am quite
content to leave it to history to pronounce judgemectt on
the nightmare of Jordanian occupation of part of the city
and on its reunification by Israel.

Then he said:
“I have one last point. In the course of the debate this
evening, a new phrase has gradually come into circulation,
that is the phrase ‘cease-fire line’. Lest it be accepted
merely by default, let me say, for my delegation at least,
that we do not understand that there is a cease-fire line.
There are Armistice lines. There is the cease-fire order
which means that troops should stay where they are and
that any movement, north, south, east or west, except
such movement as to return from the scene of battle to
one’s own home ground, is a violation of the cease-fire.”
/Ibid., para. 177.1

94. To the representative of Jordan I shall say only one
thing: the difference between us is that you uprooted the
tombstones of Jewry’s most ancient and most holy cemetery in Jerusalem to construct latrines and pave roads for a
Jordanian army camp. We allowed a monument to be
constructed in Jerusalem to the Jordanian Army’s fighting
men who fell in the 1967 war. There is another difference
between us: you destroyed Jerusalem; we shall rebuild it.
95. The PRESIDENT (tramlated jkom Spauish): I now
call on the representative of Jordan to speak in exercise of
his right of reply.

Any movement-east, west, south, north-if it is not a
movement back to where the Israeli troops came from, is a
violation. What can it be called when they move to destroy
and bulldoze Arab homes and Moslem shrines in the Holy
City? I beg members of the Council to ponder this, If their
movement is to destroy Arab homes and Moslem shrines, is
this not a violation not only of Security Council resolution
252 (196X)-your
resolution-but also of the cease-fire?
Luckily, Lord Caradon agreed with Mr, Iyalla. He said at
the same meeting:

96. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): I shall be very brief. I do
not wish to abuse the patience of the Council. I simply wish
to say that acts of terrorism have never been part of our
tradition. If there is resistance, it is imposed by the
continued acts of aggression and the continued crimes
committed against our people, As I have said, it is not a
unique thing in the history of mankind for an occupation
to be resisted. The Israelis were the first to present this
picture, when they came from Europe and invaded the
land, using all kinds of terrorism, I will not refer to many
cases. I will not quote statements from any sources but
Israeli sources. Here is what was stated by Mr. Uri Avnery, a
one-time member of the Irgun terrorist gang, in his book

“ . . . I entirely agree with the important point which he
has put to us. It is well, I think, to refer back to the
actual words of the agreement reached by General Bull, I
refer to the record of yesterday; the actual words of
12

Iqmel without Zionists.1 He said that when he was
interviewed for membership in the Irgun terrorist gang he
was askedwhether he hated the Arabs. That wasthe first
qualification for anyone wanting to join the terrorist
organization. That wasthe first question: “DO you hate the
Arabs?” He said that he almost flunked the interview
becausehe answeredno. On page 11 of the samebook
Mr. Avnery writes:

Jerusalemand took a decisionon it by unanimousvote.
The Security Councildid the same.Therewasno labour on
the part of the Security Councilor the GeneralAssembly,
for that matter. It was only lip servicein so far as the
questionof Jerusalem
is concerned.Hence“the lip tendeth
to penury”.

102. Are we bankrupt in the United Nations? Is the
Security Councilparalysed?Shallwe passmoreresolutions
“Our company commander,and architect whom we that are not implemented?Of course,we know why they
admiredand imitated, joined Stern, the extremist leader are not implemented.I am not going into the technical
who believedthat we should make commoncauseeven reasons.I seethat Mr. Tekoahis not here, but I hope that
with the Nazis and Fascistsin order to overthrow British
he will readmy speech.Mr. Tekoahsaidthat the Arabsin
imperialism.”
Palestinewerebackward,they they lived in slums,andthat
if Israeldemolishedcertain buildingsin the Holy City of
97. So terrorism wasstarted by the Israelis.The invasion Jerusalem
it wasto givethe peoplebetter habitation, to see
started when they invaded the British positions and that they obtain socialwelfare servicesand jobs. Again I
attacked them in all kinds of ways, andthey continuedthis have to go to King Solomon.He had a proverb for this
practice until they displacedthe Palestinians.If the people situation. King Solomonsaid: “The poor is hated even of
resisttoday, it is a movementof the people,andit becomes his own neighbourbut the rich hath many friends.” If the
stronger every day, becauseit stemsfrom determination Arabs were not as rich as those EuropeanZionists who
and from the belief that they shouldhave their place as invaded the country, it is not a causefor shame.The
equals,asa people. To say that the Governmentof Jordan Zionists have the Rothschildsbehind them, the Oppenis doing this is to be blind to the facts. Mr. Tekoah heimers,the Readings,the multimillionairesof Western
sometimeslikes to ignore the facts. The resistancein Tel
Europe, and alsothe bounty of the Christianworld that
Aviv itself yesterday could not be a government-planned
act.
wasbrainwashed
by fundamentalistic
interpretationsof the
The continued attacks in Gaza-which, as you know, is Bible. But the Arabs have beenemergingfrom under the
surrounded by land occupied by the Israelis-cannot be yoke of Europeanmandatesthat werefoisted upon them
calledJordanian.The sameappliesto other areas.It is easy by the Treaty of Versailles-aperfidiousact after Mr. Wilfor Mr. Tekoah to find pretexts, but facts are stubborn. son,the Presidentof the United States,had enunciatedhis
Falsehoodflies on very short wingsbut it soonfalls on the
fourteen points, amongstwhich was the principle of
rock of truth. Truth is a stubbornthing.
self-determination.But King Solomonforesawwhat might
happenin communities,not to speakof nations.Again, he
98. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom Spanish):I wishto
said: “He that despiseth
his neighboursinneth,but he that
inform the Council that in the courseof this meetingI have hath mercyon the poor, happyis he.” What mercy havethe
receivedthree requests-from the representativesof Saudi Zionistsextendedsincethey setfoot there?
Arabia, the Syrian Arab Republic, and Morocco-asking
103. My colleaguefrom Jordanmentionedthe Irgun gang,
that they be permitted to participatein this debatewithout
the right to vote. If the Council agrees,I proposeto invite
the Stern gangand many other gangswhich, asI havesaid
the representativesof those three countries to take the before, causedall this trouble in the Holy Land. Those
placeswhich have beenreservedfor them in the chamber, EuropeanZionistscameto occupy the land and chaseout
its indigenouspeople.And herethey say that they want to
on the understandingthat when they wishto take the floor
resuscitateJudaism.But they do not heed what King
they will be invited to take a placeat the Counciltable.
Solomonsaid.But before King Solomon,in Exodusof the
At the invitation of the President,Mr. J. M. Baroody Bible-not the Exodus that sold a million copiesin New
York City to glorify the Jewishenterprisein Palestine-it is
(Saudi Arabia), Mr. G. J. Tomeh (Syria) and Mr. A. T.
said: “Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour’shouse nor
Benhima(Morocco) took the placesreservedfor them in
anything that is thy neighbour’s,”ThoseEuropeanZionists
the Councilchamber.
do not covet the house,they destroy it, they expel the
peoplefrom the houses.Remember,I do not say “Jews”
99. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom Spanish):The next
speakeron my list is the representativeof Saudi Arabia, but “Zionists”.
whom I invite to take a seatat the Counciltable.
104. We cometo Jerusalem.
Many think that “Jerusalem”
is
a
Hebrew
word.
Of
course,
Jerusalemis a Semitic word,
100. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Thank YOU,
Mr. President,and membersof the Council,for grantingme not a Hebrew word. The word “Uru”came from the
Assyrians,who werealsoSemites,andthe Babylonians.For
permissionto participate in the debateon this question.
example,we know that Abraham camefrom Ur of the
101. There is a proverb from King Solomonwhich says: Chaldees,Ur the City; and Jerusalemis derived not from
“In all labour there is profit, but the talk of the lip tendeth Uru-Shalom,or Uru-Salaam.It is derived from “Uruto penury.” HOW does this proverb apply to Jerusalem? Salim”, moreakin to Arabic, the NabataenArabic, than it
is to Hebrew.And to this day we have many peoplecalled
The GeneralAssembly addresseditself to the questionof
Salim-Uru-Salim,Uru-Shalim,the city of peaceandsecurity. And againwe goto Genesis-butGenesis
isnot the only
1 Uri Avnery, Israel without Zionists: A pleafor peacein the
sourceif we go to archaeologicalsources.According to
Middle East, New York, The Macmillan Company.
13

another’s throats. That is how the Crusades began-to wrest
the Holy Sepulchre from the hands of the infidels; and
there followed a series of wars and massacres, a period of
turmoil and tribulation. And where are the Crusaders now?
They are gone with the wind of history. The Zionists also, I
dare, say, will be swept away by the hurricane of the future.
But the trouble is that if any miscalculation takes place, the
whole world might blow up, because the Zionists, as I will
show you presently, are indeed capable of blowing up this
whole world, How? Through the influence they exercise all
over the Western World. I dare say too that if the Soviet
Union does not watch out, they will also exercise a great
deal of influence inside that country. I do not know about
Red China; we do not recognize Red China. Mr. Tckoah
spoke of the destruction of Jerusalem by the Jordanians.
He now rationalizes-not he, personally, but the authorities
in Israel-by referring to the excavations that are being
darried out by none other than great archaeologists. The
names of illustrious people were recited by Mr. Tekoah,
people who have been invited to Jerusalem to see how they
can make a new city of it-l dare say a new Babylon. The
Dome of the Rock has been considered by all architectsincluding Gustave Lebon, who was also a great psychologist
and wrote La psychologie des Foules2 -as one of the most
beautiful of artistic achievements. It so happens that the
Dome of the Rock is built on what was at one time
Solomon’s Temple. But who destroyed the Temple of
Solomon? First of all, let us find out who built it: the
Canaanites built it, the Canaanites from Lebanon. The
father of King Solomon was none other than King David.
David was a shepherd, and the Canaanites preceded those
tribes that are referred to today as Jewish tribes. King
Solomon was the son of David the Shepherd. Everyone
belonged to a tribal society in that part of the world. I do
not have to recall the jealousy of Saul because David played
the flute. He was a shepherd and shepherds played the
flute: that was the music of those days. King Solomon
wanted to build a temple: he asked the aid of Lebanon and
the cedars of Lebanon were cut down. Phoenician or
Canaanite architects built the Temple of King Solomon.
Did any Arab destroy the Temple of Solomon? The
Remans destroyed the Temple of Solomon. Where did the
Romans come from? They came from Europe. All the
destruction in the Holy Land comes from Europe. Who
destroyed Jerusalem? It was destroyed due to the intrusion
of the Europeans into that part of the world. They do not
leave us alone. And now come those European Zionists.
Our Jews would never have thought of any such action,
They were good Arabs. They distinguished themselves in
Baghdad and they distinguished themselves in Spain. They
wrote in Arabic. Many of them were scientists. The Arabs
are proud of them. We did not hear of this Zionism until
the early nineteenth century when Herzl, having been
exasperated by the maltreatment of the Jews on the part of
the Europeans, thought that the Jews should have a
national home of their own. At one time, as I mentioned
before, they thought of Uganda. But I do not have to go
into all this history again. It is already in the record.

Genesis, Jerusalem, before the old biblical Israel was
established, was ruled for hundreds of years by a King
called Melchisedek. When did those European Zionists
come to Jerusalem? We know that before the middle of the
nineteenth century Jerusalem was still surrounded by its
sixteenth century wall-that was after the Crusades; the
Crusades had been liquidated by that time. It was not until
after lg.58 that Sir Moses Montefiore-I suppose he was
knighted by Britain, otherwise he would not be called
“Sir”-built
a Jewish religious quarter. There had been no
religious quarter to speak of. There were Jews living in
Jerusalem, living like the Arabs. These were Arab Jews. The
emphasis has been laid on this today by my colleague from
Jordan; and rightly so because, after all, the Old City of
Jerusalem was part of Jordan. But Jerusalem is not only an
Arab city, Jerusalem is a Moslem city, and at one time the
Christians thought it was a Christian city. It is the spiritual
city of 600 million Moslems.
105. In Mr. Tekoah’s arguments he used such hackneyed
terms as “democratic processes” and “democratic procedures”. But democracy has been perverted since the days of
Damocles. Even in Periclean days, democracy was for
certain Athenians only, not for all Athenians. Everybody
who lived outside Athens was called a barbarian. And here
comes the West speaking about democracy-also
other
countries, although I do not think they use the term so
much; they use new terms, since all sorts of ideologies have
sprung up in the world, liberal or left or right or centre or
conservative and so on. If we go by the democratic
yardstick, there are 16 million or 17 million Jews in the
world. May they increase and prosper: we have nothing
against the Jews as such. They are prospering anyway,
without us; they are prospering mostly in the United States
of America; they have prospered before, in England; they
have prospered in South Africa, where they have the
diamonds and the gold. Well, good luck to them: as we say
in Arabic, may they prosper even more, but at a little
greater distance from us.
106. There are 600 million Moslems and there are about
1,000 million Christians. By dint of what logic, by what
yardstick of justice, should a small segment of the Jews
who started the Zionist movement say that because of their
religious association with Jerusalem, Jerusalem should be
the capital of Judaism? The Christians tried that argument
before, during the Crusades, but the motivatidn behind the
Crusades was economic and political. When Pope Urban II
found that his vassals, who were the princes of Europe, felt
they should be independent of him in temporal matters,
and when Europe was at that time suffering from wars
among those vassals, and because economically it was
backward and underdeveloped, Urban II proclaimed the
Crusades. Peter the Hermit was his propagandist. He said:
“Why are you killing one another here in Etlrope? Go to
the Holy Land and wrest the Holy Sepulchre from the
hands of the infidels.” And who were the infidels? The
Moslems. And the people did not know that the most
revered prophet in the Koran was Jesus. To wrest the Holy
Sepulchre from the hands of the infidels-and the motivation of the religious and temporal heads of Europe at that
time was political and economic. It was a diversion from
the national awakening of the princes, to get them to go
and explore other lands and not to continue cutting one

107. And our colleague, Mr. Tekoah, has the temerity to
say that the Jordanians desecrated the Holy Land. He
mentioned slums and latrines. I do not know whether the
2 Paris,Alcon,
14

1895.

Zionists took some chlorine or some other disinfectant with
them when they went there. I was in the Old City of
Jerusalem in 1925. It was a very old city; it was as clean as
any other old city. I did not smell anything foul in the air.
108. When the wall of a synagogue in New York or in any
other Western city is @astered with an insolent sticker or is
scribbled on with impolite language against Judaism, a hue
and ciry is raised and the whole world is astir: look at
anti-Semitism. But when a revered mosque in Jordan is
seized for allegedly civic purposes, it seems that the Arabs
have no way of arousing world public opinion, because the
mass media of information are in the hands of the Zionists,
We all feel sorry when a place of worship is desecrated, I
must say, whether it is a synagogue, a church or a mosque. I
guess that Mr. Tekoah must be familiar with the New
Testament, even though he does not believe in it, and I shall
quote the following from it: “They see the thorn in their
brother’s eye, but they do not see the beam in their own
eye.” That is human nature. It does not apply only to the
Zionists; it sometimes applies to the Arabs too. But here it
applies to what is being done in Jerusalem.
109. Jerusalem is sacred to the Christians, to the Moslems
and to the Jews. Let us forget that it is a part of Palestine.
It is a Holy City to those three monotheistic faiths. Why
should the Zionists make it their capital? If we follow
democratic procedure, the Chl-istians should dominate
because they are the majority of the three monotheistic
faith. But most of the Christians have become secular. Also,
most of the Jews who live here in the New World have
become secular, as well as most of those who live in
Europe. They have become assimilated or, with respect to
those who have not, the question of their religion is
something between themselves and their own conscience.
They do not make an issue of it. In France there are many
Jews who are my friends, and one could not know whether
they are Jews or Gentiles. What is the difference? They are
good Frenchmen. By what yardstick of justice should
Jerusalem be the capital of Judaism, when the first Kibbla
in Islam-the Kibbla, for the information of members, is
where the Moslems face in prayer-was
not Mecca or
Medina, but Jerusalem, aside from the subsequent associations that Islam, religiously or spiritually, had with Jerusalem?

arrangements. Mr. Tekoah talks of discrimination. I have in
mind a very good book; he has probably purchased it
already. I recommend it to everyone, I wish the author
success, and I hope that his publishers will not make more
money. It is a Jew who wrote that book-a very objective
Jew. His name is Barnet Litvinoff, of Russian origin, British
by adoption but I believe he is cosmopolitan in attitude, I
was amongst the first to read his book. The title is “A
Peculiar Peopleyy3meaning the Jews. And I want to quote
freely from Mr. Barnet Litvinoff, a very honest author.
Mr. Tekoah speaks of discrimination.
Listen
to
Mr. Litvinoff:
“In fact, the Oriental Jews of Israel constitute a more
perplexing social problem than the Arabs. They too have
made the rueful discovery that equality as a constantly
proclaimed theory need not guarantee equality in practice.” That is from page 275.
Here is another quotation from Mr. Litvinoff:
“The citizens of Oriental origin”-he does not say
whether they are Jews or Gentiles-“felt
they were
discriminated against, for the best jobs, the key positions
of influence, the good residential areas and the richest
farm lands were in the hands of Europeans.“-discrimination.
112. When the Arab Jews lived amongst us, they had
banks; they had buildings; they lived amongst us; our
neighbours were Jews. We did not say they were Jew or
Gentile: we do not discriminate in our part of the world. If
there was a tolerant people it was the Moslems and the
Arabs towards the Jews, because we considered that they
worshipped the same God. Jews are people, and there are
good ones amongst them as there are amongst the Gentiles,
and there are bad ones amongst them as there are amongst
the Gentiles. But how can you help but discriminate when
some of their religious leaders insist that they constitute an
exclusive society, claiming that they are the “chosen people
of God”, and that they should never be assimilated-or, if
assimilated, that they should not identify themselves
wholly with the people of the country of adoption or even
the country of birth?
113. The Talmud states that a child born of a Jewish
mother and a Gentile uncircumcised father may be considered a Jew-you see, they forgot that the Moslems are
circumcised and did not take the Moslems into consideration-1 repeat: a child born of a Jewish mother and a
Gentile uncircumcised father may be considered a Jew, but
not the child of a parentage in the reverse order. What more
discrimination do you want-what more exclusivity? But
many Jews do not believe in all those antiquated traditions.
We have our antiquated traditions ourselves. The younger
generation is shedding them away. And remember that the
Talmud was written by 2,000 scholars and rabbis during
nine centuries. So the Zionists draw not only on the Bible
but also on the Talmud when it suits their purpose; and
they are more secular than I am. I am religious in my
private life, but I am secular when I am sitting here and
talking strictly from a detached and objective point of view.

110. I am willing to wager anything that before the Israeli
question came under the focus of world attention there
were not more than 3 million or 4 million Jews who
thought that they should go back to Jerusalem. The Jews
became citizens of various countries. Why should 2 million
or 3 miIlion Jews under the banner of Zionism consider
that they have an inalienable right to Jerusalem? Why?
Because the Christians, after the Crusades, washed their
hands of Jerusalem? All right, that was their business. If
the Christians have washed their hands of Jerusalem and do
not claim it any more, the Moslems have not done so-and
there are 600 million of them. Let those Governments who
sent instructions to you gentlemen ponder this fact: sooner
or later, that dormant giant of Islam might be roused. And I
hope it will not be wronged when roused, because the
innocent will suffer, among the Moslems and the Jews alike.
111. Let us talk dispassionately and detachedly and
objectively on this question, not out of certain political

3 New York, Weidenfcld and Nicolson, 1969.

15

The door which Mr. Truman and others had hoped to slam
in the face of the Soviet Union fell away from its hinges,
and one does not have to look with a microscope for the
Soviet presence all over the Middle East. Soviet warships are
in the Eastern Mediterranean, in the Red Sea and the
Persian Gulf, and some Russian sailors, I am told, have been
enjoying cruises on the Shat-al-Arab, the confluence of the
waters of the Tigris and the Euphrates. Soviet military,
economic and technical assistance in most Arab countries
has outpaced assistance from the West. But that is not all.
The northern tier of the Western defences in the Middle
East has crumbled. The Soviet Union had developed
friendly relations with its southern neighbours of the
Middle East. All of them happen to be Moslem States
bound by brotherly ties with Arab Moslem neighbours. The
Russians no longer have to do any leap-frog@& as it was
called, over that northern tier. They are in the Middle East.
They strolled easily and they are navigating in the waters
surrounding the area. If Mr. Gromyko were familiar with
Mr. Robert Browning’s famous poem, Rabbi Ben Ezra, he
would gleefully recite: “Grow old along with me; the best is
yet to be.”

114. But let us examine why all this trouble is still with
us-and Palestine is only part of the trouble. I want to be
frank with my colleagues sitting around this table, especially three colleagues, who sit alphabetically next to each
other: the representatives of the United States, the United
Kingdom, and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. I
happened to be present at Lake Success in 1947 when the
partition of Palestine was voted. At one time the United
States and its Western allies had thought that placing
Palestine and Jerusalem under a joint American-BritishFrench trusteeship would appease Arab fears and allay
Zionist suspicions until a workable solution could be found
for the Palestine question. But when it was whispered at
Lake Success that if Palestine were to be made into a Trust
Territory there was nothing to deter the Soviet Union from
asking to be a co-trustee, the Western allies regarded such a
contingency as a catastrophe-that was at the beginning of
the cold war-because the Russians would then succeed in
getting their foot in the door of the Middle East.
Communism in those days was a political taboo in Western
countries, and worse than the plague for Western interests
abroad. So Senator Austin-and I dealt with him personally-the representative of the United States, toyed with an
interim soIution based on a joint trusteeship over Palestine
and Jerusalem-a special arrangement for Jerusalem, in fact.
But it was feared that that would lead to a sanguinary
conflict and Senator Austin withdrew the idea, on secret
instructions from Mr. Truman, the then President of the
United States. Instead, the partition plan was revived, under
pressures which the Zionists exercised on the White House.
All of you can read Mr. Truman’s memoirs: I do not have
to cite them chapter and verse.

117. Unabashedly, certain Western Governments still
support this artificial State in our midst which caused all
this trouble. They allow themselves to be swayed by Zionist
pressure, and I am sure that the Western Powers would not
take exception to seeing the whole of the Arab countries
go up in flames in order to light the cigarette of Israel, Mr.
Truman and his allies wanted to keep Russia out of the
Middle East. Mr. Gromyko is no longer smiling cryptically
as he had done at Lake Success, where a Russian success
was scored by a vote for the partition of Palestine. He must
be laughing wholeheartedly these days, to himself, if not in
public, and he who laughs last laughs best. But the situation
in the Middle East is not a laughing matter. Who knows?
The situation may deteriorate and it may ignite the spark
that will blow up the whole world. Zionism will then have
succeeded in destroying mankind in the style of the
infuriated, blind Samson, who flourished and perished in
the land of the Biblical Philistines-the Philistines who gave
their name to Palestine. This is no laughing matter.,We sit
here and read statements and receive instructions from our
Governments, but the stakes are high in the Middle East.
The balance of power is not very stable. With the lethal
weapons of today, God knows what may happen tomorrow: there will be no more Jews or Gentiles left to weep,
This is a serious matter. Do not take it lightly. The four
Powers meet. One of their representatives is familiar with
our area: Lord Caradon. The others know about it by
hearsay and the reports of experts, but here comes a man
from the area who has been seized of these problems for
the past 49 years to tell you time and again of the danger,
and you dismiss what he is saying as nothing to merit
serious thought,

115. After the partition plan was announced by Senator
Austin as the best solution, Mr. Gromyko would not be
checkmated by the Senator from the hoary mountains of
New Hampshire, who had no choice but to carry out the
imperious instructions of Mr. Truman, an erstwhile Senator
from the Middle West-from Missouri, I believe. This was in
contravention of the knowledgeable advice of the experts
of the State Department, specialists on the Middle East, To
the surprise of all of us at Lake Success-and, as I have said,
I was sitting there-when the partition plan was submitted
to the vote, Mr. Gromyko acquiesced. None of the gentlemen present in this Council were there. I think Mr. Bunche
was there. I was there, and I can tell you what happened.
The Western Powers had put their heads together to keep
the Soviet Union out of the Middle East, by spiking all
~dutions
short of establishing a Zionist State. Mr, Gromy
ko, with his cryptic smile, .went along with them, no doubt
chuckling in private at the nai’vety of the Western leaders in
thinking that they could bar Russia from having a stake in
the Middle East. Ten years later, I was present and our
Secretary-General was present too. Some of you at least
were present in 1956. I am not reading from books: I am
citing facts. Ten years later Mr. Krushchev, supporting the
Arab case, articulated his famous threat in the United
Nations General Assembly to destroy those States that
committed aggression against Egypt in collusion with Israel.
Were it not for the wise policy of Mr. Dulles in those days
the world might have been blown up through some
miscalculation and we would not be here,

118. Why? Because we do not exercise power. But if
those who exercise power do not heed the lessons of
history they will fall, and their fall will be great. What irony
it would be if Jerusalem, the City of Peace, were to ignite
the spark that would blow up this world, Why? Because
the Middle East is at the crossroads of three continents. It is
the gate from the West to the whole continent of Asia. As if
we did not have sufficient warning from what has gone on

116. Mr. Gromyko had proven himself the winner in the
game on the chequer-board of international power politics.
16

in the eastern gate of Asia-at one time in Korea and now in
Viet-Nam. If giant Asia, the Asian people, that dormant
giant, becomes conscious that it has been maltreated by
Westerners throughout the last few centuries, who knows
what the consequences may be?

lend her a few pounds-she is in her eighties-until the
department in chirge of tourism in London could approve
her request for more funds to be converted into Swiss
francs so that she might continue to get medical care where
she was staying.

119. How is it that this small State of Israel, a European
State with which the Arabs are not only at loggerheads but
engaged in perpetual conflict-which
is deplorable because
it involves the loss of life, quite often the innocent lives of
Jews and Gentiles-a State established by a handful of
leaders from Eastern and Central Europe, can lord it not
only over the Arab Middle East but over the the whole
world? Again I am not going to read from the pages of
history. I will cite facts to you because I have lived here in
the United Nations for 23 years with this question.

122. But what do the American Jewish agencies do here
year in year out? They export millions upon millions of
dollars abroad and further weaken the purchasing power of
the at-one-time mighty dollar. It is not so mighty any more.
In 1939 I could purchase with a quarter what I have to pay
one dollar for today. The American taxpayer is continuously burdened with the assistance that is being lavishly
proffered to Israel officially and the taxpayer’s dollar is
being relentlessly eroded by the ever-flowing stream of
munificent contributions made to Israel. The result of all
this is that the situation has got so far our of hand that
American banks are borrowing Eurodollars abroad at
usurious interest rates-at 10 or 11 l/2 per cent; the latest
quotation, a week ago, was 11 l/2 per cent-to bring those
dollars back home from abroad. Those dollars have been
swiftly flowing out of the country for the purpose, inter
alia, of keeping the usurping State of Israel solvent in the
Middle East. At whose expense? At the expense of the
indigenous people of Palestine, who were robbed of their
right of self-determination. Certain States are accused of
squandering thousands of millions of dollars to land on the
moon and explore other planets in our solar system. But it
is their business if they wish to do so, and such expenditures, exorbitant as they are, can be considered as falling
within their own national jurisdiction. But when those
self-same States make available a great splurge of funds for
Israel-Israel,
which is still lording it over the Arab
population that has been trodden underfoot-I think I may
be permitted to say that this question does not any longer
fall within the domestic jurisdiction of States. He who abets
the aggressor or usurper should be deemed equally responsible.

120. After the Second World War two world Powers
emerged, the United States and the Soviet Union, and we
are caught in the power politics between those two giants.
Again we go back to what Mr. Truman did after the British
threw the Palestine question into the lap of the United
Nations. Mr. Truman counted on the United States Jewish
vote to win the election in 1948. No wonder that, aside
from the pressure he exercised on foreign Governments that
needed United States financial assistance in the wake of the
Second World War; he was the first Chief of State to
recognize Israel before Israel declared its independence
through Mr. Weizmann. But more important than all of
this: during his four years in office-1 am talking of those
years between 1948 and 1952 because he had served as
President after Mr. Roosevelt’s death in 1945-at the time
when the Israeli population did not exceed 1 million,
Mr. Truman disbursed to Israel from the so-called Point
Four and other economic programmes as much as that for
five Arab States put together, namely, Egypt, Jordan,
Lebanon, Syria and Iraq, in assistance from the same
source, from the United States, although the aggregate
population of those five Arab countries was more than 45
times that of the artificial Jewish State.

123. This question of aggression is a most intricate
subject. One might say it is a vicious circle of cause and
effect, or an interminable chain of action and reaction. But
if you go to the genesis of the Palestine issue, you will find
that the cause of the aggression in Palestine ca’me from
outside the region, namely from the Judaized Chazars or
Ashkenazim of Eastern and Central Europe-Europeanssupported by Zionists in all Christendom, especially those
in Western Europe and in the United States and other parts
of the New World. Hence, the main cause, nay, the whole
cause of the trouble stems initially from Europe.

121. But that is not all. Israel was bolstered financially
with subventions exceeding $1,500 million-and that is a
conservative estimate-by
none other than the United
Jewish Appeal of America. Is it any wonder that the United
States has developed such an adverse balance of payments?
The hard-earned money of the taxpayers is bountifully
distributed so that Palestinians-and I mean by Palestinians
the indigenous people of Palestine-should continue to be
usurped of their homeland. Philanthropically the United
Jewish Appeal of America erodes the value of the dollar by
exporting millions upon millions of dollars to Israel whilst
the United States Government is continually endeavouring
to adopt stringent measures to ameliorate its balance of
payments. Only last year Mr. Johnson’s administration was
seriously thinking of placing restrictions on travel abroad in
order to restrain the relentless outflow of dollars from this
country. The American people were exhorted to discover
the beauties-I mean the scenic, natural beauties-of their
own country, to help their own balance of payments. This
is precisely what the British are doing, patriotically. Each
traveller abroad is not allowed more than 250, An old lady
I have known for the past 40 years was sick and had to go
to Lugano. She is a British citizen. She asked me if I could

124. You see the parallel between Zionism and the
Crusades now? Both are European movements. Palestine
under the banner of Zionism is the source of the tragedy.
These Europeans were Ashkenazim, not Sephardim. The
Sephardim are our own people; they are Jews, but our own
people. You, Mr. Tekoah, you Zionists, are Ashkenazim.
European Ashkenazim intruded into Palestine under the
banner of Zionism just as centuries before the Christian
European hordes swarmed over Palestine by land and by
sea, mostly from Western Europe, allegedly-again I must
say this-to wrest the Holy Sepulchre from the hands of the
infidels. The infidels were those indigenous people of
Palestine, many of whom had originally been Jews. Those
17

i

---

,..
infidels considered Jesus one of their most revered prophets.
125. All this incidentally, was when America belonged to
the Red Indians. I am talking of the era of the Crusades.
And where are the Red Indians now? Mostly in reservations. Before he left office Mr. Johnson, the former
President of the United States, appealed to the American
people to contribute generously to improving the lot of the
Red Indians, whose standard of living is far below that
enjoyed by the white popuiation. Other voices, official and
unofficial, have been concurrently raised for the amelioration of the economic, social and cultural conditions of the
Negropopulation of this country, of our host country. All
this clamouris asit shouldbe and deservesour praise.But
all those ardent and vociferousappealsmadeon behalf of
the Red Indians and the NegroAmericansare beingmade
when hundredsof millionsof dollarshavebeensystematically siphoned off from the New World into the ZionM
State which was foisted upon the indigenouspeople of
Palestine.What a sadcommentaryon Mr. Wilson’sprinciple
of self-determinationformulated at the VersaillesConferencein 1919. What a sadcommentarytoo on the principle
of self-determinationthat was enshrinedin the United
NationsCharterin 1945.
126. In 1919, the indigenouspeople of Palestineconstituted 94 per cent of the populationof that land. And what
doesour colleagueMr. Tekoahspeakof here? He speaksof
the “discrimination” of the Arabs against the Jews.
Ninety-four per cent of the indigenouspeopleof Palestine
driven out, most of them, from their homes-isthis not
discrimination? And where do we find the natives of
Palestinenow, the nativeswho have beenusurpedof their
homeland? They are huddled together in campsas refugees,kept alive on a paltry daily ration amountingto six or
sevencentsper person.I think the Red Indiansfare better
in their reservations.I think that here a personwho hasan
income of $3,000 a year is consideredpoor. But for the
Arabs, six or sevencentsa day is quite enough.The irony
of the whole sad situation is that the biggestsharein
keepingthoserefugeesalive is contributed by Americanand
WesternEuropeans.They arebeingkept in a perpetualstate
of claustrophobia,cooped up as they are in miserable
camps.

have not arrived at that stageyet. Why do YOU want the
Palestiniansto go and bundle up with the Arab States?Is it
just to makeroom for the European Zionists who cameand
exploited the land? What logic is there in that argument?
And who foots the bill for Israel’s adventure, which is
gloriousto the Zionists and perfidious to the Palestinians?
Who is actually footing the bill for this adventure, 01
misadventure? For indeed, whether it is glorious 01
perfidiousis besidethe poirit. Who is footing the bill? It is
the European and American taxpayers who, although
considered affluent by world standards of living, are
burdened by interminable debts and live under constant.
fear and tension, to such an extent that thousandsupon.
thousandsin the Westernworld today hope to escapefrom
their plight by resorting to addictive sedatives,sedative:
drugs,whether obtainedby prescription or from pushers.
128. Leave us alone: we are evolving our own traditions
and customs in the Middle East. Why do you want to
intrude upon us from the West, or from America or from
any part of the world for that matter? And who foots the:
bill for all this imbroglio in the Middle East? It is alsothe
peopleof the Middle Eastwho are fopting the bill, andthey
are suffering in trying to expel this extraneous Zionist
element from their midst, as they did centuries ago in
trying to get rid of the Europeanmarauders,not necessarily
by slaughteringthem but by assimilatingthe remnantsthat
did not return to their native lands. Many remnantsof
those crusaderswere Arabized. They forgot even theil
native tongues.

129. We do not have to define aggressionin the Sixth
Committee to seewho is to blame for the trouble m the
Middle East, of which Jerusalemis now the focus. Wedo
not have to go into the dialectic of causeand effect or any
obscurantistargumentsin searchingfor a peacefulsolution
for the Middle East problem. The cause is simply the
incursion of a EuropeanZionist elementin the body politic
and body socialof the Middle East. The effect hasbeen21
strong reaction to that cause. What happened to the
Crusaders?They were swept away, as I saidbefore, by the
winds of history. If Israel persists in its aggressionin
Jerusalemand elsewhere,it no doubt will be blown up asa
State by the hurricane of the turbulent future. Many Jews
and Arabs will perishin the holocaust, but short of a WBI
that may bring about total annihilation, the survivingJews
127. Why do they not go and bundleup with their other and Arabs of Palestinewill have no choice but to live with
Arab brethren? Why does not Germany take Austria’? one another as brothers under the common flag, not 01
They are both ethnologically the same-they speakthe
Israel but-if they do not want the name “Palestine”
samelanguage.The Austriansdo not want to be absorbed. becauseit was associatedwith the word “Philistine’‘-of
The Germanstried to absorbthem during the Anschluss. humanism.Humanismis the only true “ism”. All the othcl
The Palestinianshave a personality of their own, like the
“isms” are suspicious.Today the world can afford only one
Syrians, like the Lebanese,like the Egyptians, like the
“ism”: humanism.Even patriotism is now consideredasthe
Iraqis. It is their land. Wehave no right to tell them to go refugeof scoundrels.Humanismis the only solution.
and live with their cousins.Why do not someof the States
of the new hemisphere,for example,Canada,saythat there
130. I have a brief word to say not to my Jewishfriends
shouIdbe a union betweenCanadaandthe United States? but to the Jewswho have written to me. They havewritten
The Canadiansare Canadians.Most of them speakEnglish me many letters which I have received in my office. I wanit
and most of them camefrom Europe, asdid most of the
to draw their attention to a matter so that one day they
Americans. In your area, Mr. President, why could not
may not be madethe scapegoatin any society that may run
Honduras,for example, say to El Salvador,or CostaRica berserk-not becauseof the Jews, but becauseof tensions
say to another State, “Come let us bundleup togetherand
and greedand the scramblefor economicadvantagesamong
lose our nationalities”? That would be ideal if one day it
nationsto the extent that millions are sentlike sheepto the
cameto pass.Then there would be unity amongus.But we slaughterhouses.In the year 1903 at the time when the
18

United Kingdom was worried about the Zionist movement-1 am speaking of 1903 and not 1917-when, after’
the then Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, none other
than Balfour, had appointed a Royal Commission on
Aliens, he said in Parliament: “A state of things could easily
be imagined in which it would not be to the advantage of
civilization, of this country, that there should be an
immense body of ‘persons”-parenthetically,
I should say
that the Jews numbered 250,000 of a population of 42
million in Britain in those days-“who,
however patriotic,
able and industrious and however they threw themselves
into the national life, still by their own action remained a
people apart and not merely held a religion differing from
the vast majority of their fellow countrymen, but only
intermarried among themselves.” That was a problem in
1903.
13I, Fourteen years later, Balfour declared his scheme for
a national home for the Jews in Palestine. Is that
significant? I wonder sometimes whether the Balfour of
1903 was the same as the Balfour of 1917. I got that from
British records, Lord Caradon. Maybe he wanted to get rid
of those Jews; I do not know. But still, if you go back and
think of things, Balfour was related to the Roseberrys, and
I think the Roseberrys were the uncles of Balfour, and one
fo the Roseberrys was married to a Jewess, but he was more
British, I think, than Jewish.
132. I said that I would quote freely from Mr. Litvinoffs
book so as to bring home to my Jewish friends outside
these halls, and also to those who think that Zionism has a
case in the United Nations, that they should think twice
and report to their Governments that the question is a very
serious one. Mr. Litvinoff says: “The Jews as a whole are a
peculiar people. Israel reborn is in many respects a peculiar
State.” He then says: “Zionism was only one of the
solutions, if the most obvious, put forward to cure the
Jewish problem in the nineteenth century.” Did the Arabs
create this problem? It is the Europeans who created the
problem. Should we pay the price-we, the indigenous
people of the Middle East?

discrimination against them, many laws were enacted ic
Europe whereby they were even given privileges, as if to
wash away the guilt of past centuries when the Jews were
discriminated against in Europe.
134. I am sorry that I have taken so much of the Council’s
time, but I want to show members of the Council how the
Zionists operate and get that influence which they wield all
over the world. I shall quote from liberal Jewish authors.
Again, as I said, I have to depend on the latest book on the
Jewish people-Litvinoff s book.
“The American Jewish Committee”-says
Mr. Litvinoff-“threw
itself whole-heartedly into the task of
helping Israel without surrendering by one scintilla its
view that Israel had no right to intervene in the affairs of
Jewish America,”
Many Jews whom I know were embarrassed by the
pressures exerted by Zionism on them.
“Blaustein was one of the few Americans of great
wealth to back Harry Truman for the White House in
1948, though it was Eisenhower who sent him to the
United Nations as a member of the United States
delegation to the UN. Like the B’nai Brith, the Committee”-meaning
the American Jewish Committee“strongly took the stand in its early days that racial
oppression . , . was a Jewish issue.”
I knew Mr. Blaustein personally: he was with me in the
same Committee, the Third Committee. He was a most
mild-mannered gentleman of very few words when he
served his country, the United States, incidentally, in that
Committee. I was told he was one of the wealthiest men in
the host country, which explains why he was a man of very
few words. His wealth spoke for him. Money is more
eloquent than speech. No wonder the French have a phrase
for it: ‘II, ‘urgent fait tout. ” But I must say that Mr. Blaustein was not “stuck” on himself on account of his fortune:
he liked art; but I think he made a mistake by donating that
cock-eyed sculpture in front of the United Nations. My
good friend Mr. Bunche told me there were pressures to
consider it as a great work of art. I don’t understand that
cock-eyed sculpture. Maybe I am old-fashioned. Mr. Blaustein donated that sculpture.

133. But Mr. Litvinoff continues:
“The majority”-meaning
the Jews-“preferred
either
assimilation or emigration to established States, or social
revolution at home, as the means to give the Jews
equality in the world. Their reasoning was in part logical,
in part instinctive. They desired to break loose from
religion, not to become enclosed by it, for the Jews were
secularizing their society, One aspect of Jewish ghettoization was Jewish self-hatred.”

135. But here again Mr. Litvinoff says:
“Such, too, is Jewish America, the young lions of the
underground hipster Press loading LSD and taking sex as
far as print will carry it while calling for revolutions all
round”-that
is on the one hand-.“and the sturdy
upholders of State Department Americanism waving their
colours and shaking their fists at Communism in all its
forms.”

Nobody hates the Jews; it seems here that they hate
themselves, sometimes. Litvinoff continues:
“After many centuries of inbreeding, of choking in
confined places, of dressing, behaving, speaking differently from their neighbours, was it not time that the Jews
ceased to be preoccupied with themselves and merged
with peoples of the world? ”

These Jewish factions may fight tooth and nail among
themselves but when it comes to rationalizing Israel’s
aggression they are all one. Of course, we Arabs do the
same thing: we may fight like cats and dogs among
ourselves, but when it comes to the invader-who happens
to be Israel here-we are all one, too. This is human nature.

The Jews have been happy wherever they have gone
because after the Dreyfus affair, and also after a lot of
19

Mr. Litvinoff, the Foreign Minister, in Europe. He wasa
great Foreign Minister and, incidentally, he wasa Jew.I dlo
not know whether he professed Judaism. He was a grea.t
Foreign Minsiter of the Soviet Union. I am quoting from
Barnet, the British Litvinoff, not from the Foreign Minister.
He says:

I am showing you why Zionism exerts such world influence. Again Mr. Litvinoff speaks:
“Every known publicity device blares to imply that by
giving to the United Jewish Appeal a man is a better
American and a better Jew. Israeli citizens, from the rank
of cabinet minister downward, are brought over on
speaking tours and at important meetings they are paired
off with accommodating Senators, whose fees reach
$l,OOO’a speech.”

“The forces that first illicitly, and then openly, worked
for the overthrow of the Czars found the Jews flocking to
their ranks, and entire branches of the Communist Party
were made of these Yiddish-speaking Yevektsias.”

I think that is not much; I was once offered $2,000 to
speak, but I refused. And it till be known that all the
Senator has to do-and this is my comment-is to scintillate
his personality, dine and wine, and only read a speech
which is written for him by a ghost writer, and the ghost
writer most probably is a Zionist. Now, this is the United
States, one of the Western countries that support Zionism-not only in 1947; we are talking about the present.
136. Let us see what Britain has been doing. Mr. Barnet
Litvinoff, who is a British subject, says:
“Jewish representation in the House of Commons
comprised 38 Labourites and 2 Conservatives in 1968.
This was 9 more than the number of Catholics, who are
14 times as numerous in Britain.”
Is it any wonder they exercise a great deal of influence on
the Government of the United Kingdom, a Western
country? But here is the upshot of it all. On page 161
Mr. Litvinoff says: “The reason why the Jews of Britain do
not choose to live in Israel is that in general they are happy
where they are.” These are good Jews. I suppose that some
of them can enjoy non-Kosher breakfasts of bacon and eggs
without being watched-aside from their prosperity from
the department stores and chain stores they own, like
Marks and Spences, and being exclusive dealers in gold
bullion and finance. More power to them. Why not? They
know their business. But these people stay in the United
Kingdom. They do not pester us in our part of the world.
137. Now I going to do some leap-frogging across the
Channel to France. Mr. Litvinoff says “Politicians in France
have astonishingly started to woo the Jewish vote.” Of
course this was after General De Gaulle stepped down. But
why should I alwaysquote Mr. Litvinoff? Why not quote a
very respectable newspaper, Le Monde? Le Monde wrote
that in six months, a committee to raise $2 million for
Viet-Nam has collected just over $250,000 and considered
that a success;but in three days the Jewish Solidarity Fund
for Israel had passedthe $2 million mark. The best rally for
peace in Viet-Nam, which had been in preparation for six
months, had brought together 3,000 delegates from all
parts of the country. On 31 May, there were some 30,000
people gathered before the Israeli Embassy in Paris,
although this meeting had been improvised 24 hours before.
How can we Arabs expect that you will render justice to
the people of Palestine, when the Zionists are so influential
in your own countries? We are wasting our time here.

That is from page 72. On page 74 Mr. Litvinoff goeson to
inform us :
“If the Jews were in the main beh’nd the Revolution,
they were not always out and out Leninists. Some of
them . . . considered the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk of March
1918 to be a surrender to the capitalist world. They
wanted the war against Germany resumed, and whenthey
sought to assassinateLenin it wasa Jewess,Dora Kaplan,
who volunteered to fire the pistol. The leader was
wounded and never fully recovered.”
139. I wish the United States had not closed its doors to
the European immigrants in 1924, for many of the Jews
who considered themselves oppressed could then have come
to this country. I remember that in the 1920s also Brazil,
Argentina and many other Latin American countries closed
the immigration doors in the faces of the Italians, and thst
produced Mussolini. They shut the door in their facesit1the
big continent and then helped them to colon&. The
United States shut the door in 1924 in the face of the Jews
and it supported them in 1947 in the colonization of
Palestine. Even Stalin wanted the mass of Jews cancel%
trated in Leningrad, Moskovia and Odessa to be far frown
the centres of influence, which explains his launching of the
project for the Jewish Republic of Biro-Bidjan. All this
happened after Zionism waslaunched in the early twentieth
century, and we have to pay the price. Not only the
Palestinians, the whole Arab East is in turmoil, and the
whole Middle East may yet suffer. This is very significant .in
showing how our American friends who are of Jewishfaith
look upon this experiment of Israel. Mr. Litvinoff again
speaks:
“Of the many thousands of American Jews who have
visited Israel, few decided to make their homes there, but
when an Israeli comes to America, either to work or asa
tourist or as a student or even perhaps as a Zionist
emissary, it is by no means certain that he will return
home.”
Many Jews consider that this is their promised land, not the
biblical one. America is the promised land, not Jemsalern,
not Palestine. why do the American Jews come back?
Because they have a better life here. Zionism is a Europesa
movement not too dissimilar from the Crusades, but 1
submit it is an anachronism.
140. The Soviet Union is being blamed for supplying arms
to a number of Arab countries. The Arab countries would
not have needed any arms had there not been a State ‘of
Israel in their midst. Let us seehow this arms game works.1

138. Now I want to come to the Russians and the Soviet
Union. I will start with Russia of the Tsarist days. Again we
go back to Mr. Litvinoff. I happened to know the original
20

am preparaing myself on the arms game so that I may
address myself to the question of disarmament in the
General Assembly’s First Committee next fall. These are
stray ,notes, but here are some more facts that should be
noted. We find that Britain sold to Israel 250 Centurions,
and all of Israel’s naval vessels were bought from Britain.
Until 1967 Edmond de Rothschild, the French banker,
supplied or financed Israel with arms purchased from
France. It took a courageous man like de Gaulle to say that
this arms race would finally plunge the whole Middle East
into flames. I read in the newspapers now that France is
considering supplying arms to Israel again. In 1956 Israel
used twenty-five P-51 Mustangs in their war against Egypt,
bought from a very neutral State, Sweden, a Western State.
From February 1965 to February 1966 the United States
sold arms secretly to Israel while professing to be neutral.
But that is not all. West Germany has sold American arms
through the back door to Israel since 1960 when the late
Chancellor Adenauer met with Mr. Ben-Gurion secretly and
when we Arabs were at peace with Germany. “We are going
to be neutral in this case” the Germans assured us but they
were meeting secretly with Israelis and making deals
through the back door. That is the Western world. The
Germans sold arms to the tune of $80 million, including
200 tanks. All of this, I repeat, was done secretly and at the
instigation of the Government of the host country.
141. Do you want me to reproduce the origin of those
facts? It is too late at this hour to reproduce the origin. I
have no secret agents. There are Americans who are fed up
and make documents available to us, just as some British
friends made documents available to us about the Balfour
Declaration when I was researching the question in the
1930s in Chancery Lane, where the British archives are
kept. Certain documents were not made available to me
because at that time 50 years had not elapsed. Baroody is
not speaking off the top of his head: he has been seized of
this problem for about half a century.
142. I never thought of the Germans as being hypocritical-because they were apt to be blunt even before Hitler.
If the Germans like a person they tell him they like him: if
they do not like him they may even tell him, “We hate
you.” But they learned from other Western countries how
to justify or rationalize such help given to Israel. The
Germans labelled the assistance to Israel, namely selling
arms secretly, as a moral debt. And their industrialists were
coming to our part of the world and saying, “HOW we feel
for you in all this intrusion, this invasion of Zionism into
your midst”. How can we believe anybody any more?
143. I do not think that there is any rancour or hatred in
my heart towards the Jews, or for that matter any hatred or
animosity against the Israelis, because, after all they are
human beings. But it is the law of life that when somebody
aggresses against somebody else, the one who is aggressed
against should react in self-defence. Now Israel is drunk
with the glory of its achievements, not only in war but in
its technical achievements at home-because, after all, the
Zionists came from a different area to ours.
144. But what shall we do here in the Council? Shall we
pass another resolution’? Shall we engage in longer deliberations? Shall we keep talking-I have cited the proverbs of

Solomon-when talk means penury and action is needed?
Are the big Powers prepared to take matters into their
hands and see that justice is done? Or shal1 we be false
witnesses, as we have been for several years, in the era of
the United Nations, about what is happening in the Far
East, as if that part of Asia were outside the scope of the
United Nations? Shall we hold sinecure jobs representirlg
our respective Governments, attending cocktail parties,
being dined and wined? Our diplomatic corps consists of
conscientious persons who sometimes unfortunately have
to act against their own conscience because of strict
instructions from their Governments,
145. If I have taken the floor today it is because I feel
myself responsible not only towards the Government I
represent, but also towards this Organization which I have
served in my humble capacity. Nobody wants to kill the
Jews or the Israelis, and I am sure that the Jews of Israel in
their innermost heart feel that they would be guilty if they
were to kill more Arabs, because they, the Israelis were the
original intruders.
146. What shall we do? I repeat what I said before. I hope
that the leaders of Israel will come to their senses and
realize that they cannot continue in this manner to
defy-not the United Nations; they have too many friends
in the United Nations-to defy a 100 million Arabs, on the
one hand, as far as Palestine is concerned, and 600 million
Moslems, on the other hand, as far as Jerusalem is
concerned. If I were a Jew myself I would let the better
part of wisdom rule my judgement.
147. But it is only natural that the Zionists, drunk as they
are at present with power, would heed no advice, especially
from someone who hails from that area. The leaders of
Israel are European. I know, for one thing, that may Jews
now living in Israel would like to see things work out in a
different manner; they would like to forget about this
ideology imported into the Middle East and, even though
some of them may be from Europe, live with their Arab
neighbours as brothers if they so choose-not necessairly
under the Palestinian flag, but as people who are prompted
by religious sentiments. They would like to live side by side
with the Arabs, in cantons, or in a b&national State, until
perhaps there occurs a re-evaluation in these climactic days
when moral values are being redefined, not necessarily
outside the context of the monotheistic religions but in a
manner that will keep abreast of the social and economic
developments of the world. For it is only then that there
will be peace in Palestine, only then will peace return to the
Holy City of Jerusalem. Otherwise, I am not sure that the
City of Jerusalem will not be destroyed, just as it was
destroyed before by other Europeans: I refer to the time
when the Temple of Solomon was razed to the ground.
148. The PRESIDENT (translated .fiom Spanish): As I
have no further speakers on my list I now propose, with the
consent of the Council, to adjourn this meeting.
149. Before doing so, however, I should like to add a few
words. First, a few words of explanation, although I realize
they may perhaps be unnecessary. Nevertheless, I prefer to
make the point explicitly. I invited the representatives of
Saudi Arabia, the Syrian Arab Republic and Morocco to

the Council for the unreserved co-operation I have been
given in the discharge of my duties.

take the seats reserved for them in this chamber solely
because there is not enough room at the Council table for
all of them to be seated there at the same time. In doing so,
I have followed the precedent established by long practice
in the Security Council.

151. The next meeting of the Council, to continue the
consideration of the item we have discussed today, is
scheduled for tomorrow, Tuesday, 1 July, at 3 p.m., under
the presidency of the representative of Senegal, who will be
President for the month of July.

150. The following words are of a personal nature. A few
hours from now the period during which I have had the
honour and responsibility of presiding over the Security
Council will come to an end. I wish on this occasion to
express my sincerest thanks to each and every member of

The meeting rose at 7.50 p.m.

22
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S. p.50 (or equivalent

in other currencies)

82095-November

1972-2,050
