United Nations

S/PV.5924

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

5924th meeting
Tuesday, 24 June 2008, 3.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Khalilzad/Mr. Wolff . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Grauls
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Spatafora
Mr. Ettalhi
Mr. Arias
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Kumalo
Mr. Quarrey
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Letter dated 11 June 2008 from the Permanent Representative of Djibouti to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2008/387)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-39798 (E)

*0839798*

S/PV.5924

The meeting was called to order at 3.40 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
Letter dated 11 June 2008 from the
Permanent Representative of Djibouti to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2008/387)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Djibouti and Eritrea, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I request the Protocol Officer to escort His
Excellency Mr. Dileita Mohamed Dileita, Prime
Minister of Djibouti, to a seat at the Council table.
Mr. Dileita Mohamed Dileita, Prime Minister of
Djibouti, was escorted to a seat at the Council
table.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to Mr. Dileita Mohamed
Dileita, Prime Minister of Djibouti.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. João
Honwana, Director of the Africa Division of the
Department of Political Affairs.
It is so decided.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mrs. Alice Mungwa, Adviser in the Permanent
Observer Mission of the African Union.
It is so decided.

2

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Yahya Mahmassani, Permanent
Observer of the League of Arab States.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in response to a letter dated 11 June 2008 from
the Permanent Representative of Djibouti addressed to
the President of the Security Council, which is
contained in document S/2008/387.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. João Honwana, Director of the Africa
Division of the Department of Political Affairs, to
whom I now give the floor.
Mr. Honwana: At the request of the Council, I
have the honour to present an update on the latest
reports we have received about the situation on the
border between Djibouti and Eritrea. At the outset, I
would like to reiterate that the United Nations does not
have a presence in the area and that this briefing relies
only on reports we have received. I look forward to
hearing the Prime Minister’s briefing for greater detail.
Since the Secretariat’s last briefing to the
Council, all our interlocutors have described the
situation at the border as calm but tense, with military
regroupings on either side of the border. Apparently,
the de facto ceasefire that Djibouti and Eritrea have
observed since last week continues to hold. According
to local Somali radio, Eritrea has reportedly deployed
heavy military equipment in Ras Doumeira, north-east
of Obock. Another source reported the reinforcement
of Eritrean troops near the town of Daddato, located
north-west of Obock. That may indicate tensions in the
north-west and the north-east of Djibouti. A Somali
newspaper also reported that, on 15 June, an Eritrean
gunboat was sunk after being hit by a missile. All the
crew of the gunboat are believed dead and it is not
known whether the missile was fired by a French
warship or the Djiboutian navy.
While the local press and other sources report
that Djiboutian forces have reoccupied lost ground and
have massively regrouped near the border, other
reports indicate that they have in fact retreated to a
position about four kilometres from the border in order

08-39798

S/PV.5924

to be out of range of Eritrean mortars. We also
understand that there is a new Ethiopian military
presence on the Ethiopian side of the meeting point of
the borders between Ethiopia, Eritrea and Djibouti.

Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of Eritrea, in New
York on 23 June. He claimed that Djiboutian
dramatization and internationalization of the border
incident had gotten out of hand.

Reportedly, some 300 French troops have been
placed in the north-east of Djibouti to provide medical
and logistical support to the Djiboutian army. The State
Secretary of the French Ministry of Defence was
expected to arrive in Djibouti today. He is expected to
meet with President Ismail Omar Guelleh to discuss the
border crisis and to visit French troops.

In turn, on the same day, the Permanent
Representative of Djibouti said that the situation at the
border was very risky and could ignite into a war at
any minute. Many soldiers had died as a result of the
fighting and there were numerous troops and heavy
equipment present at the border. He said that Eritrea
had thus far failed to explain the reasons for its
military presence in the area and refused to resume
dialogue with Djibouti. Eritrea had also rebuffed the
President of Yemen’s offer to act as a mediator. The
Permanent Representative added that Djibouti had
never had any intention of waging war, but had been
forced to respond to the attacks by Eritrea on the
ground. He stated that the current state of affairs was
costly to Djibouti and that both countries needed to
return to the status quo ante.

On 11 June, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
Eritrea issued a press statement accusing Djibouti of
conducting hostile anti-Eritrean campaigns and
“concocted animosity”. On 12 June, Eritrean State
radio in the local Tigrigna language blamed Djibouti
for the border issue and accused the United States of
inflaming regional conflicts. That was in response to a
United States State Department press release issued
earlier that condemned “Eritrea’s military aggression
against Djibouti”.
On the same day, during an emergency meeting,
the League of Arab States called on Eritrea to withdraw
its forces from the border area. France and Egypt have
also urged Eritrea to allow mediation efforts into the
conflict. In addition, on 12 June, the African Union
joined the United Nations in calling for talks between
Eritrea and Djibouti to end the border clashes. In a
statement, the African Union Peace and Security
Council urged the two countries to show maximum
restraint, resort to dialogue to resolve any bilateral
disputes and give their full cooperation to all efforts in
that regard.
The Secretariat remains in close contact with our
colleagues in the region and regularly meets with the
Permanent Representatives to receive views from both
sides. In a meeting with me on 19 June, the Permanent
Representative
of
Eritrea
acknowledged
that
skirmishes had occurred in the border area a few days
before, but he said that Djibouti had initiated the attack
and that Eritrea had only reacted in self-defence. He
blamed the United States for creating wars in the Horn
of Africa region. He also reiterated Eritrea’s peaceful
intentions towards Djibouti and questioned the
Security Council’s hastiness in issuing a presidential
statement last week. He furthermore mentioned that the
African Group would hold a meeting on the border
issue with the League of Arab States, as well as the

08-39798

The Secretary-General had an excellent meeting
with the Prime Minister of Djibouti yesterday. The
Prime Minister reiterated that this was a war situation
involving massive military regrouping on either side of
the border. They agreed on the urgent need to resolve
the situation through dialogue and confidence-building
and a return to the status quo ante. We believe that the
ceasefire should be consolidated, the matter should be
settled peacefully and the status quo ante should be
restored.
The President: I thank Mr. Honwana for his
briefing. I now invite the Prime Minister of Djibouti,
His Excellency Mr. Dileita Mohamed Dileita, to take
the floor.
Mr. Dileita (Djibouti) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to present to the Council my Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Mahamoud Ali Youssouf, who
has travelled here with me today.
At the outset, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the manner in which you have been
leading the work of the Council and for your
delegation’s efforts last week throughout the
consultation process, designed to draw the attention of
the members of the Security Council to the great
urgency of the conflict between Djibouti and Eritrea. I
would also like to extend my thanks to Mr. João
Honwana for his briefing to the Council today.

3

S/PV.5924

I am pleased to meet again with members of the
Council whom I met during their visit to Djibouti
within the framework of inter-Somali peace talks,
which produced the peace accord that has given rise
within the international community to great hope and
that is a solid basis for a lasting peace in Somalia. I
would also like to state how pleased we have been, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and myself, to have
spoken with most of members of the Council in a
climate of confidence and brotherhood since our arrival
here in the New York.

In the absence of a clear explanation on the part
of the Eritrean leaders, our Government has strong
suspicions that they are guided by greed caused by the
avowed ambition of Djibouti to become a regional
cross-border maritime hub with the construction of a
new modern port and infrastructure projects. Thanks to
the confidence of investors and our position in this area
of the Red Sea which is highly strategic for world
navigation, Djibouti has embarked upon the path of
growth and development in order to become a regional
trading centre.

May I remind members of the Council of the
origins of this latest crisis in the Horn of Africa, which
has had more than its share of war, destruction and
regression of all types, and which we could have, in
our view, done well without. The relations between
Djibouti and Eritrea since the independence of Eritrea
in 1993 have encountered difficulties that, thus far,
have been overcome thanks to a determination to settle
any misunderstanding through dialogue. The conflict
which today has already caused many casualties since
Eritrean troops attacked positions of the Djibouti army
on 10 June, forcing it to defend its territory, is
deserving of the attention of the members of this
important United Nations body, the mandate of which
is the maintenance of international peace and security,
pursuant to the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations.

But also we think that the Asmara authorities are
pursuing their confrontation with Ethiopia through a
conflict with Djibouti, through which transits most of
the merchandise headed for Ethiopia. Thus, it is
without question an attempt to regionalize the conflict.

I am not here simply to make unfounded
allegations against Eritrea; it would not be a good idea
to make such a long trip with the intention of
discrediting Eritrean leaders. We have never and will
never be part of an anti-Eritrean front. Quite the
contrary, we have always tried to maintain pragmatic
relations with that country. We believe that the
international community should be well informed of
the ins and outs of this conflict because the situation on
the ground remains of great concern.
The current crisis is very different from the
preceding ones for several reasons. First of all, it is
different in its form because, for the first time, Eritrean
troops have not only violated Djiboutian territory, but
they have occupied it and have even begun
construction work on our soil. Furthermore, it is
different as to substance because while all previous
attempts were more or less avowed claims of an
important part of our Djiboutian territory, the current
motivations are still obscure and suspect in the eyes of
Djiboutian authorities.

4

The Council is not at all ignorant of how much
the impasse in the conflict between Ethiopia and
Eritrea constitutes a major source of instability in the
Horn of Africa, in particular for peace in Somalia. The
international community must therefore bring all its
weight to bear until Eritrea begins to take into account
the minimum international standards involved in
relations between nations.
Finally, we cannot pass over in silence the fact
that the attack of the Eritrean army took place
immediately following the signing in Djibouti of an
agreement between part of the opposition in Somalia
and the Somali Transitional Government under the
aegis of the United Nations. At this stage, we are
entitled to ask legitimate questions about the role
supposedly played by the Asmara authorities and the
use that they have made of the Somali conflict which,
in our view, should not be used as a tool.
As for the Eritrean authorities, they are indeed
remaining mysterious as to their true objectives and are
hiding behind a total denial of the dispute, or when
they implicitly deign to admit the existence of the
dispute that they make unfounded and unreasonable
allegations by referring to external interference that
would supposedly be the cause of all the tensions in the
region. Of course, we believe that this attitude of
denying reality is irresponsible since the media
throughout the world have reported an outbreak of
hostilities, and armed conflict has in fact been initiated
by the Eritrean armed forces.
But any arguments from the Eritrean authorities
fall short when one examines the situation on the

08-39798

S/PV.5924

ground because the Djibouti military forces have
indeed been attacked solely by Eritrean forces; we have
not seen any other force involved on the field of battle.
Moreover, all the reasons given remain inadmissible to
our Government and for our entire country, which is
prepared to defend in every way possible its political
and territory integrity.
Our country is not, in principle, a country with an
aggressive culture; even less so are our people
bellicose. However, we should not be seen as being
weak, hesitant, or capable of intimidation. The
Republic of Djibouti will not at all hesitate once again,
if necessary, to exercise its right to legitimate selfdefence accorded under the Charter to any country in
order to guarantee its national sovereignty.
The basic pillars and principles of Djiboutian
diplomacy in the region and throughout the world are
no longer a secret. As a long-standing haven a peace in
a troubled region, our country has been a refuge for all
the victims of fratricidal wars in the region and is in a
good position to assess the value of peace and the
practice of tolerance. More particularly, our regional
policy is fundamentally based on respect for good
neighbourly relations and non-interference in the
internal affairs of the countries of the region as well as
neutrality, friendship and cooperation with a view to
economic development for the benefit of all the
peoples in the region.
Guided by these values, we have taken all
necessary steps in order to find a diplomatic way out of
the current crisis with Eritrea in order to avoid being
drawn again into a conflict that we found and still find
to be useless.
Djiboutian diplomacy has been very active
bilaterally as well as multilaterally. Mediation has been
proposed by friendly countries and by regional
organizations, such as the African Union and the
League of Arab States. Finally, we have come before
the Security Council through our letters dated
respectively the 5 and 9 May and 11 June 2008.
While all of our attention and all of our efforts
have been devoted to a quest for a diplomatic solution
to the crisis, Eritrea has rejected all mediation and has
persisted in denying the existence of any problem. Of
course, at the same time, it has taken advantage of this
situation to make further territorial gains and to
strengthen the positions of its army. All of these
manoeuvres were clearly designed to unleash a war

08-39798

that we would like to avoid until the last minute, as is
proven by the attack of 10 June. My country was
precipitously forced into a fratricidal war which we
detest.
In this regard, I would like to thank the members
of the Council, who have heeded our appeal and have
acted in an expeditious way, as required by the urgency
and seriousness of the situation. The preservation of
human life and the cessation of the unjustified
hostilities — which are also unjust for the peoples of
Djibouti and Eritrea — are and remain an absolute
priority for my Government. My country cannot
conceive of a scenario of indefinite impasse. That
would surely try our patience, our morale and our
resources.
We welcome the Council’s presidential statement
(S/PRST/2008/20) unequivocally condemning Eritrea’s
military action against Djibouti in Ras Doumeira and
Doumeira Island, as well as the statements issued by
all regional and subregional organizations. They
confirm our initial view of a settlement of the crisis,
that the use of force cannot, in any way, be an
alternative to dialogue or diplomacy.
We reaffirm our confidence in the capacity of the
Council, consistent with its functions and power under
the Charter, and we express the hope that a settlement
of the dispute with Eritrea will come about by peaceful
means in accordance with the principles of justice and
international law.
The failure of the authorities of that country to
honour all of the obligations they have undertaken
under the Charter is clear, because the use of force and
the violation of our territory are a reality. No pretext
can exempt Eritrea from its obligations to the
international community. Furthermore, we note the
persistent defiance with regard to all the good offices
missions that have been undertaken, including the
attempt at mediation with the head of State of Eritrea
by Mr. Louis Michel, European Commissioner for
development and humanitarian aid, following the
summit meeting of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), which yielded no better result
than previous initiatives.
For its part, the Republic of Djibouti is entirely
ready to honour its responsibilities, as it has always
done, and will continue tirelessly its efforts to engage
in dialogue with a view to establishing lasting peace

5

S/PV.5924

and stability throughout the region and throughout the
world.
Peace and the security of shipping throughout the
region are the key stakes in this conflict. As the
Council is already aware, the Bab al-Mandab Strait at
the southern part of the Red Sea is a strategic strait
separating the Arab peninsula from East Africa and is a
key passage for international trade and for bringing oil
to Europe and Asia. Moreover, analysts today agree
that control of the strait will be vital in this conflict.
All of our initiatives to prevent conflict have been in
vain. Although military hostilities have ceased since
12 June, the consequences would be disastrous if there
were to be no reasonable and proportionate response
from the Security Council and the international
community in the face of this explosive and dangerous
situation, which is developing rapidly.
Indeed,
since
the
Council’s
12
June
condemnation, there have been no positive
developments, and there has been no sign of goodwill
regarding a peaceful settlement of the dispute from the
Eritrean authorities. Quite the contrary: as I address the
Council, whereas our army has withdrawn several
kilometres since 12 June, Eritrean troops have once
again infiltrated the territory of Djibouti. This massive
incursion into our country by Eritrean troops, who are
present all along our common border without any valid
justification should not be taken lightly by the Council;
it must be given the importance it deserves.
For lack of any strong international intervention
based on dialogue and the disengagement of forces, we
are faced with a dilemma: choosing between the status
quo and war. Clearly, neither of these two options can
be contemplated by our Government. The Security
Council, in a word, must be aware of the danger of
inaction, which would be appeasing a bellicose and
unpredictable leader. It would be, in fact, ill-advised,
through negligence or lack of attention, to let this
situation remain as it is. Action by the Council to
prevent a resumption of fighting between the armed
forces, which are now within firing range of each
other, would be, we feel, wiser and more realistic. That
would prevent an escalation of violence and
widespread conflagration, the results of which could
not at all be predicted.
Unfortunately, this scenario is well known to the
peoples of our region. The only certainty would be a
spiral of war and tragedy with great loss of human life.

6

I would add that, if the situation of extreme tension
were to continue because of the disdainful attitude of
the Eritrean authorities, who have turned a deaf ear to
all expressions of goodwill, the latest being a proposal
for mediation by the President of the Republic of
Yemen, His Excellency Mr. Abdulla Ali Sallah, which
was rejected by the Eritrean authorities, for who the
only option remains war. We truly hope that Eritrea
does not misjudge the determination of Djibouti and
the indignation and growing impatience in the face of
its tactics and its aggressive behaviour.
In conclusion, my Government is prepared to
cooperate with the Security Council and the SecretaryGeneral in their efforts to resolve this unfortunate
unilateral military adventure, which merits the
Council’s urgent, serious and great attention.
The President: I thank the Prime Minister of
Djibouti for his statement.
I now give invite the representative of Eritrea to
take the floor.
Mr. Desta (Eritrea): In the interests of time, I
will read a shortened version of my statement. I kindly
request that the full text be circulated in the Council
Chamber.
I wish to thank the presidency and the Council for
according my delegation the opportunity to share its
views on the current developments between Eritrea and
Djibouti. Eritrea observes with great regret that the
Government of the Republic of Djibouti has chosen to
engage in the levelling of incessant and baseless
accusations against the Government of Eritrea for the
past two months. Eritrea has made no incursion into
the territory of Djibouti, and it does not have any
territorial ambitions in the region.
There have been numerous contacts between
officials of the two Governments, including at the
highest level. The two leaders spoke about the current
development and decided to address it in a calm and
quiet manner that takes into account the sisterly
relationship between the two countries and the need to
ensure peace and security in the subregion.
However, for reasons that are best known to the
authorities of Djibouti, the understanding reached by
the highest officials of both countries was put aside and
the matter was taken to the public arena, with totally
unwarranted hostile anti-Eritrea campaigns. Attempts
to drag the Government of Eritrea into animosity

08-39798

S/PV.5924

continued, but, Eritrea did not respond to the hostile
campaign. Instead, it chose the path of restraint and
patience. This was for profound reasons, because
Eritrea is keenly aware that the provocative campaign
originates from — and is designed and packaged —
elsewhere. Indeed, Djibouti and its people cannot, by
any stretch of imagination, have any interest in this
affair. The issue is not in reality an agenda or any other
matter that regards Djibouti.
The fact is there is no territorial or other dispute
between Eritrea and Djibouti. Djibouti’s unwarranted
hostile campaign is underpinned by, and synchronized
with, other ulterior motives and regional developments.
Allow me to elaborate further on the dimensions
and ramifications of this manufactured crisis.
On 22 April this year, a few weeks before the
onset of this unwarranted campaign, the Ethiopian
regime set up a new military camp on Mount Musa Ali.
Ethiopia built a network of winding roads up the
mountain and deployed offensive long-range artillery
and heavy equipment directed at Eritrea, with the
apparent knowledge and acquiescence of its major
backers.
Musa Ali is perched at the intersection of the
borders of the three countries: Djibouti, Ethiopia and
Eritrea. The Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary Commission
(EEBC) has, in the course of its delimitation and
demarcation awards of the Eritrea-Ethiopia boundary,
determined the respective sovereignties of both
countries at that trilateral junction. Ethiopia’s actions,
six years after the EEBC award, are in flagrant
violation of those determinations.
In spite of those illegal acts of destabilization,
Eritrea chose to keep silent so as to pursue its
established legal approach with a higher focus. But
Eritrea’s restraint in the face of that provocation only
aroused further frustration in the forces that wanted to
stir up trouble by trampling the rule of law. A hostile
campaign was set in motion, and on 10 June the
Government of Djibouti was pushed to launch a
provocative military attack on our units on the border.
The attack by Djibouti started at approximately 7 p.m.
and continued to 11 June. To avoid the attack, Eritrea
pulled its forces back. On 12 June, Djibouti again
continued its attack, accompanied by helicopters. At
that time, Eritrea responded and defended itself.
However, Djibouti first cried foul, accusing Eritrea of
the very acts that it had perpetrated. As a local proverb

08-39798

says, “a slingshot hits its target and emits a shrill cry
first”. Djibouti thus did not only launch an unprovoked
attack, but levelled a trumped-up and well-orchestrated
accusation against Eritrea.
What was more surprising was the unbalanced
and unwarranted presidential statement that the
Security Council adopted on 12 June on the basis of
one side’s information. In spite of all those adversities,
Eritrea did not relax but instead heightened its
restraint.
As I pointed out earlier, the underlying objective
of the military provocation, using Djibouti as a Trojan
horse, is to divert Eritrea from the main agenda — its
legal pursuit to ensure Ethiopia’s eviction from its
sovereign territories in accordance with the final and
binding determinations of the EEBC — and to embroil
Eritrea on another front. The whole idea is to entangle
us in mutual recriminations with Djibouti. That would
lead to endless mediation missions and the aggravation
of putative regional crises.
In that light, the new campaign this week in the
Security Council is highly regrettable. Why has
Djibouti been prompted to submit an accusation
against Eritrea at this level? Why has the Security
Council been summoned to discuss a dubious and
irresponsible accusation against a Member State with
such hastiness? When the Security Council has kept
silent or shown little, if any, concern regarding
Ethiopia’s flagrant violation of international law and its
occupation of sovereign Eritrean territories, how has it
been persuaded now to discuss a territorial dispute that
does not exist and where no territory has been
occupied? Why is an unwarranted skirmish, which
Djibouti provoked in the first place, being
misconstrued as an act of aggression that deserves
prompt consideration and action by the Security
Council? Why is the issue being blown up out of all
proportion? We could ask endless questions.
The Government of Eritrea wishes to underline
again that it will not be plunged — through
provocations, enticements or other mendacious
accusations — into a crisis to become a scapegoat for
misguided policies in our region. It will continue to
value close cooperation with Djibouti, as demonstrated
by the signing of several bilateral ventures recently in
the areas of trade, health, fishing and infrastructure.
Indeed, if the Security Council is to maintain
regional peace and security, it must look elsewhere. It

7

S/PV.5924

cannot and must not target the victim. I wish to call on
countries with global reach and influence in the region
to take a careful look at their policies to ensure that
they become a positive force for development, peace
and security for the people in the region.
I also wish to draw the attention of the Council to
Eritrea’s commitment to exercising restraint and
remaining politically committed to solving peacefully
any problem that might arise between Djibouti and
Eritrea.
The President: I now give the floor to those
Council members who wish to make comments or ask
questions.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I would
like first of all to thank Under-Secretary-General
Honwana, for his briefing. I welcome the presence here
today of the Prime Minister of Djibouti, the Permanent
Representative of Eritrea, and the representatives of the
African Union and the Arab League. Those two
organizations have an important role to play in
resolving this crisis.
I would like to highlight two points. First, the
border dispute between Djibouti and Eritrea has
become an international issue. The Council has already
discussed, in informal consultations, various border
disputes between Djibouti and Eritrea.
In May, the Secretariat advised the Council of
tensions between the two countries on the issue of the
promontory and Doumeira Island following various
defensive exercises undertaken by Eritrea. France
made a statement to this Council, as it had already
done in its national capacity, condemning that violation
of Djibouti’s sovereignty. At the time, the Council
welcomed the positive gestures made by Eritrea, which
had withdrawn from certain positions. We had hoped
that the two parties, with the help of the Chair of the
African Union, the Arab League and other interested
States, were on the verge of engaging in dialogue in
order to find a diplomatic solution to their dispute.
The Council was, however, forced to react to the
new situation created by the bloody confrontations of
10 and 11 June. On 12 June, in a presidential
statement, the Council condemned the military action
conducted by Eritrea against Djibouti and called on the
two parties to implement a ceasefire, exercise restraint
and — with regard to Eritrea in particular — withdraw
its forces and return to the status quo ante.

8

The situation on the ground seems to be stable,
but it could still degenerate very rapidly in an area
where the rugged landscape forces the two armies to
face each other at close proximity. The parties, in
particular Eritrea, must imperatively abide by the
presidential statement of 12 June. In particular, that
means that Eritrea must retreat from its defensive
installations that it has started building on the southern
flank of the promontory leading to the crest of the hill
and that the two parties withdraw from Doumeira
Island. The troops from Djibouti have done so; they
have withdrawn. The Eritrean troops have not.
The Security Council will therefore continue to
follow this question very closely, as will the African
Union and the Arab League.
The second point that I would like to highlight is
that the two parties have a new window of opportunity
to find, with the support the international community, a
diplomatic solution to their dispute. France welcomes
the role being played by the European Union
Commissioner, Louis Michel, who is in contact with
both parties. We must not underestimate the difficulties
facing us, but the Horn of Africa has already had its
share of conflict, and it is in the interests of the two
parties to avoid a new one.
I would like to emphasize that we believe that
Djibouti plays a stabilizing role, especially by
welcoming the holding on its territory of negotiations
between the Transitional Federal Government and the
Alliance for the Re-Liberation of Somalia. That region
is very important to the stability of Africa as a whole.
Djibouti and France have established a
relationship of friendship, cooperation and trust that
dates back many years. In that regard, France fully
intends to respect its commitments to Djibouti. Neither
a large-scale conflict nor a frozen conflict is a
satisfactory alternative.
I should now like to return to the issue of the
border, which is at the heart of the problem and to
which the parties must find an agreement. The border
was delimited by a Franco-Ethiopian agreement of
1897 and, subsequently, by Franco-Italian protocols in
1900 and 1901. Other later agreements have not been
ratified. The border has never been defined. With
regard to Doumeira Island, the Franco-Italian protocol
provides that the two parties would eventually
determine sovereignty over the island and that, in the

08-39798

S/PV.5924

meanwhile, they would not deploy troops there on a
permanent basis.
Several relevant documents of long standing
therefore exist, none of which has been signed by the
States that are currently parties to the conflict. That
uncertainty twice led to tension between Eritrea and
Djibouti during the 1990s. France therefore hopes that
the two parties — along with a third party of their
choosing, if they so desire — can find a negotiated
solution and that the border of Doumeira can be
definitively demarcated.
Along with the African Union, the League of
Arab States and Qatar, we have expressed to the two
parties the readiness of France to support them in such
an undertaking. We have in particular proposed the
sending of an envoy or a legal team to facilitate the
parties’ discussions. I should like today to reiterate our
readiness to do that.
Lastly, I should like to underscore the fact that
the two points I have raised — internationalization and
a call for dialogue between the parties — are in no way
mutually exclusive. To the contrary, it is clear that it is
not up to the international community, and especially
not the Security Council, to define the border for the
parties. However, we must together help the parties to
find a negotiated solution that is their own. My
delegation therefore believes that it would be useful
today for the Security Council to send some specific
messages. We regret that Eritrea did not respond to the
calls contained in the Security Council presidential
statement of 12 June. We call on the two parties,
especially Eritrea, to withdraw their forces and to
return to the status quo ante.
We would like to thank the regional and
subregional organizations involved in helping the two
parties to find a negotiated solution.
It would be very helpful for the SecretaryGeneral to deploy a fact-finding mission to the region,
which should have the full cooperation of both parties.
The Secretary-General could also keep the Security
Council apprised of developments in the situation as
soon as he has a report from the mission we are calling
for.
I think that this is a useful and unifying message
from which you, Sir, could draw when you meet the
press following this meeting.

08-39798

Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Let me start by
welcoming the Prime Minister of Djibouti, Mr. Dileita
Mohamed Dileita, and his delegation to the Security
Council. I should also like to thank you, Sir, for
organizing this meeting in a timely manner in response
to a request by a Member State, which, under Article
35 of the Charter of the United Nations, may bring any
dispute to the attention of the Security Council. We
appreciate the statements and explanations that have
been given by the representatives of Djibouti and
Eritrea. We also thank Mr. Honwana for the briefing he
has given us.
The recent clash between Eritrea and Djibouti
along their shared border deeply concerns us, as it is a
breach of international peace and security. Above all,
we are also very troubled at the prospect of a further
aggravation of the already volatile situation in the Horn
of Africa. It may be that neither side has the intention
to allow the situation to slide into full-fledged
conflagration. Notwithstanding their intentions, the
situation could in fact develop in an unanticipated
direction due to the chain of action-and-reaction and
perception-and-misperception, and spiral towards
wider confrontation. The resort to military force is
unacceptable. We view this situation as very serious
and warranting our continued vigilance.
We strongly encourage the parties to resort to
peaceful dispute settlement mechanisms, in accordance
with Article 33 of the Charter of the United Nations,
which urges that parties seek diplomatic and judicial
approaches to dispute settlement, as well as the resort
to regional agencies or other peaceful means of their
choice.
Security and the sense of security are holistic and
indivisible. Obviously, there is urgency to develop a
sense of mutual security, both bilaterally and
regionally, as one country’s security cannot be
achieved at the cost of another country’s insecurity.
Both Djibouti and Eritrea need to feel safe for security
to be preserved.
We call upon both parties to move forward to
resolve this dispute expeditiously in accordance with
international law, including the acceptance of thirdparty mediation as necessary. We are cognizant of the
importance of finding a mutually acceptable solution to
the border conflict for both countries and recognize
that their bilateral relations have been peaceful in the

9

S/PV.5924

past. There is therefore still hope for a solution and all
appropriate avenues should be pursued.
We appreciate and commend the role played by
the African Union and the Arab League, as well as by
third countries, as they assist in the conflict resolution
and dispute settlement processes.
Ultimately, peace and stability along the border
must be maintained. That quest for peace is even more
critical in the light of the volatility in the Horn of
Africa and the strategic value of the Bab-el-Mandeb
Strait.
Finally, my delegation wishes to reiterate the
sentiments expressed in the Council’s presidential
statement of 12 June 2008.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
On behalf of my delegation, I would like to welcome
the Prime Minister of the Republic of Djibouti, who
has been kind enough to meet with us this afternoon,
illustrating his belief in the importance of the matter
we are addressing today.
Before I begin my statement, I should like to
thank Mr. Honwana for the briefing he has just given
us on the dispute pitting Djibouti against Eritrea.
In its presidential statement of 12 June, to which
Ambassador Ripert referred a few moments ago, the
Security Council expressed its concern about the
serious incidents that have taken place on the border
between Djibouti and Eritrea, which resulted in
casualties to the Djiboutian army. The Council also
called on the two parties, and on Eritrea in particular,
to exercise restraint, withdraw their respective forces
and return to the status quo ante. It also called for
negotiations to begin without delay in order to put an
end to the conflict.
My country categorically condemns the use of
force and reiterates that there exists an obligation on
States to demonstrate mutual respect for sovereignty
and territorial integrity.
We continue to be concerned about the ongoing
tension between the two countries. It therefore seems
to us that it is the duty of the Security Council to urge
them to refrain from any action that could lead to an
escalation of the conflict. It is also crucial that it
emphasize dialogue over military action. It is therefore
essential that Djibouti and Eritrea agree to the offers of
mediation made to them, notably by the African Union,

10

the League of Arab States and other friendly countries.
It goes without saying that Burkina Faso, out of a
desire for peace, welcomes these initiatives and these
efforts, which we hope will continue.
With regard to the rather disturbing situation in
the Horn of Africa, everything should be done to help
these two States to overcome their dispute because it is
crucial to spare their respective populations from the
agony of a new confrontation with unpredictable
consequences. Therefore, we hope that the two
countries will agree to cooperate fully with the
subregional and regional organizations and agree to the
assistance of friendly countries with a view to finding a
final solution to their dispute.
We also urge the
international community to assist in this endeavour.
In conclusion, we would like to thank the French
delegation for the draft of a statement to the press that
it submitted to us. We would like to say that we fully
support it.
Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation at today’s
meeting of the Prime Minister of Djibouti and we are
grateful to him for the evaluation he gave us. We have
also listened carefully to the statement by the
Permanent Representative of Eritrea.
The Russian Federation is seriously concerned
over the serious rise in confrontation that took place on
the border between Djibouti and Eritrea earlier this
month. Russia fully agrees with the statement made by
the President of the Security Council adopted in
connection with this incident, which includes a
condemnation of the hostilities begun by Eritrea
against Djibouti in Ras Doumeira and Doumeira
Island. We call on both sides to take upon themselves
the obligation of observing a ceasefire, show maximum
restraint and return to their previous positions.
Russia is carefully observing the developments in
the situation on the border between Eritrea and
Djibouti. We believe that the border problems must be
settled only through negotiations. We call upon both
sides to cooperate and undertake diplomatic efforts for
a peaceful settlement and in strict conformity with the
rules of international law and the Charter of the United
Nations.
We support the efforts undertaken by the African
Union and the League of Arab States and the various
interested parties in order to achieve an early solution

08-39798

S/PV.5924

to the confrontation and a settlement between Djibouti
and Eritrea. We call upon both sides to cooperate in
this endeavour. We are counting on the implementation
of what has been called for by the Security Council and
of the recommendation of the Secretary-General to
make use of his good offices in coordination with
regional organizations. The aim is to initiate bilateral
negotiations between Djibouti and Eritrea that may
engender greater trust and bring about a peaceful
settlement to the situation on the border between these
two countries.

Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Allow me also to
welcome the Prime Minister of Djibouti and thank him
for visiting us in New York. We still have very fond
memories of the hospitable and gracious way in which
the Government of Djibouti treated us when we visited
that country. We are very thankful for that. We also
welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Djibouti
and thank him for also having come to this meeting.
We are pleased with the participation in this meeting of
the representative of Eritrea and the representatives of
the League of Arab States and of the African Union.

The Security Council will doubtless continue to
follow the momentum in the situation in the interest of
supporting stability and of preventing a destabilization
in this important region of the Horn of Africa.

The situation that is being faced by the Council,
and indeed by the African Union, is a very difficult
one. That is why we support the holding of this
emergency meeting today.

Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China welcomes the holding of this emergency meeting
of the Council. We would like to thank Mr. Honwana
for his briefing.

We wish to appeal to both Djibouti and Eritrea
and to emphasize that the use of force in resolving
disputes is both unworkable and indeed unsustainable.
We join others in expressing our concern over the
escalation of tensions in the Horn of Africa and
condemn the use of force to solve disputes.
Unfortunately, this involves part of our continent,
which has seen its own share of troubles.

On behalf of the Chinese delegation, we welcome
Prime Minister Dileita of Djibouti to this meeting and
thank him for his statement. I would also like to
welcome the presence of the Permanent Representative
of Eritrea and thank him for his statement. We also
welcome the presence of the representatives of the
African Union and the League of Arab States at today’s
meeting.
China is attentively following the recent border
dispute between Djibouti and Eritrea. We find
developments in the border areas to be worrisome. We
call upon the two parties to proceed from the greater
interests of relations between the two countries and of
peace and security in the Horn of Africa. We also call
upon them to exercise restraint and prevent the
situation from worsening further. China hopes that the
two parties will resolve their differences through
dialogue and negotiations.
China supports African Union and League of
Arab States and other regional organizations and
countries of the region in playing an active mediation
role. The Council should continue to play an active and
constructive role in promoting the resolution of the
differences of the two parties through dialogue and
negotiations. The Council may strengthen its contact
and communication with Djibouti and Eritrea, listen to
the views and requests of the parties concerned and
coordinate with and support the good offices of the
African Union and other regional organizations.

08-39798

We appeal to both parties to exercise restraint. We
support the call of the African Union for the parties to
immediately return to the situation prevailing before
this dispute began. We urge the parties to engage in
dialogue in an effort to resolve their differences. We
encourage the efforts of the Secretary-General and
thank Mr. Honwana for his briefing. We believe that
the good offices of the Secretary-General must be
encouraged to help these two friendly neighbours
resolve their dispute.
We also wish to point out that both the League of
Arab States and the African Union have also offered
their good offices in this dispute. We can only express
the hope that the two countries will heed the call of the
international community, not allow their differences to
balloon into major disputes and do everything in their
power to resolve their problems in a peaceful manner.
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): At the outset,
I wish to thank to Mr. Honwana for his briefing to the
Council this afternoon. My delegation also wishes to
welcome the participation of His Excellency the Prime
Minister of Djibouti, as well as the presence of the
Permanent Representative of Eritrea and the
representatives of the African Union and the League of
Arab States at the Council’s meeting today.

11

S/PV.5924

My delegation notes with concern the escalation
of tension on the border between Eritrea and Djibouti,
most notably the serious incidents that occurred on 10
June 2008 along the frontier between the two countries.
We wish to underline the fundamental principle to be
applied to such situations, namely that the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of States must be fully
respected and that every dispute and conflict should be
resolved through peaceful negotiations in a manner
consistent with international law and with the United
Nations Charter. We therefore call upon the two parties
to show utmost restraint, to refrain from any threat or
use of force, to strengthen the current ceasefire and to
intensify dialogue to de-escalate the tension.
It goes without saying that the primary
responsibility to resolve the conflict rests with the two
parties themselves. Viet Nam, however, commends the
efforts undertaken by the African Union, the Arab
League and the Organization of the Islamic Conference
to facilitate the settlement of the dispute. In that
connection, we welcome the decision made by the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union at its
136th meeting, held on 12 June 2008, on the situation
on the border between Djibouti and Eritrea, as well as
on the development in relations between the two
countries.
My delegation also wishes to encourage the
Secretary-General, in coordination with regional
efforts, to use his good offices and to reach out to both
parties to promote dialogue on arrangements for the
immediate return to the situation prevailing at the
common border between the two countries before the
incidents leading to the current tension, including the
withdrawal from the border of all forces that have been
positioned there since February 2008, and for the
development of confidence-building measures to
resolve their bilateral dispute in a peaceful manner.
Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): I should like to join those who spoke before
me in welcoming to the Council His Excellency
Mr. Dileita Mohamed Dileita, Prime Minister of the
State of Djibouti. I take this opportunity to thank him
for the warm welcome and generosity with which he
received the Security Council mission in Djibouti
earlier this month, as well as for the facilities offered to
the mission for its meetings with the Somali parties.
We thank His Excellency the Prime Minister for his
statement to the Council today, and we also express our
gratitude to the representative of Eritrea for his

12

statement. Our thanks also go to Mr. Honwana for his
briefing.
The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya expresses its deep
sorrow and concern over the military confrontations
that have recently taken place between two
neighbouring countries that not only have ties of
geographic proximity but also numerous other ties, so
numerous that it is difficult to imagine any recourse to
arms or force in order to resolve even the most
profound differences.
Africa in general and the Horn of Africa in
particular have long been paying a high price as a
result of armed conflicts. That price has been paid in
the lives of its men and women, in human suffering and
in lost development opportunities. It is also unfortunate
that while armed conflicts are receding everywhere
else in the world, even in Africa, armed conflicts in
Eastern Africa are only spreading and growing more
intense.
Libya hopes that the Security Council, in
cooperation
with
regional
and
subregional
organizations, as the organ with primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
will work towards putting an end to these conflicts and
preventing their escalation by assisting the conflicting
parties to reach a peaceful solution. I do not wish to
say that the Council’s inability to settle the dispute
between Ethiopia and Eritrea or to put an end to the
instability and insecurity in Somalia might be among
the reasons for the threat posed to peace along the
border between Eritrea and Djibouti.
My country strongly condemns the use of force
and the resort to arms. My country calls on the two
friendly countries Djibouti and Eritrea to turn to
dialogue, and we ask them to heed the call at the 136th
meeting of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union, as well as the Arab League resolution
dated 12 June 2008 and the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2008/20) issued by the Security Council at its
5908th meeting. We call upon both parties to return to
the status quo on the borders before the crisis erupted.
My country reaffirms the principle of respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and
stresses that any attempt to undermine that concept
constitutes a threat to peace and security. My
delegation reaffirms and recalls the need for African
States to respect the borders inherited from the days of
colonialism, which they voluntarily agreed to do within

08-39798

S/PV.5924

the framework of the Organization of African Unity,
now the African Union.

Security Council informed of any developments in the
situation.

We hope that the Council will look into resolving
this issue by helping both parties to reach a political
settlement.

Mr. Quarrey (United Kingdom): We join others
in warmly welcoming the Prime Minister of Djibouti
today and also the representatives of Eritrea, the
African Union and the League of Arab States. We
thank Mr. Honwana for his briefing.

In closing, we thank the French delegation for
preparing the main elements of a verbal presidential
briefing to the press, and we support them.
Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): I should
like to join in welcoming to this Council His
Excellency Mr. Dileita Mohamed Dileita, Prime
Minister of Djibouti, and in acknowledging the
presence here of the Permanent Representative of
Eritrea and the representatives of the African Union
and of the League of Arab States. I should also like to
express our thanks for the briefing we have received
today from Mr. João Honwana of the Department of
Political Affairs.
The Council is meeting today at the request of the
Government of Djibouti for the purpose of assessing
the serious situation on the border between Djibouti
and Eritrea, where confrontations have recently
occurred between the armed forces of the two
countries.
In that connection, allow me to outline Panama’s
position. The United Nations and each and every one
of its Member States are called upon to respect the
territorial integrity of States, and that includes
respecting their borders. When two neighbouring States
dispute the location of borders, the dispute should be
resolved through bilateral negotiations. If an agreement
cannot be reached between the two parties, they should
submit the dispute to the International Court of Justice.
In the event of any dispute that might jeopardize
international peace and security, this Council is called
upon to act to prevent the dispute from escalating into
armed conflict. To that purpose, the Security Council
should use all means at its disposal, including dialogue,
participation and collaboration between Member
States.
We thus appeal to both parties to withdraw the
military forces that have recently been deployed on the
border and immediately to initiate bilateral dialogue,
making use of the good offices and mechanisms
provided by the United Nations and other relevant
international bodies. Likewise, Panama considers it
appropriate for the Secretary-General to keep the

08-39798

Of course, we welcome reports that the situation
is calm at present, but we are also concerned by other
reports of regroupings and reinforcements. The
situation clearly remains fragile in an already very
troubled region. We would reiterate all the concerns
that were set out in the presidential statement of 12
June, including condemnation of the Eritrean military
incursion, deep regret at the loss of life and the need
for maximum restraint.
Like others, we welcome the efforts of the
African Union, the League of Arab States and third
countries to help the parties find a peaceful way
forward. We would urge both parties, and especially
Eritrea, to engage fully with those efforts. We agree
with France that the Council should send a message
today through a statement to the press. We thank the
French delegation for the elements that it circulated
yesterday, which we fully support.
Mr. Spatafora (Italy): I thank Mr. Honwana for
his briefing. I join others in extending a very warm
welcome to Prime Minister Dileita and to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Djibouti. We strongly appreciate
that they have come from Djibouti to give us first-hand
accounts. I wish to thank Prime Minister Dileita and
the Permanent Representative of Eritrea, Ambassador
Desta, for their decision to take part, together around
this table, in this important and extremely timely
meeting, in order to convey their national perspectives
to this Council and to clarify their respective positions.
As we have heard, there are conflicting
perceptions and positions, but it is important that those
conflicting positions be expressed around a table, not
on the ground. I thank the Permanent Observer of the
League of Arab States, Mr. Mahmassani, and the
representative of the African Union because their role,
as has been stated already, will be crucial in the future.
I mentioned the importance of the dialogue
around the table. In fact, Italy’s expectation is that this
meeting — and this is important — will serve as the
beginning of a renewed engagement by both parties to

13

S/PV.5924

exercise restraint and resolve their differences through
dialogue, international law and diplomacy, thereby
demonstrating their attachment to peace and security in
the wider region. To the extent that we will be able to
catalyse and sustain that positive dynamic, fully and
promptly placing the United Nations political
machinery at the disposal of the parties, as expressed in
our presidential statement of 12 June, we will have
paid a significant service to our common cause of
advancing the role of the Security Council as an
instrument of conflict prevention, as mandated by
Article 34 of the United Nations Charter. In addition,
as recalled by Article 33 of the Charter and shown by
the African experience on a number of occasions, the
key to conflict prevention ultimately lies in the hands
of interested Member States, as has already been stated
by others.
Adopting a bottom-up approach, looking at
events from the ground and lending the strongest
possible support to the good offices or mediation
offices offered by the African Union and the Arab
League should be retained as essential elements of our
involvement.
Cooperation
with
regional
and
subregional organizations and Governments will be
particularly crucial in the coming weeks, as we will
need to acquire a more accurate and detailed picture of
the situation. The first account of events, as we have
heard, confirms the seriousness of current tensions
between the two countries. The crisis indeed has the
potential to become a threat to regional stability.
However, a number of elements will need to be
further investigated and brought to light. That is why
we strongly support the urgent launch of a fact-finding
mission by the Secretariat, which would provide
essential elements for this Council to develop its
position and approach to the issue. We feel that it is
equally important that the Security Council President
bring to the attention of the international media the
perceptions, assessments and concerns that have been
expressed by members of the Council. Here, we fully
recognize our position in the language that has been
proposed to the presidency by the French delegation,
which we thank. We fully recognize ourselves in those
elements.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate our thanks to
the Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Djibouti and express once more Italy’s trust in their
Government, as well as in Government of Eritrea, and
in the governing will and capacity to agree on a way

14

out of this crisis using the tools of diplomacy and
cooperation.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by welcoming Mr. Dileita Mohamed
Dileita, Prime Minister of Djibouti, and his Minister
for Foreign Affairs, and by acknowledging the
presence of the Permanent Representatives of Djibouti
and Eritrea and the representatives of the League of
Arab States and the African Union.
The Horn of Africa cannot afford yet another
conflict. That region cannot afford to resort to violence
to settle yet another dispute. Brother nations must find
solutions around the table of dialogue rather than in the
trenches and with the use of weapons.
Although it is only natural that different countries
have different views regarding their respective
interests, particularly where colonial borders have not
been consolidated, we feel that it should be pointed out
that solutions that emanate from peace be based on
caution and common sense and allow for areas of
growth for brother countries. The conflict between
Djibouti and Eritrea has its roots in the issue of borders
that have never been defined and that are disputed.
Such questions should be settled, in our view, through
consultations and negotiations between the parties that
explore ways of reaching new agreements through
arbitration, mediation and the possibility of appealing
to higher courts, such as the International Court of
Justice. The use of specialized tribunals should also be
considered as an option.
Costa Rica believes that, with respect to this
situation, regional organizations can offer very
valuable support. We are therefore grateful for the
efforts of the African Union and the League of Arab
States, and urge them to continue to provide forums for
a peaceful and consensual settlement of the situation.
Of course, we also appeal to Djibouti and Eritrea to
resume dialogue and to seek a solution to their
differences through negotiation, making use of the
appropriate instruments and bodies, and promptly to
end the dispute between them.
We thank the delegation of France for the points
it circulated yesterday, which we can support for
inclusion in a statement.
Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the Prime Minister of the
Republic of Djibouti and the representatives of Eritrea,

08-39798

S/PV.5924

the African Union and the League of Arab States. We
also thank the Secretariat for its briefing.
Belgium shares the concern expressed around this
table regarding the border incidents that took place
from 10 to 12 June in Ras Doumeira and Doumeira
Island. Those incidents caused numerous deaths and
much damage, and could have quickly degenerated.
The situation continues to run a serious risk of
escalation that is not limited to the countries concerned
but potentially threatens the entire region.
The Security Council reacted speedily on 12 June
by reminding both countries of their commitment to
dialogue, if necessary with the assistance of other
countries and regional organizations. That appeal
remains valid.
Belgium thanks all those who have helped in the
search for a settlement to the crisis. It is in the interests
of neither country to prolong the current situation of
confusion. Belgium encourages the two countries
themselves, first and foremost, as well as others
involved, including the Secretary-General, to pursue
their efforts. Belgium supports the dispatch by the
Secretary-General of a fact-finding mission and
encourages him to consult with the African Union and
the League of Arab States with respect to the
conclusions from their respective initiatives.
Finally, my delegation wishes to thank France for
submitting elements of language for a statement to the
press.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): First of all, let me join
previous speakers in welcoming and thanking the
Prime Minister of Djibouti for being here with us, as
well as the representative of Eritrea and the
representatives of the African Union and the League of
Arab States.
For some time now, we have been carefully
monitoring the escalation of the incidents between the
two neighbouring countries, and we fully share the
grave concerns expressed by all member States on the
seriousness of the situation. It is even more serious
given the fragile and sensitive situation in the region.
Having said that, we welcome today’s debate as
timely. We also value the opportunity to hear from the
parties themselves, as well as from the regional
organizations involved in helping them to de-escalate
tensions. We appreciate their efforts and hope that they
will yield concrete results shortly.

08-39798

My delegation would like to use this occasion to
renew the call on the parties, in particular Eritrea, to
exercise restraint, to withdraw their forces to the status
quo ante, and to resolve the dispute through dialogue
and peaceful means, including through third-party
mediation. In our opinion, any military option is not
acceptable; we strongly condemn any use of force and
stress the importance of respect for the territorial
integrity of States. In that respect, we welcome the
announced press statement as a timely and welcome
action of the Council.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the United States.
I, too, would like to welcome the presence of
Prime Minister Dileita at this meeting. We also
welcome the participation of Ambassador Desta, the
Permanent Representative of Eritrea, and the
representatives of the African Union and the League of
Arab States.
The United States remains extremely concerned
with the situation along the Djibouti-Eritrea border.
Today, I would like to make the following two points.
First, on 12 June, the Council adopted a
presidential statement that condemned Eritrean military
action against Djibouti, called upon the parties to
commit to a ceasefire and show maximum restraint,
and urged both sides to cooperate and engage in
diplomatic efforts to resolve the matter peacefully.
While no new violence has occurred, Eritrea remains in
an aggressive military posture towards Djibouti and
refuses to engage with Djibouti directly or through a
third party to negotiate a peaceful resolution to the
crisis.
We reiterate our call on both sides, and
particularly on Eritrea, to withdraw their military
forces from the common border area and to engage in a
diplomatic process to resolve the matter peacefully, in
accordance with international law, as the representative
of Italy and others have urged. If Eritrea fails to engage
in a peaceful solution and pull its forces back from its
border with Djibouti, the Security Council should
consider appropriate actions or measures.
Secondly, the Security Council cannot condone
Eritrea’s regional destabilization, especially when it
comes at such a great cost to its neighbours. The
conflict with Djibouti occurs against a backdrop of
destabilizing behaviour elsewhere by Eritrea. In

15

S/PV.5924

Somalia, the Eritrean Government has supported
extremist groups, including the Al-Qaida-affiliated
Al-Shabab, which refuses to negotiate on a peaceful
political solution in Somalia. Eritrea has worked to
discredit and disrupt the recent discussion between
Somali parties in Djibouti. The Government of Eritrea
restricted the activities of the United Nations Mission
in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) — a force it freely
and voluntarily invited to its country — preventing it
from executing its mandate. Finally, the Eritrea
Government stopped all fuel delivery to UNMEE, and
consequently the United Nations was forced to
withdraw UNMEE from Eritrea, which further
destabilized an already dangerous situation.
For Eritrea, even now it is not too late to resume
its place as a responsible Member of this Organization
and to resume its status as a good neighbour. We will
be watching Eritrea’s actions closely and we will insist
that Eritrea be held accountable for its actions.
Finally, my delegation can support the elements
for use in the press statement proposed by the French
delegation.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I shall now give the floor to Ms. Alice Aghenebit
Mungwa, Adviser to the Permanent Observer Mission
of the African Union.
Ms. Mungwa: On behalf of the Commission of
the African Union, I would first of all like to thank
you, Sir, for inviting us to participate in this important
meeting and to convey the apologies of the Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations,
who has already travelled to Sharm el-Sheikh for the
meetings of the upcoming eleventh ordinary session of
the African Union taking place at the end of the month.
She therefore could not attend this meeting in person.
It is on me that the great honour and privilege have
fallen today to convey the remarks of the African
Union Commission to the Council today.
In view of the challenges that the situation
between Djibouti and Eritrea may present for the
already challenged region of the Horn of Africa, your
initiative, Mr. President, to organize this timely and
important meeting once again illustrates the continuing
attention of the Security Council to matters of concern
to Africa and highlights the growing cooperation
between the Security Council and the Peace and

16

Security Council of the African Union in dealing with
common agenda items. Allow me also, Sir, to take this
opportunity to convey our deep gratitude to you and to
all other members of the Council for the special focus
placed on Africa during your presidency.
We would also like to join in welcoming His
Excellency the Prime Minister of Djibouti, His
Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the
other members of their delegation. We thank the Prime
Minister for the very informative briefing he gave the
Council today. We would also like to thank
Ambassador Desta of Eritrea for his statement to the
Council. The presence of the representatives of these
two countries in the Council today is a clear sign that
both are willing to give priority to the path of dialogue,
and we wish to commend them for that choice.
We also thank Mr. Honwana for his statement.
Our appreciation goes as well to all members of the
Council for their statements today.
As members are aware, Eritrea and Djibouti are
two important and valued States members of the
African Union, and the surprising occurrence of the
regrettable incidents under consideration in the Council
today was never expected — even remotely — despite
the persisting tensions in the Horn of Africa as a
whole.
We would like to recall that at its 121st and 125th
meetings, held on 24 April and 2 May respectively, the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union
exchanged views on relations between the State of
Eritrea and the Republic of Djibouti, following a letter
sent to the Peace and Security Council on 24 April
2008 by the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of the Republic of Djibouti
regarding the situation at the border between the two
countries.
For its part, the Commission of the African Union
formally wrote to the two countries to gather as much
information as possible about the situation at their
common border and about the steps they may have
taken to resolve the situation amicably. Further to the
recommendation of the Peace and Security Council, the
Commission also dispatched a mission to assess the
situation on the ground and to consult with the two
countries. The mission was received by authorities of
Djibouti and is still waiting to be received by Eritrea.

08-39798

S/PV.5924

In the light of the disturbing tensions unfolding
between Djibouti and Eritrea — in particular the
incidents between the armed forces of the two
countries — since Tuesday, 10 June 2008, the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union, at its 136th
meeting, held on 12 June 2008, strongly condemned
the use of force and stressed the imperative need to
respect the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
independence of member States, in conformity with the
Constitutive Act of the African Union. The Council
called for the immediate return to the situation
prevailing at the common border between the two
countries before the current tension began, including
the withdrawal from the border of all forces that have
been positioned there since 4 February 2008. The
Peace and Security Council again urged the two
countries to show utmost restraint, resort to dialogue to
resolve any bilateral dispute and give their full
cooperation to all efforts made to that end.
Furthermore, the African Union’s Council decided to
meet in due course at the appropriate level to consider
the situation and to take necessary decisions.
We are pleased to confirm to the Security Council
today that the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union, in implementation of that decision, will
discuss the situation between Eritrea and Djibouti at
the level of heads of State and Government on 29 June
2008, on the margins of the eleventh ordinary session
of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of
the African Union, to be held in Sharm el-Sheikh,
Egypt.
In that regard, and pursuant to the provisions of
the Protocol of the Peace and Security Council, Eritrea
and Djibouti have been invited to that summit. We
would like to take the opportunity of their presence in
the Security Council today to underscore the
importance of their participation at the summit meeting
with a view to finding a peaceful and lasting solution
to their differences.
We would also like to reiterate the appeal of the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union to the
two countries; we hope that all parties will act
positively and constructively for the restoration of
peaceful and cordial relations between them, in the
interest of peace and security for the Governments and
the peoples of both countries, and for the subregion
and Africa as a whole. We are confident that the
deliberations of the Security Council today will
contribute to that process.

08-39798

The President: I thank Ms. Mungwa for her
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Yahya Mahmassani,
Permanent Observer for the League of Arab States
Mr. Mahmassani (spoke in Arabic): I wish at the
outset to thank you, Mr. President, for inviting the
League of Arab States to participate in this meeting. I
welcome the presence in the Council Chamber today of
His Excellency Mr. Dileita Mohamed Dileita, Prime
Minister of Djibouti. I thank the Permanent
Representative of Eritrea for his statement and the
representative of Department of Political Affairs for his
briefing.
The Security Council is meeting today to
consider a new crisis confronting the Horn of Africa.
Since February, the Government of Djibouti has
reported to the League of Arab States concerning a
gradual massing of Eritrean troops along the border
between the two countries, including fortifications and
trenches and encroachments by Eritrean soldiers on
Djibouti’s side of the border, overlooking Red Sea
shipping lanes.
Following a letter from the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of the Republic
of Djibouti addressed to the Secretary-General of the
League of Arab States with a view to addressing the
tensions between Djibouti and Eritrea by peaceful
means, the League sent a fact-finding mission to the
Ras Doumeira area in the Republic of Djibouti, whose
visit occurred from 9 to 11 May 2008, in order to seek
a settlement of the crisis. The mission met with
officials in Djibouti and sought a meeting with officials
in Eritrea, but the Eritrean side did not respond to its
request.
The Council of the League of Arab States met on
12 June to discuss the situation between Djibouti and
Eritrea. It adopted a decision which stressed the
importance of respect for Djibouti’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity and rejected any aggression against
that country. It called upon Eritrea to withdraw its
forces immediately from the border with Djibouti. The
Council of the League renewed its call for respect for
the principle of good-neighbourliness between the two
countries and respect for the post-colonial borders. It
called upon the Secretary-General of the League of
Arab States and the Arab Peace and Security Council to
continue their efforts to deal with the issue, and it
mandated the League secretariat to undertake necessary

17

S/PV.5924

contacts with the Government of Eritrea with a view to
addressing the situation, easing the tension and ending
the confrontation along the border between the two
neighbouring countries.
The current situation along the border between
Djibouti and Eritrea is a source of concern, because
there are many potential repercussions. A crisis of this
kind cannot be resolved by military means or by the
use or threat of use of force. The only way to resolve
the crisis is through peaceful negotiations between the
parties concerned to find a solution. The territorial
integrity and stability of States must be respected, and
Arab-African cooperation must be deepened.
We call on the parties to show restraint and to
take no measures to escalate the situation. A peaceful
outcome to the crisis requires the parties to commit to
implementing the agreements between them, to

18

maintain good-neighbourly relations, and to refrain
from intervening in each other’s affairs.
The Horn of Africa continues to experience
numerous upheavals and instability. It certainly does
not need any new such situations. The crisis must
therefore be addressed and contained expeditiously. We
believe that the role of the Security Council, the main
body responsible for international peace and security,
is pivotal in that regard.
The President: I thank Ambassador Mahmassani
for his briefing.
There are no other speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.

08-39798
