82

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

Welcoming the decision of the Scientific Committee to
submit its report with scientific annexes to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session,
l. Commends the United Nations Scientific Committee
on the Effects of Atomic Radiation for the valuable contribution it has been making in the course of the past twentysix years, since its inception, to wider knowledge and
understanding of the levels, effects and risks of atomic radiation, and for fulfilling its original mandate with scientific
authority and independence of judgement;
2. Notes with satisfaction the continued and growing
scientific co-operation between the Scientific Committee and
the United Nations Environment Programme;
3. Requests the Scientific Committee to continue its
work, including its important co-ordinating activities, to
increase knowledge of the doses, effects and risks of ionizing radiation from all sources;
4. Endorses the Scientific Committee's intention to continue its activity of scientific review and assessment on
behalf of the General Assembly;
5. Requests the United Nations Environment Programme to continue providing support for the effective conduct of the Scientific Committee's work and for the
dissemination of its findings to the General Assembly, the
scientific community and the public;
6. Expresses its appreciation for the assistance rendered
to the Scientific Committee by Member States, the specialized agencies, the International Atomic Energy Agency
and non-governmental organizations and invites them to
increase their co-operation in this field;
7. Endorses the Scientific Committee's renewed request
that Member States and the United Nations agencies and
non-governmental organizations concerned should provide
further relevant data about doses, effects and risks from
various sources of radiation, which would greatly help the
Committee in the preparation of its next major report to the
General Assembly.
42nd plenary meeting
28 October 1981

36/15.

Recent developments in connection with excavations in eastern Jerusalem

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August
1949, 3 is applicable to Palestinian and other Arab territories
occupied by Israel since 1967, including Jerusalem,
Recalling its resolutions 2253 (ES-V) of 4 July 1967.
2254 (ES-V) of 14 July 1967, 3092 (XXVIII) of 7 December
1973, 3240 B (XXIX) of 29 November 1974, 3525 B (XXX)
of 15 December 1975, 31/I06 B of 16 December 1976,
32/91 A of 13 December 1977.33/113 A of 18 December
1978, 34/90 B of 12 December 1979 and 35/122 of 11
December 1980,
Recalling Security Council resolutions 252 (1968) of 21
May 1968, 267 (1969) of 3 July 1969, 271 (1969) of 15
September 1969, 465 (1980) of I March 1980, 476 (1980)
of 30 June 1980 and 478 (1980) of 20 August 1980,
Bearing in mind the need to protect and preserve the
unique spiritual and religious character and dimensions of
the Holy City of Jerusalem,
Expressing its very grave concern that Israel, as the occupying Power, persists in excavating and transforming the
historical, cultural and religious sites of Jerusalem,
3

United Nations, Treaty Series. vol 75, No. 973, p. 287.

Noting with alarm that the excavations and transformations in progress seriously endanger the historical. cultural
and religious sites of Jerusalem as well as its over-all configuration and that these sites have never been as endangered
as they are today,
Noting with satisfaction and approval the decision of the
World Heritage Committee of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to include the
Old City of Jerusalem and its walls on the World Heritage
List.
Noting with appreciation the recommendation of the Executive Board of the United Nations Educational. Scientific
and Cultural Organization during its one hundred and thirteenth session that the World Heritage Committee should
speed up the procedure for including the Old City of
Jerusalem and its walls in the List of World Heritage in
Danger,
I . Determines that the excavations and transformations
of the landscape and of the historical, cultural and religious
sites of Jerusalem constitute a flagrant violation of the principles of international law and the relevant provisions of the
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, of 12 August I949;
2. Decides that such violations by Israel constitute a
serious obstruction to achieving a comprehensive and just
peace in the Middle East as well as a threat to international
peace and security:
3. Demands that Israel desist forthwith from all excavations and transformations of the historical. cultural and
religious sites of Jerusalem, particularly beneath and around
the Moslem Holy Sanctuary of AI-Haram Al-Sharif (Al
Masjid Al Aqsa and the Sacred Dome of the Rock), the
structures of which are in danger of collapse:
4. Requests the Security Council to conside1 this situation in case Israel fails to comply immediately with the
present resolution;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly and the Security Council, not later than 23
November 1981 . on the implementation of the present
resolution.
42nd plenary meeting
28 October 1981

36/35.

International co-operation in the peaceful uses
of outer space

The General Assemhl_v,
Recalling its resolution 35/14 of 3 November 1980,
Deeply convinct'd of the common interest of mankind in
promoting the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes and in continuing efforts to extend to all States
the benefits derived therefrom, as well as the importance
of international co-operation in this field, for which the
United Nations should continue to provide a focal point,
Reaffirming the importance of international co-operation
in developing the rule of law in the peaceful exploration
and use of outer space,
Taking note with satisfaction of the progress achieved in
various national and co-operative space projects. such as
the launch of the Ariane rocket by the European Space
Agency, the flight of the United States Space Shuttle Orbiter
Columbia and the completion of the first stage of the Voyager II mission, the Sa!yut Soyuz orbital research programme of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the
successful outer space missions by the first Mongolian and
Romanian cosmonauts, the successful launching of the

IV.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political Committee

Rohini II and Apple satellites by India and the placing into
orbit of a group of three satellites with a single carrier rocket
by China,
Having considered the report of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space on the work of its twentyfourth session, 4
1. Endorses the report of the Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space;
2. Invites States which have not yet become parties to
the international treaties governing the use of outer space'
to give consideration to ratifying or acceding to those
treaties;
3. Takes note with appreciation of the progress in the
preparation of the Second United Nations Conference on
the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, to be
held at Vienna from 9 to 21 August 1982, achieved by the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and by its
Scientific and Technical Sub-Committee, acting as Preparatory Committee for the Conference and Advisory Committee to the Preparatory Committee, respectively;
4. Notes that the Legal Sub-Committee of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space at its twentieth
session:
(a) Continued its efforts to formulate draft principles
relating to the legal implications of remote sensing of the
earth from space;
(b) Continued its efforts to complete the elaboration of
principles governing the use by States of artificial earth
satellites for direct television broadcasting;
(c) Continued its discussion of matters relating to the
definition and/or delimitation of outer space and outer space
activities, bearing in mind, inter alia, questions relating to
the geostationary orbit;
(d) Considered the possibility of supplementing the
norms of international law relevant to the use of nuclear
power sources in outer space and established a working
group in connection with this item;
5. Decides that the Legal Sub-Committee of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space at its twentyfirst session should:
(a) Continue on a priority basis its detailed consideration of the legal implications of remote sensing of the earth
from space, with the aim of formulating draft principles
relating to remote sensing;
(b) Continue its consideration of:
(i) The possibility of supplementing the norms of international law relevant to the use of nuclear power
sources in outer space through its working group;
(ii) Matters relating to the definition and/or delimitation
of outer space and outer space activities, bearing
in mind, inter alia, questions relating to the geostationary orbit, and devote adequate time for a
deeper consideration of this question;
6. Decides to convene the twenty-first session of the
Legal Sub-Committee of the Committee on the Peaceful
4
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thim·-sixth Se.ssion, Supplement No. 20 (A/36/20).
~ Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial
Bodies (General Assembly resolution 2222 (XXI), annex); Agreement on
the Rescue of Astronauts, the Return of Astronauts and the Return of
Objects Launched into Outer Space (General Assembly resolution 2345
(XXII), annex); Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused
by Space Objects (General Assembly resolution 2777 (XXVI), annex);
Convention on Rellistration of Objects Launched into Outer Space (General
Assembly resolution 3235 (XXIX). annex); Agreement Governing the
Act1v1t1es of States on the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies (General
Assembly resolution 34/68, annex).

83

Uses of Outer Space at Geneva from I to 19 February 1982.
with the possibility of extending that session to 26 February
1982;
7. Decides that further attempts to complete the elaboration of a draft set of principles governing the use by
States of artificial earth satellites for direct television broadcasting shall be made by the Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space during its twenty-fifth session;
8. Decides to consider at its thirty-seventh session the
adoption of a draft set of principles governing the use by
States of artificial earth satellites for direct television
broadcasting;
9. Notes that the Snentitic and Technical Sub-Committee of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space at its eighteenth session continued:
(a) Its consideration of questions relating to remote
sensing of the earth by satellites;
(h) Its consideration of the United Nations Programme
on Space Applications and the co-ordination of space activities within the United Nations system;
(c) Its examination of the physical nature and technical
attributes of the geostationary orbit;
(d) Its consideration of technical aspects of. and safety
measures relating to, the use of nuclear power sources in
outer space and adopted the report of the Working Group:
(e) Its consideration nf questions relating to space transportation systems and their implications for future activities
in space:
(j) Preparations for the Second United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
in its capacity as Advisory Committee to the Preparatory
Committee;
10. Endorses the recommendation of the Committee on
the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space that the Scientific and
Technical Sub-Committee at its nineteenth session should:
(a) Consider the following items on a priority basis:
(i) Consideration of the United Nations Programme
on Space Applications and the co-ordination of
outer space activities within the United Nations
system;
( ii) Questions relating to remote sensing of the earth
by satellites;
(iii) Preparations for the Second United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space:
(iv) Use of nuclear power sources in outer space;
(h)
Consider the following items:
(i) Questions relating to space transportation systems
and their implications for future activities in space;
(ii) Examination of the physical nature and technical
attributes of the geostationary orbit:
11. Endorses the United Nations Programme on Space
Applications for 1982 as proposed to the Scientific and
Technical Sub-Committee by the Expert on Space
Applications:
12. Requests the Secretary-General to appoint a new
Expert on Space Applications without delay, taking into
account the important role of the Expert in the preparation
of the Second United Nations Conference on the Exploration
and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space:
13. Expresses its appreciation to all Governments as
well as specialized agencies and other international organizations which acted as hosts to. offered fellowships for.
or otherwise assisted in the holding of. international training
seminars and workshops on space applications. particularly
for the benefit of developing countries;

84

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

14. Requests the specialized agencies and other international organizations to continue their co-operation with
the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and to
provide it with progress reports on their work relating to the
peaceful uses of outer space;
15. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space to continue its work, in accordance with the
present resolution and previous resolutions of the General
Assembly, to consider, as appropriate, new projects in outer
space activities and to submit a report to the Assembly at
its thirty-seventh session, including its views on which subjects should be studied in the future.
63rd plenary meeting
18 November /981

36/36.

Second United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 33/16 of 10 November 1978,
34/67 of 5 December 1979 and 35/15 of 3 November 1980
concerning the convening as well as the preparation of the
Second United Nations Conference on the Exploration and
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, to be held at Vienna from
9 to 21 August 1982,
Having considered the report submitted to the General
Assembly by the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space in its capacity as Preparatory Committee for the
Conference, 6
1. Approves the recommendations contained in the report of the Preparatory Committee for the Second United
Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space concerning, in particular, the publicity arrangements, the outline of the draft report, the provisional
rules of procedure, the schedule of meetings and the officers
of the Conference;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations Programme on Space Applications for the holding of regional
seminars related to the preparation of the Conference, as
well as to all the Governments that have acted as hosts to
these seminars;
3. Expresses its concern at the fact that all the officers
necessary for the preparation of the Conference have not
yet been appointed;
4. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
make all the necessary appointments without further delay,
and in any case not later than 31 December 1981, in order
to ensure the efficient preparation of the Conference;
5. Invites Member States actively to promote, to the
extent possible, public awareness of the Conference through
their national radio and television networks, as well as
through the efficient use of other mass media;
6. Requests the Preparatory Committee and its Advisory
Committee to continue the preparatory work for the
Conference;
7. Commends the Secretary-General of the Conference
for the satisfactory arrangements for the Conference;
8. Requests the Secretary-General of the Conference to
continue fulfilling his mandate and to mobilize further assistance from the Department of Public Information of the
Secretariat and other relevant services of the United Nations

• Official Records of the General Assemblv. Thirtv-sixth Session. Supplement No. 46 (A/36/46).
·

system as well as from the non-governmental organizations
in disseminating effectively information on the Conference
to ensure world-wide awareness of the Conference and its
objectives;
9. Requests the Conference to submit a report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session.
63rd plenary meeting
18 November /981

36/37.

Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peace-keeping operations in all their aspects

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2006 (XIX) of 18 February 1965,
2053 A (XX) of 15 December 1965, 2249 (S-V) of 23 May
1967, 2308 (XXII) of 13 December 1967, 2451 (XXIII) of
19 December 1968, 2670 (XXV) of 8 December 1970, 2835
(XXVI) of 17 December 1971, 2965 (XXVII) of 13 December 1972, 3091 (XXVIII) of 7 December 1973, 3239
(XXIX) of29 November 1974, 3457 (XXX)of 10 December
1975, 31/l 05 of 15 December 1976, 32/ 106 of 15 December
1977, 33/114 of 18 December 1978, 34/53 of 23 November
1979 and 35/121 of 11 December 1980,
Reaffirming once again the fundamental importance of
the maintenance of international peace and security by the
United Nations as set out in the Charter of the United
Nations,
Reaffirming the determination of the United Nations to
ensure, by the acceptance of principles and the institution
of methods, that armed force shall not be used, save in the
common interest of Member States,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee
on Peace-keeping Operations,7
Noting with regret the difficulties being experienced by
the Special Committee in carrying out its mandate,
Emphasizing again that only by a greater demonstration
of political will and conciliation can progress be achieved,
I . Takes note of the report of the Special Committee
on Peace-keeping Operations;
2. Repeats its invitations to Member States to report
and to provide information on experience gained in peacekeeping operations;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a further
compilation of the replies submitted in accordance with
paragraph 2 above;
4. Urges again the Special Committee, in accordance
with its mandate, to renew its efforts to work towards the
completion of dgreed guidelines which will govern the conduct of peace-keeping operations of the United Nations in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and to
devote further attention to specific questions related to the
practical implementation of peace-keeping operations;
5. Requests the Special Committee to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled •'Comprehensive
review of the whole question of peace-keeping operations
in all their aspects".
63rd plenary meeting
18 November 1981

7

A/361469.
