A /68/PV.108

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-eighth session

108th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 10 September 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ashe .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Antigua and Barbuda)

The meeting was called to order at 4.15 p.m.
Agenda item 122 (continued)
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Report of the Ad Hoc Working Group
on the Revitalization of the Work of the
General Assembly (A/68/951)
Draft resolution (A/68/951, para. 91)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly considered, in a joint debate, agenda items
121 and 122 at its 59th plenary meeting on 4 December
2013.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution contained in paragraph 91 of the report of
the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the
Work of the General Assembly. May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt the draft resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
68/307).
The President: I should like to express my sincere
thanks to the Permanent Representatives of Slovakia
and Thailand, co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working
Group, who have so ably conducted the discussions and
complex negotiations of the Working Group. I am sure
members of the Assembly join me in extending them
our sincere appreciation.
I now give the floor to the observer of the European
Union.

Mr. Vrailas (European Union): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, Montenegro,
Iceland, Serbia and Albania; the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Armenia
and Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
The European Union and its member States
welcome today’s adoption of resolution 68/307, on the
revitalization of the work of the General Assembly. We
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s plenary meeting and for your engagement
with the General Assembly revitalization process. We
owe further thanks to the co-Chairs, Mr. František
Ružička and Mr. Norachit Sinhaseni, and their teams,
who ably led the negotiation process forward, as
well as to Mr. Noel Sinclair, Deputy Chef de Cabinet
of the President of the General Assembly, who was
personally involved in the negotiations in a most
constructive manner, and to Ms. Alina Padeanu of the
Office of the President of the General Assembly. We
also thank Mr. Ion Botnaru, Director of the General
Assembly and Economic and Social Council Affairs
Division of the Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management, and Mr. Georg Zeiner
for their useful involvement. We would also like to
highlight the constructive atmosphere throughout the
negotiations and thank all the negotiating partners for
their engagement in revitalizing the General Assembly.
Resolution 68/307, which we have just adopted,
contains some concrete results. Two examples of the
achievements of the Ad Hoc Working Group during

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U‑0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

14-52992 (E)

*1452992*

A/68/PV.108

the sixty-eighth session include the earlier election of
the non-permanent members of the Security Council
and the members of the Economic and Social Council,
as well as the reiteration of the interim arrangement
adopted in decision 68/505, with the guidelines
for future arrangements included in the annex of
resolution 68/307. On the other hand, we also wish to
recall the need to consider and take steps towards the
rationalization of the agendas of the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council, with a view to
eliminating duplication and overlap and promoting
complementarity in the consideration and negotiation
of similar and related issues. In that context, it is
important to note resolution 68/1.
On 23 June, the Council of the European Union
adopted its priorities for the sixty-ninth session of the
General Assembly. Those priorities recognize that
the revitalization of the General Assembly is a key
component in strengthening the United Nations as a
whole, and it is with that in mind that I wish to signal
our readiness to remain constructively engaged in this
process.
Mr. Lazarev (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
delegation of Belarus expresses its deep gratitude for the
often self-sacrificing efforts of the Working Group on
the Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly,
led by co-Chairs Mr. Ružička and Mr. Sinhaseni, the
Permanent Representatives of Slovakia and Thailand.
The report of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly
(A/68/951) and the related resolution 68/307, adopted by
the Assembly today, are causes for genuine optimism
concerning the future of the General Assembly. The
negotiation process and its results have not only made
a definite contribution to settling vital questions about
the functioning of the Assembly, but they have also
reminded us of the possibility and necessity of seeking
and finding compromises even on major issues, which
we believe is very important.
During the Working Group’s deliberations, my
delegation contributed a number of proposals that in our
view are designed to strengthen the principles on which
the United Nations operates. We therefore consistently
called for the practical implementation of the principle
of equality for all official United Nations languages. We
believe that the year-round publication of the Journal
of the United Nations in all the official languages, as
the General Assembly’s rules of procedure require, is

2/15

10/09/2014

not an empty formality but a visible and tangible result
of the strengthening the principles of multilingualism
and the rule of law in the Organization. We believe that
financial issues will not be an obstacle to implementing
the rules of procedure and the provisions of today’s
resolution.
It is particularly important for us that the
attention of Member States be called to the process for
appointing the Secretary-General, as set forth in the
General Assembly’s rules of procedure. We believe
that every State, large or small, enjoys the inalienable
right to express its opinion on the candidatures for
Secretary-General, the individual who represents the
entire Organization. The Assembly’s rules of procedure
provide for that possibility.
Another important area is the harmonization of
all the Main Committees of the General Assembly. We
welcome the Secretariat’s efforts to improve the reports
on the work of the Committees. At the same time, we
believe that much remains to be done in this area,
particularly concerning the timeliness of the work and
services relating to the Journal of the United Nations.
We are sincerely grateful to the co-Chairs of the
Ad Hoc Working Group for their efforts in drafting
and strengthening, through the resolution, a predictable
mechanism for rotating the Chairs of the Main
Committees, amplified by principles that give the
mechanism the necessary flexibility. These principles
include the recognition of the role of the President
of the General Assembly; making the mechanism
for appointing rapporteurs to the Main Committees
automatic; and bringing order to the procedures
for making ad hoc changes to the chairmanship
arrangements. We hope that the implementation of those
standards will enable the Main Committees to devote
all the time at their disposal to considering substantive
issues. We are willing to take an active part in drawing
up new arrangements for chairmanship rotations, as
indicated in paragraph 22 of the resolution.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of Brazil, Costa Rica, Estonia,
Switzerland and my own country, Liechtenstein.
We welcome the consensus adoption today of
resolution 68/307 and wish to offer a few comments
on the issue of the appointment of the next SecretaryGeneral, as addressed in the text. We are pleased that
paragraph 27 reaffirms the role of the President of the
General Assembly in actively supporting the process of

14-52992

10/09/2014

appointing the Secretary-General. Paragraph 19 of the
annex to resolution 60/286 already stipulates that the
President of the General Assembly should consult with
Member States in order to identify potential candidates.
This has not happened yet, as stated in the commentary
to the updated inventory chart on the revitalization (see
A/68/951). We hope that future Presidents will fulfil this
mandate and play an active role in the process leading
to the appointment of the next Secretary-General.
Our delegations had hoped to start a debate within
the General Assembly about the criteria for candidates
for the position of Secretary-General, so as to ensure
the election of the best possible candidate. The
aforementioned resolution 60/286 touches on this issue,
highlighting how important it is that the SecretaryGeneral possess extensive leadership skills. We had
suggested language requesting that the Ad Hoc Working
Group consider such criteria and report on them. We
regret that the text just adopted does not address this
issue and hope that such a discussion, which should
also include input from civil society, will be possible
in the near future.
I would also like to join you, Mr. President, in
thanking our colleagues from Slovakia and Thailand
for their tireless efforts to bring this exercise to a
successful conclusion.
Mr. Metref (Algeria): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM). We
welcome the adoption by the General Assembly today
of resolution 68/307, on the revitalization of the work of
the General Assembly.
I would like to offer my sincere thanks to the
Permanent Representatives of Thailand and Slovakia,
Mr. Norachit Sinhaseni and Mr. František Ružička,
co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly,
who so ably conducted the Group’s discussions and
complex negotiations. Even if the final results were up
to our expectations, the process of the revitalization of
the work of the Assembly, as its name suggests, will not
stop here. We should continue to enhance the role and
authority of the Assembly in global matters of concern
to the international community. NAM considers that a
reinvigorated General Assembly in a more responsive
environment, exerting its role and authority fully,
would significantly contribute to strengthening the
broader United Nations system, improving international
governance and enhancing multilateralism.

A/68/PV.108

I would like to end by thanking all delegations
involved for their active participation and for the
flexibility they showed during the negotiations. I should
not forget to thank my colleagues from the Non-Aligned
Movement for their significant contributions and
support.
Mr. Sinhaseni (Thailand): After all that has been
said, I have nothing to add except to offer some simple
but sincere words of thanks. I would first like to thank
you, Mr. President, and the representatives who have
spoken before me for their kind words addressed to me
and to my co-facilitator, Ambassador František Ružička
of Slovakia. I would also like to thank the delegations
that made invaluable suggestions and proposals,
which ultimately found widespread support. Such
proposals enabled the Ad Hoc Working Group to move
forward and come up with the resolution we have just
adopted (68/307). I further thank the representatives
of the various groups, notably the Non-Aligned
Movement, the European Union and others, as well as
individual representatives. All approached the work
in the necessary spirit of compromise, flexibility and
give-and-take that enabled the Working Group to
complete its work on time. My thanks also go to the
Secretariat, led by Director Ion Botnaru and his able
staff. We could not have completed our work without
them and their essential institutional memory.
Most important, I would like to express my sincere
thanks to my co-Chair, Mr. Ružička, and his able staff,
who were a joy to work with. And finally, I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for the trust and confidence
you placed in us. We also thank your staff, particularly
Chef de Cabinet Paulette Bethel and her Deputy, Noel
Sinclair, for the support and serious attention they gave
this issue.
Mr. Ružička (Slovakia): I will be very brief. I
join with my co-Chair in his thanks, and I am grateful
for the positive and constructive atmosphere we had
during our talks. I was honoured to work with the
staff of the Secretariat, and I enjoyed discussions
with representatives of Member States. Many of those
discussions gave me hope for the future. I hope that the
same spirit prevails in any future discussions that we
may have the privilege to conduct.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 122?
It was so decided.

14-529923/15

A/68/PV.108

Agenda item 13 (continued)
2001-2010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in
Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa
Draft resolution (A/68/L.60)
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly considered, in a joint debate, agenda
item 63 and its sub-items (a) and (b) and agenda item 13
at its 36th plenary meeting, on 25 October 2013.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Ethiopia, to introduce draft resolution A/68/L.60.
Mr. Bame (Ethiopia): It is with honour that I
introduce, on behalf of the African Group, draft
resolution A/68/L.60, entitled “Consolidating gains and
accelerating efforts to control and eliminate malaria in
developing countries, particularly in Africa, by 2015”.
Further, Ethiopia is proud to chair the African Leaders
Malaria Alliance.
First of all, it is my pleasure to express my deepest
appreciation and sincere thanks to the co-facilitators of
the draft resolution for their hard work and leadership
in bringing it to its final form. I would also like to thank
all Member States that were involved in the negotiation
process for their active participation and support.
Between 2000 and 2012, a substantial scale-up of
malaria interventions led to a 42 per cent decline in
malaria mortality rates globally, saving an estimated
3.3 million lives. About 90 per cent, or 3 million, of
those lives were saved in children under the age of 5 in
Africa. The under-five mortality rate that is attributable
to malaria in Africa has declined by 54 per cent. Global
case incidence has been reduced by 25 per cent globally
and by 31 per cent in Africa. That success has happened
through the collaborative efforts of Governments,
non-governmental organizations and community-based
organizations, United Nations agencies, international
organizations, development partners, foundations,
civil society organizations, the private sector and other
stakeholders. Indeed, international disbursements
expanded tenfold between 2004 and 2013.
Available funding is still substantially less than the
$5.1 billion that is needed to achieve universal coverage
of malaria interventions. International financing for
malaria totalled $1.66 billion in 2011 and $1.94 billion in
2012. Domestic financing has shown a gradual rise and
was estimated to be $522 million in 2012, with endemic
countries in Africa and in South America committing
most resources. Combining domestic and international
4/15

10/09/2014

funds, the resources available for malaria efforts
globally were estimated to be just over $2.4 billion in
2012, leaving an annual gap of $2.7 billion.
While malaria is a preventable and treatable
disease, it continues to have a devastating impact on
people’s health and livelihoods around the world. In
2012, approximately 3.4 billion people were at risk
of the disease in 97 countries and territories, and an
estimated 207 million cases occurred. The disease
killed about 627,000 people, mostly children under 5
years of age in sub-Saharan Africa. The World Health
Organization (WHO) recommends a multi-pronged
strategy to reduce the malaria burden, including vector
control interventions, preventive therapies, diagnostic
testing, quality-assured treatment and strong malaria
surveillance.
The draft resolution, adopted on an annual basis,
is critical because it provides a rallying message for
countries and guideposts to key development partners,
such as the African Development Bank; the Global
Fund; the United Nations Economic Commission for
Africa; the World Bank; the United Kingdom, France
and the United States; the Bill and Melinda Gates
Foundation and other stakeholders, to ensure that we
build sustainable funding plans and ensure quality
financial management, including priority-setting and
accountability for results.
This year’s draft resolution highlights substantial
and technical updates and new developments with
regard to resolution 67/299, adopted last year. The new
components are as follows.
The draft resolution recalls the commitment made
by African leaders to end the epidemic of malaria by
ensuring universal and equitable access to quality
health care and by improving health systems and health
financing, contained in the African Union’s Common
African Position on the Post-2015 Development Agenda.
It welcomes the creation of the Asia-Pacific
Leaders Malaria Alliance, recognizing the leadership
and commitment of the Alliance to achieve the 2015
targets and encouraging the members of the Alliance to
continue to provide political leadership at the highest
level in the fight against malaria in the Asia-Pacific
region.
It takes note of the World Health Organization’s
framework for action for an emergency response to
artemisinin resistance in the Greater Mekong subregion
of South-East Asia, launched in April 2013.
14-52992

10/09/2014

It expresses awareness that recent successes
in prevention and control are fragile and can be
maintained only with sufficient and sustained national
and international investment to fund global malariacontrol efforts fully.
It recognizes the importance in the struggle against
malaria of the WHO Global Strategy and Plan of Action
on Public Health, Innovation and Intellectual Property
adopted by the World Health Assembly on 24 May 2008.
It calls upon malaria-endemic countries,
development partners and the international community
to support the timely replacement of long-lasting
insecticide-treated nets in accordance with the
recommendations of the World Health Organization on
the service lives of the nets in order to prevent the risk
of malaria resurgence and a reversal of the gains made
to date.
It recognizes the importance of a multisectoral
strategy to advance global control efforts, invites
malaria-endemic countries to consider adopting and
implementing the Multisectoral Action Framework for
Malaria developed by the Roll Back Malaria Partnership
and the United Nations Development Programme, and
encourages regional and intersectoral collaboration,
both public and private, at all levels, especially in
education, health, agriculture, economic development
and the environment, to advance malaria- control
objectives.
It further recognizes the need to strengthen malaria
surveillance and data quality in all endemic regions to
enable Member States to direct financial resources to
populations most in need and to respond effectively to
disease outbreaks.
It calls upon Member States and the international
community to strengthen mechanisms for countrybased coordination of technical assistance to achieve
alignment over the best approaches to implement WHO
technical guidance and to mobilize to support the
sharing and analysis of best practices to address urgent
programmatic challenges, to improve monitoring and
evaluation and to conduct regular financial planning
and gap analysis.
It recognizes the need for political commitment
and financial support beyond 2015 to sustain and
expand the achievements against malaria and to meet
the international malaria targets through prevention
and malaria control efforts to end the epidemic, while

A/68/PV.108

acknowledging the remarkable progress in combating
malaria to date.
In order to add greater value to this very important
draft resolution, we hope that next year will make more
progress. We look forward to the adoption of the draft
resolution by consensus as in previous years.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/68/L.60, entitled
“Consolidating gains and accelerating efforts to
control and eliminate malaria in developing countries,
particularly in Africa, by 2015”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, in
addition to those representatives listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
draft resolution A/68/L.60: Brazil, Denmark, Finland,
Israel, Japan, Luxembourg, Monaco, Montenegro,
Norway, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/68/L.60?
Draft resolution A/68/L.60 was adopted (resolution
68/308).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 13?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 14 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/68/L.61)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly adopted resolution 68/6, under agenda
items 14 and 118, “Follow-up to the outcome of the
Millennium Summit”, at its 32nd plenary meeting,
on 9 October 2013, and considered agenda item 14,
jointly with agenda item 118 and agenda item 125,
“United Nations reform: measures and proposals”, at its
54th plenary meeting, on 20 November 2013. Members

14-529925/15

A/68/PV.108

will also recall that the Assembly adopted resolution
68/304 at its 107th plenary meeting on 9 September
2014.
Regarding the report of the General Assembly on
sustainable development goals, circulated in document
A/68/970, I should now like to provide a clarification on
the context under which the Assembly would consider
the draft resolution before it.
First, a corrigendum to the report of the Open
Working Group will be issued in order to incorporate
the omitted names of Member States that have already
provided statements and explanations of position to
the report, as reflected in section III, paragraph 13, of
the report. Delegations are requested to communicate
to the Secretariat any omissions regarding the list of
Member States contained in paragraph 13 of the report
relating to statements or explanations of position.
Secondly, the footnote contained in section III,
paragraph 13, of the report will be revised and would
read as follows:
“The compilation of texts of statements and
explanations of position made by Member States
to the report are contained in the addendum to the
present report, issued as document A/68/970/Add.1.”
The addendum to the report containing the texts
of the reservations by Member States will be issued as
an official document of the General Assembly under
the symbol A/68/970/Add. 1. Member States wishing to
have their statements and explanations of position on
the report of the Open Working Group included in the
compilation document should provide to the General
Assembly secretariat their reservations to the report in
writing, if they have not done so already.
Before proceeding further and in accordance with
the agreement reached at the consultations held prior to
the start of this meeting, I would like to orally revise
draft resolution A/68/L.61.
I invite members to turn their attention to
paragraph 2 of the draft text. Paragraph 2 will now
read as follows:
“Decides that the proposal of the Open
Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals
contained in the report shall be the main basis for
integrating sustainable development goals into the
post-2015 development agenda, while recognizing
that other inputs will also be considered, in the

6/15

10/09/2014

intergovernmental negotiating process at the sixtyninth session of the General Assembly.”
Based on the orally amended clarification just
provided, we shall now proceed to consider draft
resolution A/68/L.61.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/68/L.61, entitled “Report of the Open
Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals
established pursuant to General Assembly resolution
66/288”, as orally revised. May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/68/L.61,
as orally revised?
Draft resolution A/68/L.61, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 68/309).
The President: Before giving the floor to the
speakers in explanation of position, may I remind
delegations that explanations of position are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia): At the outset, let me thank you, Mr. President,
very much for all your hard work.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the Group
of 77 and China (G-77).
The Group is pleased that resolution 68/309 has
been adopted by consensus by the General Assembly.
The decision to develop a set of sustainable development
goals (SDGs) was one of the landmark decisions taken
by our leaders at the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development (Rio+20). Rio+20 also
mandated that the SDGs should be coherent with and
integrated into the United Nations development agenda
beyond 2015.
The members of the Group of 77 and China attach
a high degree of importance to the outcome document
(A/68/970) of the Open Working Group on Sustainable
Development Goals containing a proposal on SDGs.
That outcome document was arrived at through
painstaking and intensive work stretching over a period
of almost 18 months, during which time the members of
the G-77 participated constructively and in good faith.
The Group of 77 and China firmly believes that
the outcome of that intergovernmental process needs
to be fully preserved and should not be reopened or
renegotiated. We are happy, therefore, that the resolution
that we have adopted today clearly recognizes that this

14-52992

10/09/2014

proposal will be the basis for integrating the SDGs into
the post-2015 development agenda. We also note that
it is important that all reservations made by members
of the Group must be faithfully compiled in an official
document that should be clearly referenced in the report
of the Open Working Group, as you, Mr. President,
have established. We have taken note of the your oral
confirmation in that regard.
The Group of 77 and China remains fully committed
to participating actively and constructively in the
forthcoming intergovernmental negotiations on the
post-2015 development agenda to reflect the common
voice and interests of the developing countries.
With that being said, let me thank you, Mr. President,
once again and all stakeholders and our partners.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libya): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the Group of Arab States.
I would like to take the opportunity to express to
you, Mr. President, and to the co-Chairs of the Open
Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals our
sincere appreciation for your hard work, which enabled
all of us to reach this final stage. The Arab Group had
engaged actively and constructively in all the meetings,
deliberations and consultations of the Open Working
Group.
With regard to the particular issues falling under
Goal 16 of the proposed sustainable development goals,
entitled “Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for
sustainable development, provide access to justice
for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive
institutions at all levels”, the Arab Group voiced its
concerns at a very early stage regarding the potential
risk of adopting a selective and reductionist approach
when addressing those issues. The way in which
discussions and consultations evolved in that regard
proved that the concerns of the Arab Group were valid
and well founded, as some Member States tried to
impose their own vision regarding those issues, thus
excluding the very valid concerns and critical interests
of the Arab Group.
The Arab Group delivered statements during
the 10th and 11th meetings of the Open Working
Group whereby it acknowledged the intrinsic link
between development, peace and security. However,
the Group reiterated that a detailed discussion was
needed and should take place in the framework of
the post-2015 development agenda. Furthermore, the
Group reaffirmed that, by all means, any discussion

A/68/PV.108

on peaceful and stable societies should take into
consideration and address Arab concerns in that regard,
in particular those related to ending foreign occupation.
Therefore, the Group requested the inclusion under
Goal 16 of the following targets: first, ending all
forms of colonial domination and foreign occupation
in order to achieve sustainable development for all;
secondly, strengthening adherence to international
law by all stakeholders, including States, international
organizations and financial institutions, to achieve
an international order based on the rule of the law;
and, thirdly, intensifying international cooperation
in the field of countering terrorism, in particular by
addressing its root causes, as they are an obstacle to
achieving sustainable development.
The Arab Group reaffirmed that it cannot accept
a selective approach when addressing the issue of
achieving a peaceful and stable society in the context
of sustainable development.
The Arab Group regretted that the proposed target
of ending all forms of foreign occupation and colonial
domination was not included under Goal 16, where
it naturally belongs. In that respect, the Group went
along with the approval of sending the proposal on
SDGs to the General Assembly with the understanding
that target 16.1 on significantly reducing all forms of
violence applies to ending foreign occupation, as it is
one of the most extreme forms of violence.
The Group’s understanding also is that target
16.3 on promoting the rule of law at the national and
international levels applies to the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem
and other Arab occupied territories, through the full
implementation of all General Assembly, Security
Council and Economic and Social Council resolutions
on ending foreign occupation and colonial domination
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem and other occupied Arab territories, as
well as the application of the relevant provisions of
international law and international humanitarian law,
including the four Geneva Conventions on the occupied
Arab territories.
The Arab Group is also very concerned about the
lack of any reference under Goal 16 to the issue of
illegal unilateral economic sanctions, which has been
raised by some Arab countries. This issue has been a
major impediment severely affecting the economy and
development of many countries, and it has played a
major role in undermining States’ sovereignty. Since

14-529927/15

A/68/PV.108

Goal 16 calls for providing access to justice for all, this
issue should have been addressed and duly reflected in
the Open Working Group’s report (A/68/970). The Arab
Group has requested that its statements and letters dated
24 July and 29 August to the co-Chairs of the Open
Working Group and to the President of the General
Assembly, respectively, as well as a letter dated 25 July
from the Arab members of the Open Working Group to
the co-Chairs, be noted as part of the official record and
in the Open Working Group’s report. So far, however,
neither the letter nor the Arab Group’s position and
reservations have been reflected in the report.
We are comfortable, Mr. President, with the
explanation you gave about this matter at the beginning
of today’s meeting. Nonetheless, the Arab Group would
like to reiterate its request to have its position and that
of its members duly reflected in the report. We have
also requested that our letter dated 29 August, along
with its attachments, be circulated as an official General
Assembly document under agenda item 14, entitled
“Integrated and coordinated implementation of and
follow-up to the outcomes of the major United Nations
conferences and summits in the economic, social and
related fields”; sub-item (a) of agenda item 19, entitled
“Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the
Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes
of the World Summit on Sustainable Development
and of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development”; and agenda item 118, entitled “Followup to the outcome of the Millennium Summit”. We also
request that letter be attached to the report of the Open
Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals.
Ms. Leiva Roesch (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank you, Sir, for all your efforts in introducing
resolution 68/309, which contains the report of the
Open Working Group on Sustainable Development
Goals (A/68/970).
Our delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Bolivia on behalf of
the Group of 77 and China.
We have decided to speak because Guatemala and
Colombia were members of the Open Working Group
on Sustainable Development Goals. We would like to
take this opportunity to recognize the efforts of all
delegations in formulating the proposed goals. We
are also grateful for the dedication and leadership in
this long process of the Working Group’s co-Chairs,

8/15

10/09/2014

Ambassador Kamau of Kenya and Ambassador Kőrösi
of Hungary.
We should emphasize that the Open Working
Group’s final product was developed through a process
that was open, transparent and somewhat different from
the traditional format of United Nations negotiations,
with which we are all familiar. At the beginning, we all
expected that negotiations would be carried out behind
closed doors and among the designated members alone;
instead, however, the process involved every delegation
of the United Nations and included contributions from
civil society as well. Now we have a proposal that
emerged from a universal process with goals that are
also universally applicable.
Our delegation recognizes that the document is
not perfect; we would have liked a more limited set of
goals and targets. However, we believe that it should be
considered in its entirety, and in that regard we believe
that the Open Working Group’s final document should
be the basis for integrating sustainable development
goals into the post-2015 development agenda. We are
also pleased that the document includes global priorities
that had previously been relegated to the margins of the
development agenda, such as Goal 13 — “Take urgent
action to combat climate change and its impacts” — and
Goal 16, “Promote peaceful societies for sustainable
development, provide access to justice for all and build
effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all
levels”.
In our view, the links between the rule of law and
sustainable development are undeniable. Strengthening
the rule of law in order to create an environment
conducive to sustainable development should be a
priority, and for that reason Goal 16.3 is of special
interest.
Finally, our delegation was surprised that our
reservations were not reflected in the report, and we
ask that they be included in a corrected version of the
report.
Mr. Mohammad Pour Ferami (Islamic Republic
of Iran): I, too, would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for presiding over this important meeting.
I would like to associate myself with the statement
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Bolivia
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China. I thank him and
the other members of his delegation for their hard work
in the past year.

14-52992

10/09/2014

I would also like to express my delegation’s deep
gratitude to the Permanent Representatives of Kenya
and Hungary for their excellent stewardship of this
process, which produced results after almost 18 months
of serious consultations.
The delegation of the Islamic Republic of Iran
participated very constructively in this process, along
with almost all the other delegations involved. We
believe that in all its aspects, positive and negative,
the report of the Open Working Group on Sustainable
Development Goals (A/68/970) is the beloved offspring
of us all. We may have complaints and concerns or be
dissatisfied with certain parts of it, but, overall, it is our
brainchild. That is how my delegation believes it should
now be regarded and integrated into the next process of
drafting the post-2015 development agenda. We really
appreciate the amendments introduced into the final
draft of the resolution (resolution 68/309) as compared
to the early version. As paragraph 246 of the Outcome
Document of the 2012 United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development (resolution 66/288) says, the
sustainable development goals “should be coherent with
and integrated into the United Nations development
agenda beyond 2015”.
My delegation’s final comment on this report, as we
clearly expressed on the day of its adoption in the Open
Working Group, is that we have serious reservations
about certain parts of the document that are contrary
to my country’s policies, practices and circumstances.
I would like to once again put those reservations
on record. They will be submitted in writing to the
Secretariat, and I ask that they be considered as an
integral part of the Open Working Group’s report. Once
again, we deeply appreciate all the energy and effort
expended by the co-Chairs of the Group, and hope that
the report will be a good basis for integrating its goals
into the post-2015 development agenda.
Ms. Cousens (United States of America): We
welcome the adoption today of resolution 68/309, as
amended, on the report of the Open Working Group
on Sustainable Development Goals (A/68/970), which
represents an important way station on the road to 2015.
We would first like to express our sincere
appreciation for your leadership on this issue,
Mr. President, and for the focus you have encouraged
during your tenure in office on setting the stage for
the post-2015 development agenda. I would also like
to warmly thank the Open Working Group co-Chairs,
Ambassadors Kamau and Kőrösi, for their skilful

A/68/PV.108

leadership, patience and good faith in bringing the
Group to a fruitful conclusion. Together we did indeed
travel a long way.
We believe that the proposal of the Open Working
Group on Sustainable Development Goals helped
build substantial common understanding among
all of us about the historic opportunity that we have
in the post-2015 development agenda to make truly
decisive gains against some of humanity’s greatest
challenges — extreme poverty, disease, inequality
between women and men, and so on — to name just
a few. The Open Working Group proposal gives us an
important point of departure for our work ahead.
We are pleased by many issues that are prominently
treated in that proposal: the strong recognition of the
need and potential to eradicate extreme poverty in a
generation; recognition of the power of sustained and
inclusive economic growth to drive poverty reduction
and broader development; a clear and ambitious target
to cut maternal mortality; the need to end the HIV/AIDS
epidemic; a standalone goal on gender equality and
empowerment, including recognition of women’s sexual
and reproductive health and reproductive rights; and
critical recognition of the fact that peaceful societies
with capable and inclusive institutions are essential
underpinnings of sustainable development. We also
welcome the strong treatment of climate change in this
agenda.
We were not able to agree on every issue in
the proposal, and we remind all colleagues of our
explanation of position and our reservations following
the conclusion of the Open Working Group. But where
the proposal was not able to find common ground,
we continue to believe that common ground remains
possible.
We now look forward to the fall and to the
opportunity to reflect more deeply on the issues
elaborated on in the Open Working Group’s proposal.
We look forward to the Secretary-General’s synthesis
report, which can make a vital contribution to our
efforts, along with other critical inputs. We anticipate
a productive start to intergovernmental negotiations in
the new year.
We want to reinforce our commitment to working
in close cooperation with all partners as we embark on
the next phase. We have vital input still to consider from
many quarters, including from wider stakeholders in all
our countries. The United States particularly welcomes

14-529929/15

A/68/PV.108

10/09/2014

this resolution’s recognition that these other inputs will
be considered in our deliberations to come.

reference to elements in the proposals that were clearly
opposed by some delegations.

The process that led us to arrive at the Open Working
Group’s proposal has given us an important foundation
for the next phase of our work. We are confident that
together in the days ahead we will be able to craft a
compelling, transformative and impactful post-2015
development agenda for all of our citizens.

For the African Group, the consideration of the
proposed sustainable development goals includes the
reservations entered into against some aspect of the
report. They go hand in hand. The African Group was
confident that the Secretariat would heed this call in
the spirit of openness, transparency, inclusiveness
and consensus, characteristics that are widely
associated with the Open Working Group process. We
thank the President of the General Assembly for his
understanding, willingness and support in finding a
way to accommodate the observations and reservations
of Member States.

Finally, if I may say, we do not believe that
today’s meeting is the place to reiterate any specific
reservations, and we regret that some delegations have
raised political issues that do not belong in this meeting
and should not be addressed here and distract us from
our task today.
Mr. Msosa (Malawi): At the very outset, the African
Group would like to align itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Plurinational
State of Bolivia on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
The African Group would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this meeting, whose
goal was to receive and agree on the report of the Open
Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals,
as mandated by the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development. The African Group wishes
to extend its profound appreciation to the co-Chairs
of the historic Open Working Group on Sustainable
Development Goals, whose devotion and exemplary
leadership were evident once again in the informal
informal consultations convened on your behalf, Sir, on
Monday this week. The Group wishes to reaffirm the
fact that despite their retirement, they remain our dear
co-Chairs, whose guidance and inspiration shall be
instrumental in the upcoming post-2015 development
agenda process.
We have received the report of the Open Working
Group, which contains goals and targets in whose
development all Member States and others, including
representatives of civil society, the scientific community
and the business sector, participated.
The African Group has insisted that the report should
also include the observations and reservations made by
Member States during and after the final session of
the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development
Goals. The African Group deemed it appropriate that
the comprehensive and complex character of the Open
Working Group process should be matched with an
outcome document of similar magnitude that makes

10/15

The fulfilment of this important task of receiving
and agreeing on the report of the Open Working Group
signifies the beginning of an important journey that will
take us through the next phase of intergovernmental
negotiations and, ultimately, the adoption of the post2015 development goals, in September 2015.
The Group notes with great pleasure that this
Hall has unanimously agreed that the proposals of
the Open Working Group shall serve as the basis for
integrating the sustainable development goals into
the post-2015 development agenda. This augurs well,
given the Group’s firm conviction that the Open
Working Group package should be neither reopened nor
renegotiated. In that regard, the African Group looks
forward to participating constructively in the upcoming
intergovernmental process and pledges its continued
support and cooperation to ensure a successful
conclusion of the said process.
Ms. Miyano (Japan): The report of the Open
Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals
is the outcome of a collective effort over a period of
more than 18 months, and Japan welcomes the adoption
of draft resolution A/68/L.61. I would like to express
sincere appreciation for your leadership, Mr. President,
and for the excellent and instrumental leadership of both
co-Chairs of the Open Working Group, Ambassador
Kamau and Ambassador Kőrösi. I should like also to
acknowledge the efforts of all involved.
The report shows that collectively we can reach the
goal of achieving inclusive, sustainable development.
After today, with this very important report in hand, we
will proceed to the next phase, towards the negotiations
on the adoption of the post-2015 development agenda.
We have already received significant other inputs for

14-52992

10/09/2014

this purpose from the report of the High-level Panel
and the Intergovernmental Committee of Experts on
Sustainable Development Financing, as well as various
other inputs, including from civil society and other
stakeholders. We expect the report of the SecretaryGeneral to be a comprehensive document encompassing
all of the input in a balanced manner, so that the
intergovernmental negotiations can build on the report.
We believe that these inputs are all equally
important and available and should be considered in the
next phase, so that we will be able to establish a strong
and transformative agenda that can be implemented by
a wide range of stakeholders.
We joined the consensus on this resolution on
the clear understanding that it does not change the
established practices of the United Nations and that
nothing in this resolution requires Member States to
accept any reservation made by other Member States.
Japan has also made reservations on the report, but
we do not expect other Member States to accept these
reservations.
We will continue to be engaged in, work hard for
and contribute to this process.
Mr. Narang (India): We commend the General
Assembly for having adopted by consensus draft
resolution A/68/L.61. The adoption of this resolution
brings to a successful close the journey that we
collectively undertook in June 2012 on crafting an
agreement on a set of sustainable development goals.
The path was rocky at times and our collective will
was tested, not least by the fact that this was perhaps
the first time that the global community had tried to
fashion a consensus template of concrete goals and
targets on such a large canvas. Translating the global
discourse of ideas on sustainable development into an
actionable agenda was never going to be easy, yet the
final outcome, though clearly not perfect, is testimony
to the power and indispensability of multilateralism
to finding common solutions to the problems we
collectively face.
We would like to place on record our sincere
appreciation for the two co-Chairs, the Permanent
Representatives of Hungary and Kenya, for their
outstanding leadership of the process. We also thank
the Secretariat for its exceptional support for the Open
Working Group.
Resolution 68/309, adopted today, correctly notes
that the proposal of the Open Working Group must

A/68/PV.108

be the basis for integrating sustainable development
goals (SDGs) into the post-2015 development agenda.
While other inputs are undoubtedly important, it must
be borne in mind that the Open Working Group is the
only intergovernmental process so far that has had the
mandate to negotiate and develop a set of sustainable
development goals. That intergovernmental process was
also unique in that it enabled the effective engagement
of all the relevant stakeholders. The range of inputs
received from United Nations agencies, international
organizations, major groups and civil society greatly
enriched the discussions and outcome of the Open
Working Group.
The work of the Open Working Group will also feed
into the synthesis report of the Secretary-General, to
which we look forward. It would be useful to recall that
the mandate for that report is to synthesize the range
of inputs available and to propose a coherent vision to
help Member States as they embark upon the process of
negotiating the post-2015 development agenda. In other
words, its mandate is not to propose a new or alternative
set of goals or a counter-narrative to the outcome of the
intergovernmental Open Working Group.
India engaged constructively and in good faith
in all the meetings of the Open Working Group and
contributed to building consensus on key issues of
interest to developing countries. The final outcome of
the Open Working Group is a broad template, but also
a delicately crafted political compromise. The outcome
clearly places eradication of poverty at the centre of
the development agenda, builds on the Millennium
Development Goals, reaffirms the continued validity
of the principle of common but differentiated
responsibilities as the bedrock of international
cooperation, emphasizes the role of robust economic
growth, industrialization and full employment,
emphasizes in a balanced way the three dimensions
of sustainable development, puts in place ambitious
action to rationalize consumption patterns and efforts
to preserve the environment, and integrates, last but
not least, means of implementation as an integral part
of the goals set. Those elements, in our view, must be
preserved going forward.
At the same time, India does not necessarily agree
with each and every element included in the final
package. While we were happy to join the consensus
on the document, we remain unconvinced as to the
inclusion of a stand-alone goal on important but
extraneous issues, such as peace, security and the rule of

14-5299211/15

A/68/PV.108

law, which, in our view, while exceptionally important,
do not form an organic part of the developmental
landscape of the SDGs.
We look forward to examining the integration
of the issues I have mentioned in greater detail as
we engage in the intergovernmental negotiations on
the post-2015 development agenda. Several other
parts of the Open Working Group outcome, on the
other hand, clearly remain ripe for further work.
The means of implementation included in the final
document (A/68/970) are, in our view, still too weak.
We look forward to the outcome of the Financing
for Development Conference to be held next July to
substantially strengthen the means of implementation
of the SDGs as part of the future agenda.
Mr. President, you can count on India’s support
and active engagement on the road ahead for crafting
a truly transformative post-2015 development agenda,
one which enables us to end poverty and leaves no one
behind.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Vrailas (European Union): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union and its member
States.
At the outset, we would like to once more warmly
thank Ambassadors Kamau and Kőrösi for the
absolutely magnificent job they did in steering the
Open Working Group on Sustainable Development
Goals to a very impressive outcome in spite of the
considerable challenges they had to face up until the
very end. Their co-chairmanship certainly raised the
bar for such future endeavours. We would also like
to thank you, Mr. President, as well as your team, for
the very valuable support you have lent to the process
throughout your tenure, not least in the last few days.
The mandate set out in paragraph 248 of the Rio
outcome document (resolution 66/288, annex) for
the Open Working Group to prepare a proposal for
sustainable development goals (SDGs) for consideration
and appropriate action by the General Assembly was
undoubtedly a complex one. As we noted at the closing
meeting of the Open Working Group, we were happy
to see that mandate brought to a successful conclusion.
Beyond the very informative and helpful conversations,
including with academia and civil society, the in-depth
discussions we had during the last year and a half

12/15

10/09/2014

allowed us to consider a wide range of issues as part of
the post-2015 goals and targets. As a result, the Open
Working Group made considerable progress during the
past 18 months, and the proposal contained in its report
(A/68/970) will clearly provide a very important input
to the intergovernmental process at the sixty-ninth
session of the General Assembly, which will lead to the
finalization of the post-2015 development agenda and
the summit in September 2015.
Of course, there are several questions that remain
to be addressed ahead of the summit if we want to set
out an ambitious and implementable post-2015 agenda.
We noted that several delegations, including from
within the European Union, made statements in the
closing meeting of the Open Working Group. We hope
that the discussions that we will have in the framework
of the intergovernmental process will allow us to agree
on a truly universal, comprehensive and transformative
development agenda.
As we agreed in the September 2013 resolution
calling for the 2015 summit and adopting the outcome
document of the special event to follow up efforts
made towards achieving the Millennium Development
Goals (resolution 68/6), the intergovernmental process
will include inputs from all stakeholders, including
civil society, scientific and knowledge institutions,
parliaments, local authorities and the private sector.
All those inputs will be very important. The report
of the Intergovernmental Committee of Experts on
Sustainable Development Financing is also a crucial
input. All of that will be synthesized in the report of the
Secretary-General, which we trust will greatly help all
of us to move our discussions forward.
We are fully committed to agreeing to a truly
transformative post-2015 development agenda that
reinforces the international community’s commitment
to poverty eradication and sustainable development and
of which the sustainable development goals will be a
key part. We look forward to working with all partners
in the weeks and months ahead with that common
objective.
Under our co-Chairs’ sterling leadership, we have
made impressive progress, which it is in everyone’s
duty now to use to good account.
Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): I wish
to make a statement on behalf of the Group of Least
Developed Countries (LDCs).

14-52992

10/09/2014

The LDC Group aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of the Plurinational State of
Bolivia on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
The LDC Group pays tribute to the co-Chairs of
the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development
Goals for their appreciable and tireless work and for all
the efforts that they have made. We would also like to
thank them for the many contributions and proposals
that they were able to elicit from the Member States and
various groups.
We are also grateful for your efforts to lead us
in our work, Mr. President. The outcome will be an
essential achievement of your term as President of the
General Assembly.
The LDC Group is pleased that it was able to
take the floor at various stages in the approximately
18 months of negotiations to voice its concerns
with respect to the formulation of targets and goals
identified. The results that we have achieved are to the
credit of the revitalized multilateral approach that the
challenges to humankind compel us to adopt. Those
results appear as a compromise and just one stage in the
process of drafting the post-2015 development agenda.
Our Group wishes to stress the need to take into account
the reservations expressed by certain States without
challenging the coherence of the document (A/68/970),
or indeed the substance of what was agreed as the basis
of consensus. We commend the factors the document
covers, in particular the concept of peaceful societies
as a component of the achievement of sustainable
development goals, since in order to have development
we must have peace, and, conversely, there can be no
peace without development.
However, it is clear that no State or group can claim
to be completely satisfied or to have seen all its concerns
taken into account. As far as the least developed
countries are concerned, they reserve the right to
return, in future negotiations, to complaints they had
that were not fully addressed during the negotiations.
We hope that the report of the Secretary-General will
reflect the international community’s commitment to
the concerns of the LDCs that were not reflected in the
report of the Open Working Group.
The LDCs are the poorest, the most vulnerable and
the countries most affected by a lack of resources, by
various crises and by climate change. Throughout the
negotiations leading to the report we made significant
contributions and submitted many proposals in that

A/68/PV.108

regard. We stand ready and mobilized to continue
working with other groups and States on efforts that
will best contribute to the development of the new
phase we are about to undertake, through to the end of
the process and the adoption of what we hope will be
a balanced and inclusive programme. The LDC Group
echoes the commendations that have already been
expressed to Ambassadors Kamau and Kőrösi for their
wisdom and the great qualities of leadership they have
shown throughout the entire process.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil): Speaking on behalf of
Nicaragua as well as Brazil, we recognize your
leadership, Mr. President, and the excellent work of the
co-Chairs of the Open Working Group on Sustainable
Development Goals, Ambassadors Kamau and Kőrösi,
who were essential to the achievement of what we
consider the groundbreaking outcome reflected in the
Open Working Group’s report (A/68/970).
Nicaragua and Brazil are pleased that we were able
to adopt by consensus resolution 68/309, which clearly
establishes the primacy of the Open Working Group’s
outcome as the main basis for integrating sustainable
development goals into the post-2015 development
agenda. We must fully respect the integrity of the work
of the Open Working Group. Its legitimacy speaks for
itself and is unrivalled. In recognition of that, and of the
value of the outcome, Nicaragua and Brazil raised no
reservations, and we call on all members that have done
so, or believe that this is only a way station on the road
to the adoption of a post-2015 development agenda,
to refrain from launching initiatives in the General
Assembly at its sixty-ninth session that could unravel
the delicate construction of the great work achieved.
The means for implementing the report’s proposals
will have to be brought up to standards that match the
ambitions of the goals and targets we have negotiated.
The report of the Intergovernmental Committee of
Experts on Financing for Sustainable Development
and the outcome of the third International Conference
on Financing for Development will provide additional
elements in that regard. We will also count on
the continuation of consultations on a technology
facilitation mechanism in the context of the post-2015
process. The Secretary-General’s synthesis report is
awaited with great interest. It should fully consider
and respect the work of members in mobilizing United
Nations resources and support.
We look forward to engaging constructively in
the finalization of this new vision for international

14-5299213/15

A/68/PV.108

development cooperation that is universal in nature
yet takes into account the shared but differentiated
responsibilities of developed and developing
countries — an outcome that is a process that should
lead to a new effort within the United Nations on
cooperation that is socially inclusive and promotes
members’ economic growth within a framework of
sustainability.
Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): I would first like to align my
delegation’s position with the statements delivered by
the representatives of Bolivia, on behalf of the Group of
77 and China, and of Malawi, on behalf of the African
Group.
Nigeria welcomes the submission of the report of
the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development
Goals (A/68/970) and commends the Working
Group’s co-Chairs, the Permanent Representatives
of Kenya and Hungary, for their leadership, patience,
perseverance and presence of mind in steering the often
difficult negotiations to a successful conclusion. We
congratulate all Member States on the accomplishment
of this landmark outcome through very difficult and
sometimes protracted negotiations, and for showing
commitment, accommodation, expansiveness of spirit
and professionalism in their engagement in the process.
We thank you, Mr. President, for lending your support
and the weight of your Office to this process. We
commend the Secretary-General and his staff for the
interest they have shown throughout the negotiation
process.
We particularly welcome the inclusive and
transparent nature of the work of the Open Working
Group. Its universality gives it broad legitimacy and
credibility. Nigeria approached the negotiations with
an open mind and keen interest in contributing to
their success. In substantive terms, we welcome the
prominence that the report gives to the eradication of
poverty. That is an issue fundamental to Nigeria and
the entire African region, for obvious reasons. We
stress that the successful achievement of the global
development agenda must hinge on a sustainable
partnership between and among different countries
and regions, and on establishing the means of its
implementation. The report underscores those two
critical elements, which Nigeria hopes will be central
to the global development framework beyond 2015. We
sincerely hope that the Secretary-General’s synthesis
report will take into account the priorities set for the
African region in the common African position.

14/15

10/09/2014

The adoption of a new document emanating from
the international intergovernmental process in the
United Nations is obviously important to Member
States. Ultimately, the Member States are the entities
that will be called on to translate the provisions and
content of such documents into policy at the national
level. Considering that such documents will likely
give rise to commitments and obligations, Member
States will rightly feel entitled to express reservations
on provisions that may conflict with their national
policies, legislative arcs, religious beliefs and cultural
values. That becomes more important particularly
if the documents adopted result in the establishment
of benchmarks and timelines for implementing their
provisions. For those reasons, Nigeria has expressed
reservations about some aspects of the document,
notably on the grounds of lack of clarity and relevance
to issues of sustainable development. In due course, in
response to a valuable suggestion made today, Nigeria
will submit in writing the reservations that it raised
at various times during the negotiations of the Open
Working Group.
Mr. Otto (Palau): We thank this body for adopting
resolution 68/309 by consensus. Such an adoption is
a recognition of the hard work by all Members of the
United Nations and the invaluable input of civil society.
We would like to thank you, Mr. President, for your
leadership in the process and, in particular, to express
our gratitude to the co-Chairs, Ambassador Kamau
and Ambassador Kőrösi, for their patience, hard work
and sterling leadership. We also want to thank all the
negotiators for the spririt of cooperation and respect,
which allowed us to develop goals that we trust will lead
us to complete the unfinished tasks of the Millennium
Development Goals and will help all nations towards
sustainable development.
We take the floor particularly to express our
gratitude and encouragement for the fact that, together,
we duly recognize the importance of mental health and
well-being, which are so fundamental to healthy, strong
and productive societies. We trust that that will allow
us to understand that, in these days of continued and
frequent natural disasters, calamities, man-made strife
and sadness, building resilience involves psychological
elements in addition to environmental infrastucture.
Mr. Viera (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of the Plurinational State of Bolivia on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China.

14-52992

10/09/2014

I would like to start by thanking the co-Chairs of the
Open Working Group for their efforts in leading all this
work during more than a year and a half of meetings.
I would also like to thank the United Nations, the
Secretariat, Member States, members of the Group and
the lead groups, including civil society organizations,
which have been supporting us with contributions and
backing many of the proposals for such goals.
We know that countries have different models,
instruments and focuses on the basis on their national
priorities in order to achieve sustainable development.
For that reason, the report before us (A/68/970) contains
various visions, which is not ideal. The differences
should be clearly reflected and show the efforts
of the entire international community. We believe
that adequate measures for each of the sustainable
development goals mentioned in the report, as well
as strengthening the global alliance for sustainable
development, are fundamental requirements without
which the entire development agenda may prove futile
without any possibility of success.
Unfortunately, the clear and direct requests of
several delegations were not properly reflected in the
report of the Working Group. That is probably owing
to a lack of political will by certain members and to
shortcomings in some of the procedural aspects of the
work of the Working Group.
Finally, we would like to highlight the fact that
the next challenge for the post-2015 development
agenda should be to establish a transparent, fair and
equitable international consultation process so that we
can produce a negotiated outcome document that fully
takes into account the results of the various followup procedures provided for in the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development and the main
summits and conferences on economic, social and
environmental issues.
Mr. Neelam (Australia): At the outset, let me add
Australia’s thanks for the commitment and hard work
of the co-Chairs, Ambassador Kamau and Ambassador
Kőrösi, and all those involved in reaching the outcome
document of the Open Working Group (A/68/970),
including Member States, their negotiators and civil
society.

A/68/PV.108

Australia welcomes the adoption of resolution
68/309, on the conclusion of the work of the Open
Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals,
which represents the collective efforts and the spirit of
cooperation of the international community.
The outcome of the Open Working Group is
without doubt a critical input into the SecretaryGeneral’s synthesis report and the next stage of the
intergovernmental negotiations.
I would like to note, as we have before, that while
Australia sees the outcome of the Open Working Group
as the end product of the Group’s work, we interpret
the basis as a starting point of the next stage of the
intergovernmental negotiations.
The intergovernmental negotiations on the post2015 development agenda are clearly mandated to also
consider a range of other inputs, not least the report
of the Intergovernmental Committee of Experts on
Sustainable Development Financing (A/68/852/Add.1).
That was reflected by our troika in our statement at the
conclusion of the Open Working Group’s work, as well
as by many other participants in that process, and is in
line with the Rio+20 mandate (see resolution 66/288,
annex) and subsequent resolutions.
Australia has engaged in good faith throughout the
process. I would like to reaffirm that we will continue
to cooperate by working with all parties towards the
conclusion of a meaningful and effective post-2015
development agenda.
The President: We have heard the last statement
in explanation of position following the adoption of
resolution 68/309.
I would like to express my personal thanks and
appreciation to the panel of representatives of Kenya
for their able stewardship as co-Chairs of the Open
Working Group and for bringing us to this point today.
I would like to invite members to join me in extending
to them our sincere appreciation.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 14.
The meeting rose at 5.50 p.m.

14-5299215/15
