TWENTY-SECOND

YEAR

th
MEETING: 10 JUNE 1967

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 354/Rev. 1)

.. I.

I.,......,...........

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

..*..,..I.**...*......

Page
I
1

Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and
Denmark addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/7902) . q . . , .
Complaint of the representative of the United Arab R.epublic in a letter to the
President of the Security Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and security in the Middle East
and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907) . . . . . . . . , . . . .
Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ire!:md addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/7910) , . . . . . . . . , , . . , . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . + .
Letter dated 9 June 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics addressed to the President of the Security Council
concerning an item entitled : “Cessation of military action by Israel and
withdrawal of the Israel forces from those parts of the territory of the United
Arab Republic, Jordan and Syria which they have seized as the result of an
aggression” (S/7967) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . .

SIPV. 1354

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN

HUNDRED AND FIFTY-FOURTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Saturday, 10 June 1967, at 4 a.m.
President: Mr. Hans R. TABOR (Denmark).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark,
Ethiopia, France, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 354/Rev.l)

Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/7902)
Complaint of the representative of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Jsrael aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international
peace and security” (S/7907)

1. Adoption of the agenda.

2. Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/7902).
3. Complaint of the representative of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907).
4.

Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/7910).

5. Letter dated 9 June 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
addressed to the President of the Security Council
concerning an item entitled: “Cessation of military
action by Israel and withdrawal of the Israel forces
from those parts of the territory of the United Arab
Republic, Jordan and Syria which they have seized as
the result of an aggression” (S/7967).
Adoption of the agenda

1. The
. . PRESIDENT: The provisional agenda for this
morning’s meeting is before the Council in document
S/Agenda/l354/Rev.l.
As members will note, a new, fifth
item has been included in the provisional agenda in
response to a request received last night from the repres&tative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, a
request circulated in document S/7967.

Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern
Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/7910)
Letter dated !I June 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
addressed to the President of the Security Council
concerning an item entitled: “Cessation of military action
by Israel and withdrawal of the Israel forces from those
parts of the territory
of the United Arab Republic,
Jordan and Syria which they have seized as the result of
an aggression” (S/7967)

3. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
previously taken by the Council, I shall now, with the
consent of the Council, invite the representatives of Israel,
the United Arab Republic, Jordan and the Syrian Arab
Republic to take places at the Council table, and the
representatives of Lebanon, Iraq, Morocco, Saudi Arabia,
Kuwait, Tunisia and Libya to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber, in order to
participate without vote in the discussion.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. G. Rafael (Israel),
Mr. M A. El Kony (United Arab Republic), Mr. G. J.
Tomeh (Syria) and Mr. M 2% El-Farra (Jordan) took places
at the Council table, and Mr. S. Ckammas (Lebanon), Mr.
K. Khalaf (Iraq j, Mr. A. T. Benhima (Morocco), Mr. G.
Al-Rachach (Saudi Arabia), Mr. S. Al-Shaheen (Kuwait),
Mr M. Mestiri (Tunisia) and Mr. W. El Bouri (Libya) took
the places reserved for them.

‘2, If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the agenda is
adopted,

4. The PRESIDENT: The Council will now continue its
consideration of the four items on its agenda, and in order
to facilitate the discussion, I should like to suggest that the
Council decide to consider them simultaneously. If there is
no objection, I shall take it that it is so decided.

The agenda was adopted.

It was so decided.

large-scale attacks along the northern front vicinity of
Banias and Moussadiye. Massive air attacks are underway
from north to south and to include Kuneitra. Request
United Nations observers reoccupy Kuneitra and to carry
out observation of Israel aggression in other areas.
(Signed) Ibrahim Makhous, Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Syrian Arab Republic.’ ”

5. I wish to inform members of the Council that at 2
o’clock this morning I was called by the Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs of the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of Syria, Ambassador Daoudy, who
informed me that he had been instructed by his Prime
Minister to ask for an emergency meeting of this Council in
view of the fact that the situation had seriously deteriorated, that the Israelis had occupied Kuneitra, and that they
were heading towards Damascus.

12. At 0224 hours, this morning, the Chief of Staff of
UNTSO, General Bull, communicated to me reports
received from the Tiberias control centre indicating that
hostilities were continuing along the northern part of the
Israel-Syrian armistice demarcation line and to the e:ast,

6. Representatives will remember that we adjourned last
night on the understanding that all members would hold
themselves available for an urgent meeting at any time,
should we be faced with an emergency situation. Against
that background, I decided to call this emergency meeting.

13. Between 0110 hours GMT and 0125 hours GMT,
numerous heavy explosions were heard north of Lake
Tiberias.

7. Representatives will further remember that we agreed
last night before adjourning that we should request the
parties concerned to extend all possible co-operation to the
United Nations observer’s in the discharge of their responsibilities, that we should request the Government of Israel
to restore the use of Government House to General Odd
Bull, and that we should ask the parties to reestablish
freedom of movement.

14. At 0145 hours GMT, parachute flares were seen north
of Tiberias over Jordan, and between 0147 hours GMT and
0155 hours GMT, continuous heavy explosions were heard
north of Tiberias.
15. At 0230 hours GMT, continuing and intense artillery
fire was heard north-east of Tiberias over Jordan valley,

8. Further, members of the Council will recall that we
requested the Secretary-General to endeavour to provide us
with information from the United Nations sources in the
area with regard to the latest developments. Accordingly, I
shall first call upon the Secretary-General to present his
report to the Council.

16. At 0250 hours GMT, three or four big explosions were
seen very far away in the direction of Kuneitra.
17. At 0320 hours GMT, three big explosions were seen in
the direction of Kuneitra and continuing sound of artillery.

9. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
Immediately after the
adjournment of the Security Council at 10.30 o’clock last
night, urgent instructions were sent to the Chief of Staff of
UNTSO in Jerusalem and to the Chairman of the IsraelSyrian Mixed Armistice Commission in Damascus. I
informed them of the discussions in the Security Council
and of the undertakings given by both parties to extend
co-operation,
and expressed the hope that enough
co-operation would be quickly extended to them so that
United Nations military observers might check on the
actual situation in Syria as regards the observance of the
cease-fire. I requested them to advise me as speedily as
possible both on the co-operation extended to them and
the information obtained. I also specifically referred to the
statement
of the Syrian Permanent Representative
concerning the attack on Massadeh and asked them in
particular to check this situation to the best of their ability.

18. At 0400 hours GMT, 0425 hours GMT and 0450
hours GMT, heavy explosions believed to be air bombing
heard in northeasterly direction. Aircraft heard passing
overhead, usually in pairs.
19. At 0245 hours New York time, I addresseda message
to the Chief of Staff of UNTSO in Jerusalem and to the
Chairman of the Israel-Syrian Mixed Armistice Commission
in Damascus in relation to the above-quoted message from
the Foreign Minister of the Syrian Arab Repu’blic and
requested that military observers should promptly visit the
areas mentioned by him to determine the facts concerning
the alleged and serious violation of the cease-fire and to
report to New York Headquarters as speedily as possible. I
am awaiting their reply.
20. I also informed the Chief of Staff of UNTSQ that an
emergency meeting of the Security Council had been called
for 0330 hours on 10 June at the request of the Syrian
representative because of reports from Syrian authorities of
massive Israel attacks by land and air in the Baniaskneitra
area. Instructions were given to General Bull to continue to
send most urgently any information as it became a.vailable.

10. At 11.33 p.m., New York time, last night, I received
from the Chairman of the Israel-Syrian Mixed Armistice
Commission the following report:
“Senior Syrian delegate states that there is large-scale
fighting in the northern area near Banias. The Israelis are
attacking with tanks and infantry supported with
artillery.”

21. Just a few minutes ago, at 4.04 a.m., I received a cable
from General Bull which reads as follows:

11. At 12.02, New York time, this morning, I received a
further message from the Chairman of the Israel-Syrian
Mixed Armistice Commission:
“Following
message received
delegate at 0254 hours GMT:

“Further to the situation reports originating from the
Tiberias control centre, the Chairman of the Isral:I-Syrian
Mixed Armistice Commission reports that senior Syrian
delegate alleged at 0616 hours GMT that Israt: forces
have launched two strong attacks on Kuncitra, first at

from senior Syrian
‘Israel has launched
2

Massadeh and second at Quassett, twelve and seven
kilometres respectively from Kuneitra. Again, at 0630
hours GMT, senior Syrian delegate alleged that Israel
aggression continues and that ‘Kuneitra, which is fifty
kilometres from Damascus, had fallen to Israel forces.
Your immediate intervention requested to halt these
violations of the cease-fire agreement.”
That is the information which was conveyed to the
Chairman of the Mixed Amistice Commission by the senior
Syrian delegate this morning.
22. I have just been informed that General Odd Bull in
Jerusalem had a discussion by Telex with Mr. Ralph
Bunche, in which General Bull gave the following latest
information. The time of the Telex is 0735 hours GMT.
“An air attack took place on the Damascus airport area.
Only half an hour ago, Sasson assured me that Israel
Defence Forces are not in Kuneitra and not on the road
to Damascus. He requested that United Nations military
observers be sent to Kuneitra to observe cease-fire. I
immediately sent a message to the Chairman of the
Israel-Syrian Mixed &mistice Commission to send United
Nations military observers to Kuneitra or to vantage
points in order to check and report on compliance with
the cease-fire resolution.

against my country. We believe that the United Nations
should act, and act promptly, if a major catastrophe is to be
avoided. The time has come for the Security Council to put
the question to the Tel-Aviv authorities whether their
troops are now in Kuneitra or whether they are not,
29. We have heard the statements of the representative of
the Tel-Aviv authorities, as well as the statement of the
representative of the United Kingdom to which I replied
shortly before the last meeting adjourned. The representative of the United Kingdom said that we were acting on
the basis of rumours and hearsay. I think we have now
proved to the members of the Council, beyond any doubt,
that we were not acting on the basis of rumours and
hearsay. We certainly note with regret this lack of
objectivity which results from an attempt to confuse the
issues. We never thought that questions of war and peace
could be treated so lightly, especially by the representative
of a great Power, a permanent member of the Security
Council, which has a responsibility for world peace,
30. The representative of the Tel-Aviv authorities has
proved, through his false statements, that he was
deliberately attempting to mislead the Council. We
witnessed his performance at the last meeting. Throughout
that meeting he was deceiving the United Nations on
purpose; he was telling lies about his Government’s observance of Security Council resolution 235 (1967) that had
been adopted at the 1352nd meeting of the Council. In this
deliberate falsehood he was only faithfully reflecting the
basic stand of his authorities, who proclaim peace and
innocence, but practise war and genocide. We believe that
such behaviour on his part should deprive him of the
honour of sitting at this Council table.

“Another report has been received from Tiberias. Air
attacks continuing on valley and Lake Tiberias shore.”
23. The PRESIDENT: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement. I give the floor to the representative of Syria.
24. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): Much to our regret, we had this
morning to awaken you, Mr. President, at two o’clock,
when yesterday we had broken your sleep at 5.30 in the
morning. That by itself is proof that the situation is
becoming graver and graver by the moment.

31. As for the criminal assault of his hordes against my
country, Syria, we feel that Israel must be punished for the
irrefutable crimes, for the utter disregard of the United
Nations Charter and of all the values on which international
relations should be built.

25. Before I speak on the subject of our complaint, I
wonder whether the Secretariat would be kind enough to
provide us with a map so that as we discuss the situation
the members of the Council can see for themselves how the
invasion of Syria is proceeding hour by hour,

32. Having adopted three resolutions calling on Israel to
stop its aggression, the Security Council is duty bound to
put an immediate end to this banditry. We will wait
anxiously-as the Arab people all over Syria, as the Arab
people throughout the Arab countries, as the world at large
wait anxiously-to see what the Security Council will do in
the face of the lies that have been perpetrated here by the
representative of the Tel-Aviv authorities, and what he has
to say now. I doubt whether he will feel any shame.

26. Only four hours ago, we were listening to the
representatives of the Tel-Aviv authorities giving,assurances
to the Council that no Israel forces were massed and that
Israel had observed the cease-fire resolution.
27. We contacted you, Mr. President, at 2 o’clock this
morning, because we had had a telephone call from
Damascus in which we were informed that Israel had moved
its forces and occupied Kuneitra, about thirty-five miles
from the capital city of Damascus. As I address the Council
now, a fierce battle is raging between the Syrian forces and
the criminal hordes coming from Tel-Aviv who are attempting to reach Damascus as soon as possible, In fact, their
plan was to occupy Damascus before we could start our
meeting today.

33. We request, after three solemn resolutions have been
unanimously adopted by the Security Council, that the
attacking hordes from Israel should be withdrawn behind
the armistice Iines. We expect the Council to face up to its
responsibilities. We request that sanctions should be
applied. For if this situation continues, it will constitute a
challenge to all values, to all small nations which count not
on the force of arms but on the force of law, because in this
fight, as I have had occasion to say time and again, Israel is
not alone, Israel is acting in collusion with and on behalf of
the imperialist Powers.

28. The time has come for the Security Council to uphold
the United Nations Charter and to stop this criminal assault

34. Needless to say, in the report of the Secretary-General,
every point, every claim, even every name that I have
3

mentioned in my letters to the Secretary-General, has been
confirmed beyond any shadow of a doubt. It now remains
for this important body to act, and to act quickly.

42. Mr. FEDORENKO
(Union
of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): And as there is no
doubt that the representative of Israel was acting in
accordance with instructions from his Government, it is
perfectly clear that the Security Council is dealing with
treachery on the part of Tel-Aviv.

35. Mr. FEDORENKO
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian) Although the information given by the Secretary-General is rather fragmentary
and incomplete, it nevertheless shows quite clearly, first,
that Israel aircraft have bombed Damascus, the Syrian
capital, and, second, that the fighting on Syrian territory is
continuing. This fighting is being done by the forces of the
Israel aggressors, who are continuing their advance. This is
sufficient proof that Israel is flouting the decisions of the
Security Council.

43. We see that the Israel diplomat, who is now trying to
raise a point of order in the Council, is nervous. May we
remind him that he has no right under the Council’s
procedure to interfere in the conduct of the Security
Council’s business.
44. It is now quite clear to everyone why, at the Council’s
previous meeting, a dispute arose regarding the fiormulas to
which the Israel Government had recourse in giving its false
agreement to the Council’s demand for a cease-fire.The aim
was precisely to mislead and deceive the Council by using
casuistical subterfuges and ambiguous reservations, the real
purpose of which was to conceal the attack by the Israel
aggressors against the Syrian Arab Republic that had been
planned earlier.

36. There are good reasons for convening an emergency
meeting of the Security Council tonight. Such a meeting
could have been foreseen, for when the Council was
discussing Israel’s continuation of its aggressiveacts against
the Syrian Arab Republic, and even when we temporarily
suspended our meeting, it was quite clear that the forces of
the aggressor were continuing to advance through Syrian
territory towards Damascus. And the fact that the Syrian
representative, Ambassador Tomeh, has just given us
detailed facts demonstrates what has been, and is,
happening in realty.

45. We drew the Council’s attention to the receipt of
information pointing to a threatenqng advance by Israel
troops towards Damascus, in defiance of the Council’s
appeals for an immediate cease-fire. In that connexion, we
requested the United Nations Secretariat to provide any
reliable information available to it. Regrettably, however,
we did not at that time receive the necessary information
which, even though it might be incomplete and limited,
would have helped us to determine the real situation.

37. We are entitled to ask the representatives of the
Western Powers seated around this table, who a few hours
ago tried to present matters as if the issue merely involved a
few rumours, and who spoke in the Council about
everything except what should have been said and heard at
such an important time-namely,
that the Israel aggression
is continuing to expand, to grow and to assume an
increasirigly ominous character-we are entitled to ask them
what was the aim of such tactics on their part.

46. It is now essential that urgent and decisivle measures
should be taken to halt the unbridled aggressor. If this is
not done immediately, the whole weight of responsibility
for the consequences will rest with those members of the
Council who prevent the adoption of the necessary
measures. We call upon the Security Council to take severe
and decisive measures to curb the aggressor.Israel’s criminal
banditry against Syria must be unreservedly condemned.

38. We are also entitled to draw the Council’s attention to
the fact that there were more than sufficient grounds for
the Soviet delegation’s comparison of the Israel representative’s statements, here in the Security Council, with
statements pf the infamous Goebbels ministry. What is now
being disclosed, too, is convincing evidence that the
methods of that ministry are now being practised by an
Israel diplomat. Mr. Gideon Rafael sat here among us five
hours ago and openly misinformed the Council in an
attempt, in this responsible forum, to distract the Council’s
attention and to play for time in order to serve the
expansionist ends of the armed Israel hordes and to enable
the leaders in Tel-Aviv to c6mmit a further crime against
peace and humanity. That was calculated deception and
this repulsive lie has now been exposed.

47. After numerous appeals and warnings to t:he Government in Tel-Aviv, and after the adoption by the Council of
three resolutions demanding an immediate cessation of
military activities by Israel, no one can say that the Israel
Government is not aware of where its actions are now
leading it. It is consciously following a path of treachery
and deceit, a path of crime, and should be condemned by
the Security Council with all the severity of international
law.
48. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the reprcsentative of lsrael, to whom I now give the floor,

39. How can monstrous cynicism and deliberate falsification be tolerated here, in this high organ? Can this go
unpunished? After all this, does the representative of
Tel-Aviv have any moral right to sit at the Security Council
table?

49. Mr. RAFAEL (Israel): I am acting here upon
instructions from my Government. I wish to be advised by
the President, in the first instance, whether it is permitted
to engage in personal abuse directed at representatives
acting here on behalf of their Governments. I caln take this
abuse, but I wonder whether it fits the dign:ity of this
Council.

40. The Soviet delegation angrily condemns the unworthy
conduct of this falsifier from Israel . . ,

50. Despite two acceptances of the cease-fire resolutions,
Syria has not ceased shelling, for thirty-six hours now,

41. Mr. RAFAEL (Israel): Point of order.
4

return to tne urgent task of restoring peace to the Middle
East.

Israel villages along the Israel-Syrian frontier. At the same
time, the Syrian representative and his colleagues have been
deluging the Council with a barrage of trumped-up charges
and fictitious complaints about actions which have never
taken place. One said that Cairo had been bombed by Israel
aircraft, and another, that Damascus was under air attack.

58. In that connexion I made a suggestion. I said that
what we needed most imperatively, in order that the
Council could fulfil its task of implementing
the
resolutions, was an impartial investigation by the SecretaryGeneral of the facts and of the allegations which have been
made concerning the violation of the cease-fire orders.

53. Now the Council has been hurriedly called for a
dramatic meeting at this early hour on the ground that
Israel forces have occupied Kuneitra and are advancing on
Damascus. We have already heard a report from the
Secretary-General that the Israel representative in Jerusalem
has denied these allegations. I denied a similar charge before
the Council adjourned last evening /1353rd meeting/. I
categorically deny it again now.

59. This morning we were awakened, by the President,
quite appropriately, in performance of his duties, to
consider an urgent complaint by the Government of Syria
that Israel forces had taken Kuneitra and were on the road
to Damascus. Obviously, if that were so, it would be a
matter of great import and would justify the immediate
convening of this Council.

52. I have just received a report that while the Israel forces
are in the process of establishing and implementing the
cease-fire, the vicious shelling of Israel villages is still going
on, There is no foundation whatsoever for the allegation
that Israel is planning to take Damascus. The only Israel
activity is against the artillery emplacements which are
brutally attacking Israel villages.

60. The Secretary-General has made his report to the
Council, He has stated, quite appropriately, what his
representative in Jerusalem, General Bull, has been told by
representatives of the Governments involved.
61. What does it add up to essentially? The senior delegate
from Syria has made the allegation that Kuneitra has been
taken; the Israel representative has denied that this is so;
the Secretary-General-I
have made notes and 1 can be
corrected if I am wrong-has asked observers to go to those
places mentioned
in the Syrian Foreign Minister’s
complaint: Massadeh, Kuneitra, and some vantage points;
and the Secretary-General says, that no first-hand information has yet been received, and as a result, he is still
awaiting a reply.

53. If the Syrian artillery would stop firing, our defence
action would cease. We are in touch with General Odd Bull
in order to ensure implementation
of the cease-fire and we
have requested him immediately to dispatch United Nations
observers to the front, and our officers are instructed to
escort these observers to the front.
54. I wish to say that at this time, at 9 a.m. local time, the
Israel villages of Gadot, She’ar-Yashav, Lehavot-Habashan
and Mishmar Hayarden all situated in the Tiberias valley,
are still under heavy artillery fire. We are, as I have said, in,
touch with General Odd Bull and we are providing him with
the necessary facilities to discharge his functions.

62. I, as a member of the Council, am also awaiting a reply
from an impartial observer of what is going on, We do not
have it; nor do I have a prepared speech castigating people
before I get an impartial investigation of the substantive
charge that has been made,

55. The Syrian authorities instead of concentrating their
attention on the bringing into effect and implementation of
the cease-fire, are trying to create a state of high international tension to cover up whatever sinister designs they
have in mind.

63. This Council can deal only on the basis of evidence,
not on the bGs of allegations; and we, in fairness to our
responsibihties, which are very great, must await the
first-hand information which the Secretary-General, quite
appropriately, has asked for.

56. The PRESIDENT: Referring to the question raised by
the representative of Israel concerning personal abuse, I
would request members of the Council not to make
references of a direct personal character. However, I wish to
inform the representative of IsraeI that he said himself that
he was speaking to the Council upon instructions from his
Government, and I have interpreted the remarks made by
the representative of the USSR as being addressed to the
representative of the Israel Government, and not as
personal attacks,

64. It seems to me, if I have understood what the
representatives of the Governments concerned have said,
that they pledge their co-operation in this respect. If we do
have, as I think we do, the co-operation of the Government
of Syria and the Government of Israel, with regard to the
dispatch of the observers to the places mentioned in the
complaint of the Foreign Minister of Syria, then they
should be so dispatched urgently and we should get a
comprehensive report.

57. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): Last
night, on the full authority of my Government, I stated
[1353rd meeting/ that the United States deems it of the
gravest import that the Security Council’s resolutions
calling for a cease-fire should be complied with in letter and
in spirit by Israel and the Arab countries involved. I also
said that there had been too much bloodshed and loss of
life and that it wasimperative that this war should come to
an end and all Governments involved in the conflict should

65. We should also get a comprehensive report on another
element, and that is: what isgoing on in Tiberias?
Is there shelling of these villages by gun emplacements of
the Syrian army? Or are the Israel forces attacking in the
area?
conflicting

66. We do not have answers to those questions. We must
have answers so that we can do our duty as a Council to
5

implement. the cease-fire. And it seems to me that that is
what is required so the Council can proceed to do its plain
duty.

73. Therefore, through you, Mr. President, I ask the
Permanent Representative of Israel t0 tell US if Israel forces
are in Syria or within the frontiers of Israel.

67. ‘My Government does not condone any violation of
the cease-fire by any party concerned. My Government
believes that both parties have the obligation to comply
with the cease-fire. But my Government will not render a
judgement in this matter on the basis of allegations coming
from the parties. My Government expects-and I think it
has a right to expect-that we shall get answers from the
United Nations machinery; and we expect both parties to
co-operate with the United Nations machinery on the spot
so that this Council can get impartial answers, and not
merely some more allegations. We have already had a great
many allegations. We do not know whether they are true or
false.

74. Mr. FEDORENKO
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian):
First of all,
Mr. President, may I say that we appreciate your remark
regarding the object of our condemnation. We are condemning falsificatiob deceit and treachery. It is not the
person that matters here, be he what he may; but :if that
person is invested with the authority of a Government, then
there is the more reason to condemn him severelywhen he
misleads this high organ.
75. We have just listened to the statement made by the
United States representative. We do not doubt the need to
receive authentic, reliable and verified information. Elut we
have just received such information, since we have just
heard, from the Secretary-General, General Bull’s report
that air raids on the capital of the Syrian Arab Republic
have been carried out by Israel’s pirate gangs. Can this
really be called unreliable information? Is this not objective evidence from a sufficiently authoritative source?
We would ask the distinguished judge where his impartiality
is, and why he has lost the gift of speech and pas& over
this fact in complete silence.

68. We are awaiting a report on the essential point which
brought us here. A question was asked by the representative
of Syria, ,Ambassador Tomeh, about Kuneitra. Let us have
General Bull’s representative go to Kuneitra and report to
this Council. Is Kuneitra in the possession of the Syrian
forces, or is it in the possession of the Israel forces? When
we get that information, the Council will know what to do.
69.

Mr.

TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated from
If I have asked to speak at this stage it is not in
order to make a statement, but to ask for clarification
through you, Mr. President, since many contradictory
statements have been made.

76. And another question arises: Would he have maintained such composure and equanimity if this piratical
attack had been carried out, not against the capital of Syria,
but against the capital of the country of which he is the
representative, just as all of us are our countries’ representatives? Why does the United States representative’s
sense of objectivity and justice fall short in this respect?
We should like to hear an answer to our question.

French):

70. If we remember correctly, when the cease-fire was
ordered by the Security Council, there were no Israel forces
on Syrian soil. That is what we have gathered from all the
reports reaching here.

77. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Syria.

71. Much is being made of the exact present location of
the Israel forces on Syrian soil and whether they have or
have not attacked a certain town. But since we are dealing
with this question and have just heard a certain representative say that he refused to speak on the matter because he
lacked information, I should like to ask the Permanent
Representative of Israel through you, Sir, since he seems
very well informed-having
spoken to his Government only
a few minutes or half an hour ago-whether Israel forces are
now on Syrian soil or not and where those fqrces are. Are
there Israel forces there; and, if so, what are they doing
there? According to his information,. where are those
forces at present, or are they on Israel’s soil? Have they not
crossed .the frontier? That is certainly an important point
for the Council,

78. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): I should prefer to delay my
statement at this moment until I hear the answersto the
questions put by the representative of Bulgaria, also.
79. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): I shall
be quite satisfied to have the members of the Counciil judge
the impartiality and tone of my statements as contrasted
with the statements made by the representative Iof the
USSR.
80. Like the other members of the Council, I wasnotified
by the President some time before three o’clock-I believe
it was 2.30 a.m.-that the representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic had requested an urgent meeting because Israel
forces had taken Kuneitra and were proceeding towards
Damascus, and that this was the basis for the request for an
urgent meeting.

72. We have just heard the Syrian delegation’s statement
that Damascus and other points have been bombed. Some
have said that the town of Kuneitra has been occupied;
others have told us that it has not. But the Syrian
delegation has stated that it has been occupied and the
newspapers say so, too. We should like the representative of
Israel, who is very well informed, to tell us whether Israel
forces have crossed the frontier. The Council will then have
a clear indication of what is going on there and we shall
have it in the form of a statement by the representative of
Israel.

81. I do not assume that we were urgently called here to
discuss the many other important matters which were the
subject of our discussion yesterday evening and which
would have been the subject of our discussion at the
scheduled time of our meeting this morning.
82. As regards that particular call for a meeting, we do not
have any information other than the fact that the Syrian
6

representative saps that Kuneitra was taken and the Israel
representative says it was not taken. We also have state.
merits from both sides; one side says that the forces are
moving towards Damascus and the other side says that
there is no truth in that statement. I still say that the best
way to determine the matter is for General Bull’s observers,
with the co-operation of both parties, to proceed to ’
Kuneitra and give USa report.
83. With respect to other items in the Secretary-General’s
report, he read very precisely. In about 90 per cent of the
casesmentioned, he reported what the senior delegate of
Syria had stated to General Bull. Or he reported what the
senior Israel delegate had said.
84. With respect to the bombing of Damascus, this is not
to be condoned if it took place. But it is apparent from the
Secretary-General’s report that it cannot be said whether
the report is based upon first-hand information and
observation or whether it is based on reports made to the
United Nations Observer by one of the parties involved. I
should not think that it would be necessary for us to
quarrel about an essential fact. We ought to have infop
mation of an impartial character before this Council further
discharges its responsibility in the matter. That is the point
I made earlier, and I repeat it. I do not regard the statement
I made as one which calls into question the impartiality of
any member of the Council. I regard it to be a necessary
element in the discharge of one’s responsibilities.
8 5, Mr. FEDORENKO
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): May I point out that
our United States colleague is evading an answer to the
question. We did not ask him about that matter, and it ill
behoves a professional lawyer and judge to resort to that
kind of verbal casuistry.
86, With all due respect, we want a reply to our direct
question, and in order to remind the Council of the essence
of the matter, I would ask you, Mr. President, to request
the Secretary-General to read out once more the section of
General Bull’s report in which reference is made to the
bombing of the capital of the Syrian Arab Republic by
Israel aircraft.
87. This is a fact: not merely the fact of an advance
towards Damascus, but of an attack, a piratical attack
against the capital of a sovereign State and a Member of our
Organization.
88, The PRESIDENT: The Council has already requested
the Secretary-General to make a report to it. A request has
now been made to have the Secretary-General repeat part
of that report. Would the Secretary-General be good
enough to read out that particular part of the report in
reply to the question raised by the representative of the
Soviet Union,
89. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
In response to the
request of the representative of the Soviet Union, I shall
read out that portion of my report. In the course of the
Telex conversation between General Odd Bull and UnderSecretary Ralph Bunche at the time of my earlier report,
we received this information: Report from the Chairman of
Israel-Syrian Mixed Armistice Commission. 10 June. Dis-

patch at 0735 hours GMT: “An air attack took place on the
Damascus airport area.”
90. I have just received a further report on the same
subject from General Bull. It reads:
“Most immediate from Bull. Report received from
Chairman of the Israel-Syrian Mixed Armistice Commission. Damascus at 0923 hours GMT, air attack on
Damascus going on.”
91. Mr.

TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated fvom
I do not of course intend to make a statement at
this time. I merely wish to repeat the question that I asked
a few moments ago, because so far I have had no answer
from the Permanent Representative of Israel to the
question that I put to him through the President as to
whether the Israel forces which were on Israel’s soil in the
beginning, when we adopted the cease-fire resolution, have
not advanced on to Syrian soil? Are there Israel forces in
Syrian territory at the moment?
French):

92. It is of capital importance for the Security Council to
know this so that we can judge the situation in the area. It
is obvious what a valuabIe witness the Permanent Representative of Israel can be on this matter. I think the Council
should obtain an answer from him to enable it to draw the
necessary conclusions.
93. Mr. FEDORENKO
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): We should like to
thank the Secretary-General, who has not only been kind
enough to read out the part of General Bull’s report that we
asked for, but has also given the Council additional
information to the effect that air raids are still being carried
out against Damascus, the capital of Syria, by the Israel
pirates.
94. Once again we ask the distinguished judge whether he
does not now deem it possible to state his views on the
information just given by U Than& the Secretary-General.
95. Mr. KEITA (Mali) (translated from French): I should
like to point out that my delegation was very interested in
the answer to the Bulgarian representative’s question. I
think the whole Council knew the answer we were
expecting. Indeed, according to what the Secretary-General
has just read out the city of Damascus is at present-and I
say at present, according to the report which has just been
read out-being bombed. That report was transmitted to
the Secretary-General by General Bull, the accredited
representative of the United Nations in the area.
96. Mention has often been made around this table of
rumours and hearsay rather than proof. The persons in
whom we place our trust are those who represent the
United Nations; General Bull does represent the United
Nations. The report which has just reached us comes from
him and states that the bombing is continuing.
97. I therefore emphasize that this is not a rumour. I do
not believe that anyone here can in good faith doubt
General Bull’s report. I believe everyone is convinced that it
is nbt a rumour, but is evidence that the bombing of
i
::

106. In this connexion, I have before me a report from the
United Press International which I would like to read out.
It is a report from Tel-Aviv and it reads as follows:

Damascus is continuing. In the light of this fact, I think the
Council must take a decision. It would not be doing so on
the basis of a rumour, but on the basis of official authentic
evidence provided by a representative of the United Nations
in the area. This is what I wanted to point out to the
members of the Council.

“Israel tanks and troops, supported by waves of jet
planes, today smashed fifty miles into Syria and began
encircling the capital city of Damascus, battlefront
reports said. Informed sources said the Soviet-supported
Syrian rCgime will fall shortly.

98. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): A
bombing of Damascus would be in violation of the
cease-fire orders that we have unanimously voted, and it
could not be condoned by any member of this Council. I
make this as an explicit statement. And any such bombing
should not be repeated.

“The report said Israel forces captured the city of
Kuneitra, ten miles deep into Syria, and then split into a
two-pronged attack-one armoured infantry column dashing north-east to Damascus, and the other sout.h-east to
the city of Der’a.

99. It is not entirely clear to me whether this report is
based on first-hand observation or n’ot, but I say specifically
that a bombing, if it is going on, is in violation of the
orders.

“Damascus Radio, in a broadcast heard in Beirut,
acknowledged the fall of Kuneitra after a fierce battle.”
107. There is also another report from the United Press
International, from Tel-Aviv, which says: “Military reports
said today Israel troops had pushed deep into Syria and
encircled Damascus.”

100. The Secretary-General also reports from his observers-and we have not enough information
as yet to
determine whether the report is accurate-that there is
firing going on from the heights in the Tiberias area. The
Israel representative charges that gun emplacements there
are shelling Israel settlements. United Nations observers
ought to go and determine whether this is the case. If it is
the case, I should then welcome a statement similar to the
one I have just made from members of this Council.

108. This creates a very serious situation ,and the Council
will have to consider very swiftly what action has to be
taken.
109. May I suggest, Mr. President, that we have a recessof
ten minutes to consider the reports that we have before us:
the Secretary-General’s report and the reports that I have
just read out. I request this recess under rule 33, paragraph 1, of the provisional rules of procedure, far suspension, of the meeting.

101. What we want is a cease-fire that is effective between
both parties. The position of my Government is that all
firing should cease in accordance with the cease-fire order
of this Council. It should cease wherever it is taking place,
whether it is by bombing or from gun emplacements or
from anywhere else.

110. The PRESIDENT:
I put the Indian motion
suspend the meeting to the vote.

102. We should be objective in this matter. The SecretaryGeneral has read to us the reports. Any bombing by aircraft
would be in violation of the cease-fire order of this Council
and it could not be condoned. Any firing from gun
emplacements into Israel villages would be in violation of
the cease-fire order and likewise could not be condoned.

to

A vote was taken by a show of hands.
The motion was adopted unanimously.
The meeting was suspended at 6 am and re,sumed at

103. We need, it is perfectly obvious, a comprehensive
report as to what is going on in the cease-fire area. That is
what we have been asking for and that is what we are
entitled to receive. I do not notice the same objectivity on
the part of other members of the Council concerning the
nature of military activities.

6.25 a.m.
111. The PRESIDENT: I apologize to the members that
consultations among the members prolonged the suspension
for twelve minutes. I had a request from the representative
of India for a prolongation.

104. I should also add that any Israel military activity also
should not be condoned, whether it is bombing or any
other kind of activity. What we are looking for is full
implementation of the cease-fire order.

112. The first speaker on my list is the representative of
Israel, to whom I now give the floor.
113. Mr. RAFAEL (Israel): The Secretary-General has
transmitted a report from the Chairman of the Israel-Syrian
Mixed Armistice Commission that at 0923 hours; GMT an
air attack on Damascus was going on. This report has
created the impression that Israel aircraft were engaged in
an attack on Damascus.

105. Mr. PARTHASARATHI
(India): We are faced with a
very grave situation indeed when the decisions of the
Security Council ordering a cease-fire are being violated
with impunity. The Secretary-General’s report has made it
very clear that it is a fact that Damascus is being bombed.
Of course, we are all naturally anxious that we should get
reliable information, as far as possible official reports, as to
the situation, the question of whether Israel forces are in
Syrian territory.

114. After having contacted my Government, I deny
again, categorically, that any Israel aircraft have attacked
Damascus, or the airport of Damascus, or the vicinity Of
Damascus at any time. My Government has launched a
8

that United Nations observers should visit settlements on
the front lines with Syria in connexion with the observance
of the Security Council cease-fire. Mr. Sasson asked that
United Nations observers should be sent to Kuneitra to
confirm that Israel’s forces were not in Kuneitra and were
not advancing on Damascus. General Bull undertook to
make every possible effort to observe the cease-fire both in
the border settlements in the Kuneitra area and elsewhere.

strong protest against that sort of reporting which has been
transmitted by the Chairman of the Israel-Syrian Mixed
Armistice Commission.
1 IS. The reliability of the information submitted to the
Council by the representative of Syria can be ascertained
from the fact that, yesterday, he charged that Israel aircraft
had bombed Cairo. And the other day he alleged that
British aircraft, from an aircraft carrier, had taken part in
recent attacks in the Middle East. I wish to refer to the
statement of Lord Caradon, the representative of the
United Kingdom, which is contained in the verbatim record
of the 1348th meeting; he said:

139. A few moments later, General Bull transmitted
another message to me. The text reads as follows:
“Following message received from Chairman of the
Israel-Syrian Mixed Armistice Commission, Damascus:

“The statement made by my Ministry of Defence in
regard to the first two allegations I shall read:

“ ‘The situation report at 0901 hours GMT 10 June. All
observers and staff being called into Mixed Armistice
Commission house area. This on the advice of the Syrian
delegate who says he cannot accept responsibility for
United Nations military observers and staff outside the
Mixed Armistice Commission house area.’ ”

“ ‘The allegation on Damascus radio that, according to
a captured Israel pilot, seventeen Vulcan aircraft arrived
in Israel ten days ago, is a complete lie which has
no-repeat, no-foundation whatsoever.
“ ‘The broadcast by Cairo radio that British Canberra
bombers have taken part in bombing Egyptian positions
in Sinai is also a complete lie, without foundation.’ ”

I do not know yet the exact implications of this message as
far as the freedom of movement and effectiveness of the
observers of the Israel-Syrian Mixed Armistice Commission
is concerned.

/ 1348th meeting, par. 242.1

120. I have just now received a few additional reports.
One cable is from General Bull; the time of dispatch was
1009 hours GMT and the text reads as follows:

And the representative of the United Kingdom continued:
“I would suggest to the representative of Syria that he
does not help his cause by coming here with repeated
allegations that have already been denied; and I would go
further and say to him that if accusations are to be made,
it would be well to be careful that they cannot be
immediately and completely disproved.” [Ibid/

“Message from Chairman of the Israel-Syrian Mixed
Armistice Commission received via Tiberias control centre
at ‘0944 hours GMT. Air raid seems to be over but alert
still going on.”
121. The last cable report from General Bull was dispatched from Jerusalem at 10.10 a.m. GMT. The text reads
as follows:

I just wish to support that wise statement made by the
representative of the United Kingdom and again 1 want
categorically to deny the false allegations that Israel forces
are advancing on Damascus, or that Israel forces are in
occupation of Kuneitra.

“The present situation is very confused. This is my
assessment in the light of available information:

116. I wish to state again that my Government is in touch
with General Bull and has requested him urgently to
dispatch observers to the front line to verify the situation
so that reliable reports can be transmitted to the Security
Council, reports which certainly will bear out the information which I have submitted to the Council in meetings
yesterday and also today, that for more than forty hours
Syrian gun emplacements have been shelling Israel villages
mercilessly, viciously, with a very great loss of life and
heavy damage to houses, structures and property.

“1. UNTSO observers have reported that bombing and
hostilities
continue along the eastern ridges of Lake
Tiberias shores in Syria, as well as on the eastern bank of
Jordan River, north of Lake Tiberias, and that Damascus
has been bombed by Israel Air Force.
“2. There is a strong indication that Kuneitra has been
taken by Israel troops but it is impossible for UNTSO to
confirm.
“3. Our observers in Damascus have been confined in
Mixed Armistice Commission house at the request of the
Syrian authorities for reasons of safety.

117. The PRESIDENT: Before we proceed, I would ask
the Secretary-General to submit some supplementary information which he has received.

“4. Our observers in Tiberias cannot function effectively because they have no freedom of movement.

118. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
Just before the short
suspension of the meeting, in a talk by Telex this morning,
General Bull reported that on the morning of 10 June he
had met with Mr. Sasson of the Israel Foreign Office.
Mr. Sasson assured General Bull that UNTSO observers
would have freedom of movement and that Israel liaison
officers would be provided for them. Mr. Sasson suggested

“5. No reply received regarding return of UNTSO
Government House.”
122. Mr.
French):
9

TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated from
Since four o’clock this morning, just ashappened

yesterday, certain parties around this table have led us into
a discussion which is meant to confuse us, to lead us into
the unknown and to make us believe that the situation
which they have brought about in a certain place, and
particularly in Syria, is not clear and that there are reports
from which it appears that one cannot ascertain what is
happening and that that is why we should not express an
opinion on certain questions.

Israel, but there were some delegations which said “There
are rumours, we shouldn’t listen to them, we cannot rely on
rumours.” But those rumours have been confirmed,. In this
morning’s United States newspapers, we find the infor.
mation that Kuneitra, a town situated about fifty kilometres from Damascus, is in the hands of the IsraeLis.And,
remember, this is information which comes not from Syria,
but from Israel-from Tel-Aviv-from
newspaper correspondents in Israel. This is information printed in news.
papers which are sympathetic towards Israel and towards
the Zionists. It is the truth and this news tells us so,

123. These tactics are not new; they are very old. There
have been statements by the representative of Israel that a
certain event, a certain bombing, has not been confirmed,
according to his information. But, if you recall, we asked a
question, to which, despite the statements by the Permanent Representative of Israel, we have still not received an
answer. He has said that Israel forces are not in such and
such places, that they have not taken such and such a town.
But so far he has not said that Israel forces are not on
Syrian soil.

129. The Permanent Representative of Israel, at this very
moment, is trying to create doubt by attempting to prove
that his country’s forces are not advancing, that they have
not occupied this point or that. But the fact is t.hat the
agency dispatches quoted here are affirmative.
130. There is a further point. The Secretary-General has
received information. It is true that the United Nations
machinery in the area is in a difficult situation which does
not enable it to collect the necessary information, because
it has been upset by Israel’s advance, by Israel’s aggression.

124. Why? Because, of course, if he had replied-and I
know we are not in a court of law-he would at least have
committed the crime of lying and even of incriminating
himself in the eyes of world public opinion and before the
Security Council. Now, he does not want to incriminate
himself; he cannot say that Israel forces are not in Syria at
this moment, although when we adopted the resolution on
the cease-fire question there were no Israel forces in Syria.

131. What was the purpose of the Permanent Representative of Israel in saying that he had no information on
the advance of the Israel troops or on the fact that Israel
was occupying a certain place or bombing a certain town?
He was trying to do the same thing as the Israel troops are
doing on the spot. The representative of Israel is carrying
the war into this chamber. He is a warrior trying to practise
diversionary tactics in order to mislead the enemy, Syria,
and the Security Council, which is also his enemy, because
he is standing here before it and must reply to the
accusations against him and tell lies, on the orders of his
Government.

12.5. Therefore, the Permanent Representative of Israel’s
silence on this question is a recognition of the fact that, at
this moment, to his knowledge, Israel forces are in Syria.
He cannot deny it and that is why he does not speak of it.
He can, of, course, speak of other matters that can give rise
to controversy because the situation created by the Israelis
is such that the machinery of the United Nations cannot
function perfectly enough to tell us where those forces are
and what is going on.

132. Why? Because they are waging war; becausethey are
committing aggression; and they are in their element. This
is something which the Permanent Representative of Israel
was perhaps accustomed to in the past when he himself
took part in the war and he is now doir:g it in the Security
Council. It may be to his honour, but it does not do honour
to the international community, which sees aggression
continuing.

126. Old verbatim records have been quoted and the
representative of Israel can say to us that their people are
lying because ,they have lied before, that the others are also
lying because they have lied before. But he cannot say that
Israel forces are not in Syria. That is a fact which has
already been established by his guilty silence.
127. In the meeting this morning, the representative of the
Soviet Union raised the question of the cessation of all
military action by Israel and the withdrawal of Israel forces
from those parts tif the territory of the United Arab
Republic, Jordan and Syria which they have seized as the
result of an aggression. That is a weighty point, because
territory has been occupied in all three countries, particularly in Syria. For the moment, at the request of the
representative of Syria, we are dealing with the question of
the continuation of Israel’s aggression against Syria.

133. What we must note here is that the sameattitude, the
same attempt to create doubt because they cannot deny the
facts, has been adopted by certain delegations which use
the words “would”, “could”, etc. Why? Simply because,
with that conditional language, one can do anything and
the Permanent Representative of Israel is trying to make
the Security Council accept anything.
134. The facts are there. But in the light of the infop
mation given us by the Secretary-General-information
coming from United Nations sources in the area, that is
from General Bull and the Damascus representative-we can
no longer have the slightest doubt that the aggression is
continuing and that Israel forces are on Syrian soil. Whether
they have gone beyond Kuneitra or not does not matter.
The essential point here is that those forces are on Syrian
territory and that they are fighting and advancing.

128. In the statements made yesterday evening by the
Permanent Representative of Israel following repeated
requests by members of the Security Council for information he said in effect: “It is not true; we have no
information; the situation is confused.” I could not really
say that all delegations asked for that information and had
doubts about the statements made by the representative of
10

135. We have been told: “They began by firing on Israel
and we had to defend ourselves”. But was this
taking place on Syrian territory? Was it in Damascus, in the
sky over Damascus? Perhaps it was still further on.

139. The Bulgarian delegation is asking for condemnation
of the aggression and for withdrawal of the troops to their
original positions. Then, as the Secretary-General said, we
must try to solve all the problems which have arisen, but
only after the essential and immediate issues have been
settled. My delegation insists that the Security Council
should condemn the aggressor and demand the withdrawal
of troops as rapidly as possible, immediately.

villages

136. What is the goal sought here? The Permanent
Representative of India indicated what it was when he read
us a press dispatch stating that the objective of Israel’s

aggression was to intervene, if possible, in Syrian affairs, to
seek to promote a COUP d’ktat to overthrow the Syrian
Government and rigime. The attitude adopted by those
who seek to attain that objective and by the Permanent
Representative of the United States, who has spoken several
times, is the typical attitude of a guilty party whether
before the Security Council or before any ordinary court of
faw. Mr. Goldberg, a Judge of the United States Supreme
Court, knows what it means not to answer a question which
might incriminate the party concerned. Consequently, he
understands full well the silence of the Permanent Representative of Israel, but he does not wish to draw the
obvious conclusions which would immediately come to the
mind of any judge or lawyer.

140. The PRESIDENT: Before proceeding, I would ask
the Secretary-General to submit a supplementary report.
141. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I have’just received
another cable from General Bull. The time of the dispatch
was 1016 hours Greenwich Mean Time, Jerusalem. It reads
as follows:
“1. (Mr.) Sasson, of the Israel Foreign Office, called to
report the following: ‘I have checked Chairman IsraelSyrian Mixed Armistice Commission’s report of aerial
attack on Damascus and I am calling to give an accurate
report on the exact situation:

137. Some delegations here have shared with the Israel
delegation the work of creating doubts and misleading the
Security Council on the true situation in the area and on
the continuation of the Israel agression. They are playing
for time in order to place the international community, the
Security Council and the entire world before new faits
accumplis, merely in order to satisfy Israel’s demands and
territorial and other claims. They are acting in this manner
to squash the progressive movement, the anti-imperialist
movement and the anti-colonialist movement in the Middle
East, that is, to oppose the efforts of those peoples to
secure freedom, independence, sovereignty and respect for
their rights. The representatives of some imperialist circles
obviously have their reasons for acting in this way. Perhaps
they even have the right to come here. But the international
community and the Security Council cannot exonerate
those imperialist circles which are trying to encourage
colonialism for the purpose of opposing the fight of the
peoples for their freedom. The task of the international
community and the Security Council is to support those
peoples, to give them the possibility of freeing themselves
from the yoke of the oppressors, who have been helped, it
must be noted, by a certain State created by the United
Nations which has become an agent of that imperialism.

“ ‘(a) There has been no air attack on the city of
Damascus or on the Damascus airfield.
“ ‘(b) There have been and are Israel aircraft in the
vicinity of Damascus; they are there as protective cover
for the Israel forces in the area.
“ ‘(c) I want to add our astonishment and strong
protest concerning the report of the Chairman with
allegations of attacks on Damascus. We are surprised that
.he, being a military man,’ “-that is, the Chairman of the
Mixed Armistice Commission being a military man“ ‘cannot distinguish between an air attack and other
things that he is hearing, for instance, anti-aircraft.’ ”
That is the message General Bull received from Mr. Sasson
of the Israel Foreign Office. The message continued:
“2. (Mr,) Sasson called back a few minutes later to
stress again that there was no air attack on the city” (of
Damascus).
142. In response to an inquiry about the alleged Syrian
shelling of villages in Israel, General Bull has just replied to
me, and I quote his report:

138. The representative of Israel has repeated the same
statements several times, but that very repetition was in
itself recognition of the fact that the aggression is continuing. His silence on certain points has also confirmed it.
The repeated allegations by the representative of Israel have
certainly not succeeded in misleading the members of the
Council. We therefore consider that the Security Council
should begin, at least for the moment, by very seriously
condemning Israel’s aggression against Syria and that it
should at the same time take steps to stop that aggression
and to see that peace in the Middle East and in the world is
not endangered further. The Security Council cannot
tolerate Israel’s aggression, which the world will not
tolerate. That aggression could have disastrous come.
quences not only for Israel, but also for the whole world.

“Only information we have is a flash from Tiberias
control center as follows: ‘0920 hours GMT, clouds of
smoke seen rising from side of hill in Israel approximate
bearing 1-2 degrees west of Safad.’ ”
That is the end of the report.
143. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
France, who has asked to speak on a point of order.
144. Mr. SEYDOUX (France) (translated from l+erich):
We have heard a series of reports which are most interesting
but do not always tally very exactly-quite understandable
in view of the local situation. I wonder whether it would

11

148. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:

not be desirable to take a break of twenty or thirty
minutes, for example, so that we could not just listen to
these very interesting reports but also read and study them.
Making photocopies of the reports should not take very
long.

All my previous

reports were published by the Office of Public Information

a few minutes ago. The report that I just submitted to the
Council’ will be available in the form of an Office of Public
Information document in perhaps another ten minutes.
149. The PRESIDENT: Is there any objection to adjourning the meeting until 7.30 am.?
As there is no objection., 1
&.ll take it that it is so decided.

145. That is why I suggest that we adjourn the meeting for
a short time, in accordance with rule 33, sub-paragraph 3,
of the provisional rules of procedure. We could meet again
at 7.30 a.m.

It was so decided.

146. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of France has
moved, under rule 33, sub-paragraph 3, of the provisional
rules of procedure, the adjournment of the meeting until
7.30 a.m.

The meeting rose at 7.5 a.m.

1 The report of the Secretnry-General,dated 10 June 1967, hlas

147. I should like to ask the Secretary-General whether we
could have copies of the reports within half an hour.

subsequently
SGfSM/738.

12

circulated

as United

Nations

Press Relealse
