84th

Vnited Nations

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY
THIRTY-FIRST SESSlON

OfJicial Records·

PLENARY MEETING

•

CONTENTS
Page

Agenda item 105:
Finnnclng of the Unlted Natlons Emergency Force nnd of
the Unlted Natlons DlsengBgemcnt Observer Force:
report of the Secretary-Gencral (continued)
Report of the Firth Committee (part 11)
1273
Agenda item 12:
Report of the Economic and Social Council (continued)
Rcport of the Second Committee (part Il) •. . • . . . . .• 1274

Wednesday, 1 December 1976.
at 11. 05 a.m.
NEW

YORK

Pursuant to rule 66 01 the rules 01 procedure, it was
decided not to discuss the report 01 the Filth Committee.
3. The PRESlDENT: lnterventions w] therefore be
limited to explanations of vote. 1 understand that sorne
explanatory statements and reservations have already been
made in the Fifth Committee in connexion with the draft
resolution before uso An account of those statements muy
be found in the relevant summary records of the Committee.

Agenda item 20:
E1ection of twelve members of the World Food Council .. 1274
Agenda item 26:
Admission of ncw Membcrs to the Unlted Nations (continued) .••.•....•••........•......••.•.• 1274

President: Mr. Hamilton Shirley AMERASINGHE
(Sri Lanka).
AGENDA ITEM lOS
Financing of the United Nations Emergency Force and of
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force: report of the Secretary-General (continued)*
REPORT OF THE FIFTH COMMITTEE (PART Il)
(A/3I /278/Add.l)
1. Mr. NASON (Ireland), Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee: On behalf of the Fifth Cornmittee I have the
honour to present, in document A/31/278/Add.l, part Il of
the Committee's report on agenda item 105.
2. The draft resolution which the Fifth Cornmittee has
voted to recommend to the General Assembly is contained
in paragraph 5 of the reporto In the first preambular
paragraph it is recalled that the Secretary-General's authority to enter into commitments for th'e United Nations
Emergency Force [UNEF/ and the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force [UNDOFj, as extended by
resolution 31/5, expires on 30 November 1976. Operative
paragraph I of the draft resolution would authorize the
Secretary-General to enter into commitments for UNEF
and UNDOF for a further period,from 1 to 21 December
1976, in order to allow additional time fOl the General
Assembly to consider the Secretary-General's report on the
financing of the two Forces. In operative paragraph 2 the
Assembly would decide to continue to apportion the
relevant expenses among Member States in accordance with
resolutions 3374 B and C (XXX). I hope that the draft
resolution will meet with the Assembly's approval.

4. I shall now call upon representatives who wish to speak
in explanation of their votes before the vote.
5. Mr. EL SHEIBANI (Libyan Arab Republic) (interpretation Irom Arabic): The Libyan Arab Republic has stated
its position on the financing of UNEF and UNDOF at
meetings of the Security Council and the Fifth Committee.
6. The presence of the Forces is based on Security Council
resollltions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). My delegation
thinks those two resolutions do not provide a basis for the
settlement of the Palestine problem or the Middle East
crisis. 1 should therefore like to place my delegation's
position on record, and tg state that the delegation of the
Libyan Arab Republic will not participate in the vote on
the draft resolution submitted by the Fifth Committee in
document A/31/278/Add.1.
7. Mr. KAPLLANI (Albania): The Albanian delegation has
on previous occasions made it abundantly clear that it
utterly disapproves of, and is resolutely against, UNEF and
UNDOF. Therefore, in full conformity with that stand, and
for the reasons my delegation explained lucidly at the Fifth
Committee's 39th meeting, the Albanian delegation will
vote against the draft resolution in paragraph 5 of document A/31/278/Add.l perta:ning to the financing of UNEF
and UNDOf.
8. Mr. HAMZAH (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation
from Arabic): My delegation has already very clearly stated
its position on the fmancing of UNEF and of UNDOF and
we have reaffirmed that the high cost to Member States of
fmancing those Forces results from the continued Israeli
aggression against Arab territories and Israel's refusal to
withdraw from those lands, in violation of the principies of
the United Nations Charter and numerous relevant resolutions. Bearing in mind that the draft resolution in document A/3I /278/Add.l, like many other resolutions, does
not differentiate between the aggressor and the victim of
the aggression, my delegation wiIl vote against the draft in
the conviction thai these costs should be borne by the
racist and aggressive Zionist entity.
9. Mr. FADHLl (Democratic Yemen): Democratic
Yemen's position has been made c1ear on previous occa-

* Resumed from the 41st meeting.
1273

A/3I/PV.84

1;

,1

'"1

,1

..

'."_

...iiiiiiiiiiiii

.1274
sions, in particular in the Fifth Committee and in the . the Comoros", and draft resolution 11, entitled "Assistance
plenary last year and again at tltis session. In conformity
with that position my delegation will not participate in the
vote on the draCt resolution in document A/31/278/Add.l,
on the fmancing of UNEF and of UNDOF.

1

1,

10. The PRESIDENT: The Assembly will now proceed to
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
FiCth Committee in paragraph S oC its report [A/31/278/
Add.l/. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour: Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Bhutan,
Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burma, Burundi, Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Canada, Central ACrican Republic, Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech03lovakia, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon,
Gambia, Germany, Federal Republic oC,. Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Hungary, lceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Luxembourg,
Malawi, Malaysia, MIIli, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Sao Tome and
Principe, Senegal, Singapore, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Surinam, Swaziland, Sweden, Thailand, Trinidad
and Tobago, Turkey, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union oC Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom oC Great Britain and Northern
lreland, United Republic oC Cameroon, United Republic oC
Tanzania, United States oC America, Uruguay, Yugoslavia,
Zaire, Zambia.
Against: Albania, Syrian Arab Republic.
The draft resolution was adopted by 112 votes to 2
(resolution 31/50).1
AGENDA ITEM 12
Report oC the Economic and Social Council
(continuedJ*
REPORT OF THE SECOND COMMITTEE (PART 11)
(A/l1 /338/Add.l)
11. Mr. PFANZELTER (Austria), Rapporteur of the
Second Committee: I have the honour to present part 11 of
the report oC the Second Committee on agenda item 12
[A/31/338/Add.lJ.

to Moznmbique". 80th draft resolutions were adopted
without a vote.

Pursuant to rule 66 of the rules of procedure, it was
decided not to discuss the report of the Second Committee.
13. The PRESIDENT: We shall now take a decision on the
two draft resolutions recommended by the Second Como
mittee in paragraph 7 of its report [A/31/338/Add.l/ .
14. Draft resolution I is entitled "Assistance to the
Comoros". May 1 take it that the General Assembly adopts
draft resolution I?

Draft reso/ution I was adopted (resolution 31/42).
15. The PRESIDENT: Draft resolution 11 is entitled
"Assistance to Mozambique". May 1 take it that the
General Assembly adopts draft resolution II?

Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 31/43).
AGENDA ITEM 20
Election oC twelve members oC the World Food Council
16. The PRESIDENT: The General Assembly has before
it, in document A/31/365, a note by the Secretary-General
regarding the recommendations of the Economic and Social
Council.
17. The 12 retiring members of the World Food Council
are: Australia, Colombia, Cuba, France, Guatemala, Guinea,
India, Libyan Arab Republic, Mali, Pakistan, Romania and
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
18. The foilowing 12 States have been nominated by 'Lhe
Economic and Social Council: from the group oi' Aftican
States-Ivory Coast, Madagaecar and Nigeria; from the
group of Asian States-Pakistan and the Philippines; from
the group of Latin American States-Cuba, Guatem8Ja and
Jamaica; from the group of Socialist States of Bastern
Europe-Poland aud the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics; from the group of Western European arld other
States-Australia and France. If there is no objection, may I
take it that it is the wish of the General ASflembly to
declare those countries elected to membership in. the World
Food Council for a term of tluee years?

It was so decided. (decision 31/309).
19. The PRESIDENT: I wish to congratulat!: those States
which have just been elected members of th,~ World Food
Council.
AGENDA ITEM 26

12. In paragraph 7 of the report the Second Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of two
draft resolutions: draft resolution 1, entitled "Assistance to
• Resumed from the 82nd meetin,g.
1 The delegation of the Ivory Coast subsequently informed the
Secretariat that it wished to have its vote recorded as having been in
favour of the draft resolution.

-.

--"')tr

J

.... '

Admission of new Members to the Uni'ted Nations
(continued) •
20. The PRESIDENT: In document A/31/340, the Se·
curity Council has recommended the admission of the
>lO

Rcsumed from the 80th meeting.

J'

'" .
84th meeting - 1 Deeember 1976

entitled "Assistance
,ons were adupted

procedure, it was
Yecond Committee.

ce a decision on the
, the Second Com·
/338/Add.1J.

Assistance to the
al Assembly adopts

ion 31/42).

Ion II is entitled
take it that the
III?

non 31/43).

Id Food Council

sembly has before
Secretary-General
onomic and Social

JrId Food Council
:uatemala, Guinea,
ltan, Romania and

nominated by '(he
group of African
"igeria; from the
Philippines; from
la, GuatemuJa and
States of Eastern
t Socialist Repub·
opean and other
J objection, may I
eral ASfJembly to
rship in. the WorId

ulat!: those States
f th~ WorId Food

ú'!ed Nations

/31/340, the Se·
ldmission of the

People's Republic of Angola to membership in the United
Nations. The relevant draft resolution has been circulated in
document A/31/L.22 and Add.1. The General Assembly
will now proc¡;¡ed to take a decision on that draft
resolution. A recorded vote I tS been requested.

A recorded vote WIlS taken.
In fmlour: Afghanistan, Albania, AIgeria, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Belgium,
Bhut:m, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Burma, Burundi, Byelo·
russian Soviet Socialist Republic, Canada, Cape Verde,
Central African Republic, Chad, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Demo·
cratic Kar••puchea, Democratic Yemen, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fijl,
Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, German Democratic
Republic, Germany, Federal Republic of, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea·Bissau, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Republic, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mexico, Mongolia, Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Norway, Oman, Panama, Papila
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal,
Singapore, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Surinam,
Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Cameroon, United Republic of
Tanzania, Upper Volta, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia.
Against: None.
Abstaining: United States of America.
The draft resolution was adopted by 116 votes to none,
with 1 abstention (resolution 31/44).2
21. The PRESIDENT: 1 declare the People's Republic of
Angola admitted to membership in the United Nations.

The delegatioll of the People's Republic of Allgola was
escorted to its place in the General Assembly hall.
22. The PRESIDENT: 1 cOlisider it an honour and a
pieasure to offer, on behalf of the General Assembly and on
my own behalf, sincere congrll.tulations to the delegation of
the People's Republic of Angola on its admission to
membership in the United Nations and to extend it a warm
welcome. I express the hope that the presence in the United
Nations of the representatives of Angola will enable them
to make a constructive contribution to the work of the
United Nations in all its spheres.
23. 1 now call on the representative of Fiji to speak on
behalf of the Asian group as its chairman.
2 The delegations of Bangladesh, Bulgaria, Ecuador, Egypt,
Greece, Guyana, Haiti, Iran, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Mauritius,
Morocco, Nigeria, Sicrra Leone, Trinidad and Tobago arid Venezuela
subsequently informed the Secretariat that they wished to have
their votes recorded as having been in favour of the draft resolution.

1275

24. Mr. VUNIBOBO (Fiji):. It is my privilege, on behalf of
the Asian group of states, to extend a very wann v'elcome
to the People's Republic oí' Angola upon its accession to
membership in this Organization, and to off"l it Clur very
sincere and very wann congratulations. I take this oppor·
tunity, too, on behalf of the people and the Government of
Fiji, to extend a very warm welcome to it.
25. It is always a source of pride and achievement fOf this
Oi"ganization when a country achieves independence. It is
also gratifying and a matter of great satisfaction to this
Organization to v'elcome a new Member and to add another
important voice to its deliberations. It is particularly
gratifying and indeed significant that during this session of
the General Assembly we welcome among us a country
from Africa, a continent that has fought, and is still fighting,
sorne of the worst manifertations of colonialism, a problem
which has deeply concerned Members of this Organization
for many years, and particularIy during this, the thirty·first
session.
26. The: People's Republic of Angola brings with its
independence not only the achievemellt of its people, but
also the hope of an end to colonialism in other parts of
Africa.
27. It is always the hope of this Organization that the
"coming of age", so to speak, of a State has been a natural
one. Unfortunately, all too often this has not been so, and a
heavy price has been paid for independence. Angola has
been no exception. The people of Angola have paid dearly
to take their rightful place in this Orgallization. Angola is
today faced with a problem of reconstruction. In spite of
thé wilI of its people and the natural resources it is
endowed with, the task before it is an enormous one.
However, freedom is the first step towards meaningful
reconstruction and development, and we are confident that,
with the goodwilI that exists towards the People's Republic
of Angola among the international community, its national
reconstruction will be achieved with the help and under·
standing of all of uso We of the Asian region hope that the
rest of Africa that is still colonized, or is under illegal or
minority régimes, will yield to reality and to the inevitable
and that there will be a transfer of power to their rightfui
peoples without the cost that has been borne b-y the people
of Angola.
28. Although Angola is situated many, many thousands of
miles from our shores, we feel we have a lot in common
with it and that we have a lot we can share. 'fhis forum has
provided us with a place to meet so that our peoples can
co-operate and coexist to build a worId of peace and
ju~tice.

29. With the admi,ion of the People's Republic of
Angola, a new African State of great importance will enter
the United Nations. We are convinced that, like many other
African countries before it, Angola will bring to om work a
spirit of wisdom and generosity, and that it will contribute
in the same constructive manner to achieving the purposes
and principies of our Charter.
30. 1 take this opportunity once again, on behalf of the
member countries of the Asian group, to extend a friendIy
hand to the People's Republic of Angola and to wish it

,¡

1276

Genenl Asaembly - Thlrty·lint Sealon - P1enuy MllCtinp

success in its endeavoul'S ....ijonally and in the international
community
•
31. The PRESIDENT: I now calt on the representative of
Butgaria, chairman of the group of Eastern European
States.
3:¿. Mi'. YANKOV (Bulgaria): The General Assembly has
just adopted a decision of great importance in admitting.the
People's Republic of Angola as a fuIl Member of the Umted
Nations. Historic justice has thus been restored to the
valiant and freedom·loving people of Angola. From now on,
the People's Republic of Angola will occupy its legitimate
place in this world Organization, in fuU conformity with
the Charter of the United Nations. Such a decision
corresponds to the interests of peace and progress, and is
conducive to !he realization of the purposes al'd principies
of our Organization.
33. I feel particularly gratified that 1 have the honour to
welcome most cordially the representatives of the People's
Republic of Angola on behalf of the countries of the
Ec:¡tem European group of States. Great is our joy to see
the representatives of the Angolan people take their rightful
place in this hall. The countries of Eastern Europe have
decisively and warmly supported the request of the People's
Republic of Angola for admission to the United Nations,
considering this request ful1y justified.
34. The admission of the People's Republic of Angola to
membership in the United Nations is a major event in
international affairs. This young African State, which was
born as a result of a long struggle against Portuguese
colonialism, had becn compelled to defend its indepen·
dence, territorial integrity and sovereignty in a hard·fought
battle against imperialist aggresslOn.
35. The Angolan pimple paid a heavy price to win and
strengthen their independence and to exercise their inalienable right freely to choose the road to their future
development. On the eve of the victorious end of the
anti-colonial war and immediately foUowing the proclamation of independence, imperialism and racism rose up in
a united front against this yotlng African State. That is why
the victory of the Angolan people over foreign intervention
and the forces of internal reaction has been warmly haHed
by the Ahíca., States and all progressive mankind.

and the overt aggreosion by the South African racists. The
Government of the Peopte's Repubtlc of Angota has
proctalmed as its maln domestic politicat task the carrying
out of a radical socio-economic and political transformation
in the intel.::st ofthe Angolan people. We sincerely wish the
People's Republic of Angola success in the building of the
ne", society based on the prinlliples of social justice and
weIl·being for the working people.
38. \Ve are happy to see that the internadonal pres~ige of
the People's Republic of Angola has been affhmed so
quickly. The faet that the request of the People's Republic
of Angola for membership in the United Nations has
commanded such wide support is eloquent proof of that.
The People's Republic of Angola has been recognized by
more tIlan 100 States. 1t is a respected and active member
of the Organization of African Unity [OAU¡ and the
non·aligned movement. The Government of the People's
Republic of Angola has established rellltions of sincere
friendship and active co.operation with aU the countries of
Eastern Europe in the political, economic, technological
and cultural fields, based on the principies of fraternal
solid»rity and on the United Nations Charter. Those .close
fraternal ties between free and independent Angola and the
Eastern European States, established from the time of the
inception of the People's Republic of Angola, have been
further promoted during the recent visits to the USSR and
Bulgaria of Mr. Antonio Agostinho Neto, Chairman of the
Movimento Popular de Uberta¡¡:iio de Angola [MPLA/ and
President ofrle People's Republic of Angola.
39. The resolution adopted by the General Assembly
today convincingly demonstrates how absolutely correct
were those who from the beginning have supported firmly
and unconditionaIly the admission of the People's Republic
of Angola to membership in the United Nations. We feel
particularly gratified that the artificial barriers raised to
prevent the admission of that young African .St~te to full
membership in the United Nations have been ehmmated.
40. At the same time, we cannot but recall that there is no
end to attempts to delay the admission to our Organization
of another independent peace-Ioving State-the SlJcialist
Republic of Viet Nam. Those attempts are in glaring
contradiction with the letter and spirit of the United
Nations Charter. However, we are deeply convinceet t'1at
the Just cause of the Vietnamese people wiII triurn
.1 the
very near future, and that we shall be able to weleo,ne the
representatives of the hero},.: Vietnamese people just as \\'e
are now welcoming our Angolan friends.

36. Today, the People's Republic of Angola, in consoli·
dating its dearly WL.n freedom and independence, represents
an important factOl for the strengthening of the indepen41. I should like, on behalf of the countries 01 .t:.lIstern
dence and security of the young States in southern Africa.
Europe, once more to welcome warmly the delegatioo of
There can be no doubt wha'.soever that the participation of' the People's Republic of Angola and to expr.:s~ our
the People's Republic of Angola in the work of the United
conviction that the relations of most fruitful co-operation
Nations wil1 further enhance tIle efficiency of our Organiwhich exist between our countries will find their expression
zation in all spheres of its activities. There can be no doubt
also in coIlaboration between our delegations in the United
either that Angola's contributior: wiIl hp. particu Jrly
Nations, in the common efforts to strengthen the efficiency
valuable and important in the implementation of the tasks . of our Organization in the interests of peace, social progress
related to the fmalliberation of the African continent from
and viable international co-operation.
colonialism, racism a.,d apartheid.
42. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
37. The people of Angola are now focusing all their efforts
Guyana, chairman of the group of Latin American Statea.
on overcoming the under·development inherited from
colonial domination and to redeem the heavy damages and
43. Mr. JACKSON (Guyana): It is for me today a signal
losses inflicted upon them by the imperialist intervention
honour, on behalf of the Latin American group of States at

--- .,.....

-._--n::.,..~~-

>

~ (

th

47.
than
reco
role
con
cont
48.

fOf i
ticip
effor
syste
Ame
and
Augo

49.
Mau'
50.
perso

·....
,

H

011_ l.

tL $

84th mooting - 1 Docember 1976

the United Nations, to welcome the People's Republic of
Angola into the fold of United Nations membersltip.
For the people of Angola, having suffered as they have
under persistent and prolonged colonial domination, the
road to independence has been strewn with many obstacles.
Yet, history itself clln testify that liberation, like progress,
is nn irrepressiblc process.
44. Between the peoples of Latin America and Aftica
there are bridges of shared experience. Tite opportunities,
as well as the challenges, of nationhood are familiar to tite
people of Latin America. The indissoluble Ituman links
between our two continents, Africa and Latin America, are
of long standing; and our two continents, as part of the
developing world, increasingly seek common cause througll
joint co-operative action to make a reality of our acknowledged interdependence. In this context, ilie people of
Latin America are united with the people of Africa, of
whiclt Angola is a part, in pursuit of the universal objectives
of peace, justice and progress.
45. We in Latin America havc every confidence that the
full realization of the universality of membership of this
Organization can only enhance the effectiveness of the
Uniterl Nations as we seek to find just and expeditious
80lutions to the manifold problems that confront today's
troubled world. The admission of the People's Republic of
Angola to membership in the United Nations represents a
further stage in the progress towards the goal of universality, a principIe which is deeply cherished by all of us and
ror which we have so arduously fought in the General
Assembly.
.
46. Allow me to observe that the struggle for freedom is
not unfamiliar to the peoples of Latin America which have
ror so long been obliged to toil under the oppressive yoke
of colonialism. We stand firmly in support of thm'e who
have had to Í1ght for their freedom. The valiant struggles of
such Latin American Iiberators and he roes as Simon
Bolívar, José Martí, Cuffy, Benito Juárez and José de San
Martín bear ample testimony to the contribution which
Latin America has made towards the attainment of the goal
of total freedom.
47. The People's Republic of Angoia, which a little more
than a fortnight ago celebrated the fil'St anniversary of the
recovery of its independence, has a positive and significant
role to play in the deliberations of this Organization. We are
confident that that Republic will make a constructive
contribution.

48. Latin America ~alutcs the People's Republic of Angola
for its valour and welcomes it most fratemally to participate in our deliberations. As we seek to intensify our
efforts geared towards the cr, ion of an international
system based en justice and Ilquity, the group of Latin
American States looks forward to a period of friendship
and meaningful co-operation with the Pcople's Republic of
Angola.

I_JIo

1277

behalf of the Aftican group of States, ovel' which 1 am
Itonoured to preside tltis month, as well as on behalf of
OAU, of which my Prime Minister has tIle privilege of
serving as c"rrent Chairman, to extend a warm and
brotherly welcome to the People's Rcpublic of Angola as it
becomes a full Member ofthe United Nations.
51. Tltis must be a Itappy and proud day for the people
and Government of Angola. It marks tite culmination of
their long and hard struggle to assume their rightful place in
the international community. It also reflects their ultimate
victory over the evil torces of domination, coloninlism and
imperialism-a resounding victory for freedom. peace and
progress in the world. With great Itappiness and deep
emotion I rejoice in congratulating them from the bottom
of my heart on reaching this shining milestone on the road
of self-fulfilment.
52. By thc same token this is a1so a significant day for the
United NatiC'ns. It hrings us a step closer to the achievement of our goal of true universality of membership. It
increases our collc¡:tive resources for progress and effectiveness in finding common solutions to world problems. It
also raises the hope that the voice of re&sen and right will
finally prevail and that the world may soon be liberated
from the tactics, dictation and obstruction of sorne of tite
great Powers.
53. One can only lament the delays, the harm and the
damage done to our common objectives that a,-e caused by
such tactics and manoeuvres, knowing that the representatives of Angola could have been working with us with a11
their talents and strength since the beginning of this session
ofthe General Assembly.
54. One must recall with regret the wastefulness and futile
efforts that kept the rightful representatives of the people
of China out of these halls for a quarter of a century. One
must also point out with pain that a sister Eastern nation,
whieh in moral, political and juridical terms is fully entitled
to membership in our Organizl!tion, is today being subjected
to sueh unjustified treatment in violation of the letter and
spirit of the Charter. We feel confident that the course of
history in this respeet will be c1ear-cut and irreversible, that
the right of al! peace-Ioving peoples to be ¡-epresented in
this august body will sooner or later prevail.
55. We strongly believe that a11 our efforts here should be
deployed to promote understanding and co-operation
rather than division and confrontation, and to build for
peace, justice, security and intemational co-operation and
development for the benefit of all mankind.

49. The PRESIDENT: 1 call on the representative of
Mauritius, chairman of the group of African States.

56. It is a great satisfaction to know that Angola, because
of its natural resources, its geographic position and me
qualititS of its people and its spirited leaders, can quickly
overcome the natural initial difficulties of the postindependence era and of nation-building. It can a1so
certainly have an important and constructive role to play in
the field of economic, social and cultural development in
strengthening international security and enhancing the
welfare and prosperity of mankind.

50. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): It gives me great pleasure
personally, as permanent representative of Mauritius, on

57. We in the United Nations should offer Angola a11 the
support and assistance that it may initially need in its

_

.

>,

1278

GoncraJ Auomb~ - Tl\lrty·l'lrat So.MIon - PlMlIIY Mootlnp

endeavour to heal the wounds and ravages ofwar, to stand
fully on its feet and to give full expresslon to lts great
potentlal.
58. Long lIve the People's Republic of Angola!
59. The PRESIDENT: 1 call on the representative of
Malta, chairman of the group of Westem European and
other States.
60. Mr. GAUCI (Malta) (interpretatian Irom Frencll):
Today it is the pleasant duty of the representative of the
Republlc of Malta, the European country that is closest to
Africa, on behalf of the group of Westem European and
other States, to welcome the Republic of Angola and to
extend to it our warmest congratulations on this happy
occasion. 1 do so with all the more pleasure because in
inviting this one hundred and forty-sixth Member of our
Organization to join us in our efforts to build a world of
peace and justice, we are coming closer to a goal which we
hold particularly dear, and which is of especial importance,
namely, the goal of universality.
61. Nobody doubts that, regardless of differences in
political, economic and social systems, the presence among
us of all States without exception is necessary so that
through co-operation and collaboration we can arrive at
solutions that are acceptable to all and are accepted by alI.
62. The admissl.0n of the Republic of Angola to the
United Nations puts an end to one of the darkest chapters
of the history of decolonization in Africa and is proof, were
any needed, that the continuation of systems based on the
domination of one people by another is no longer tolerated.
It is also symbolic, because we are living at a time when the
grave problems of southem Africa are of the l'tmost concem
to the community of nations and when all our efforts must
be directed to avoiding a blood:r confrontation. We are
convinced that the presence among us of the Republic of
Angola is in accord not only with the criteria of justice but
also with those of necessity. We cannot, therefore, but be
pleased when its representatives solemnly affirm their
profound attachment to the principIes of our common
Charter.
63. The entry of the Republic of Angola into the United
Nations will reinforce the already influential voice of Africa
in our Organization. This is a cause of satisfaction for the
group of Westem European and other States, which has
always found that great continent to be a friendly and
generous partner, desirous of contributing to the peaceful
solution of conflicts.
64. 1 should like, therefore, in conclusion, to reaffirm our
desire for frank and loyat co·operation with the Republic of
Angola in the attainment of our common goal and to
express to it, and to its courageous people, our cordial
wishes for peace and prosperity.
65. The PRESIDENT: 1 call C:í the representative of
Democratic Yemen, who wiIl speak on behalf of the Arab
group.
66. Mr. FADHLI (Democratic Yemen) (interpretatian
fram A":zbic): On behalf of the Arab group of States, 1 am

-_.7t'--_a __

~"""~~-~~'''''''---_&''A)A.,..

~~'''l'(

pleased to welcome the People's Republic of Angola as a
full Member of this Organlzatlon.
67. The admlsslon of Angola crowns wlth success a long
and herolc struggle waged for many centuries by the
Angolan people against colonlallsm, thereby enabllng
Angola to begin Its new march as an independent and
united State. Its admission to membership in our Organi·
zatlon is also a testimony to the long history of the peoples
of the Afrk311 continent in their struggle against coloni·
a1ism and e..ploitation and represents the elimination of
one of the last vestiges of colonialism.
68. We hail the Angolan people, its victory and its attempt
to build a new future and to establish a progressive State of
Angola capa"b of playing its role in the intemational arena.
69. The PRESIDENT: 1 call on the representative of Sri
Lanka, who will speak on behalf of the Ilon·aligned
countries.
70. Mr. KANAKARATNE (Sri Lanka): It gives me great
pIeasure to be here this moming to welcome the People's
Republic of Angola to join us as a Member of this
intemational brotherhood of the United Nations. The
delegation of Sri Lanka was honoured to be one of the
approximately 70 sponsors of the draft resolution-which
was adopted a short while ago by this Assembly without a
single dissentient voice-admitting the People's Republic of
Angola to membership in this Organization and thereby
taking us one step closer to the goal of universality, which
all of us believe will be eventually fully achieved in the
United Nations.
71. 1 appear here not only as the representative of my
Government and my people but also as current Chairman of
the group of 86 sovereign States Members of this Organi·
zation which belong to the Group of Non-Aligned States. 1
think that it is therefore pertinent for me particularly to
single out the distinction which has been cast upon me to
welcome the People's Republic of Angola to membership in
the United Nations. It was only a few months ago-in
August this year-that at the Fifth Conference of Heads of
State or Govemment of the 86 non-aligned nations Angola
was represented by its Head of State, President Agostinho
Neto, who carne to my country, and it was at that
Conference that Angola was unanimously elected to be a
member of the 25·nation Co-ordinating Bureau of the
non·aligned group.
72. That Conference also unanimously adopted resolution 15, in which the Conference called upon " ... all
member States of the Non-Aligned Movement to support
coIlectively Angola's application for membership to the
United Nations" and urgently appealed " ... to all member
Siates of the United Nations to support the application for
membership submitted by the People's Republic of Angola
to the United Nations." [see A/31/197. annex ¡V.I
73. It is with deep gratitude, therefore, that 1 come to this
rostrum not only to welcome a sister nation, the People's
Republic of Angüla, but also to proclaim here that we have
aemeved the purposes we set out to achieve in Colombo
when that resolution was adopted by the Conference of
Heads of State or Govemment of the Non·Aligned Coun·
tries.

>Ip'"---------------

84th meeting - 1 J;>oc:cmber 1976
74. I should Iike to be permitted to add one comment on
tho perhaps unique eOllnexion between Angola and Sri
Lallka: we were both colonies of the same colonial Power.
It was in 1505, in the early sixteenth century, that tite
Portuguese settlers first carne to Ceylon-as Sri Lanka was
tllen known-and tltey were the first European settlers to
set foot on our shores. It was at about tbe same time that
the Portuguese arrived in Angola. Fortunately for us, the
Portuguese were not able to dominate tite whole of the
island from which I come, but had to make way for their
Dutch brothel's to take over in 1635. But it took our
Angolall brothers 450 years or more eventually to reassert
their total independence, and we rejoice with Angola
because we have had this historical bond and we very much
appreciate the struggle that the Angolan people has waged
valíantly, courageously and at great sacrifice during the last
few years.
,
"

75. In this hall we have welcomed many new Members to
admission during the last few years, but I hope that 1 shall
not be taken amiss when I say that this moming we have
admitted a country which has gone through considerable
suffering in tlle ach!evement of that independence. \Ve are
happy to see its representatives sitting amongst uso
76. \Ve extend to the Govemment and the people of the
People's Republic of Angola our warmest good wishes. \Ve
are convinced that after Angola has bound up the wounds
of war, after it has been able to husband its considerable
natural resources and after it has built up the institutional
structures whieh modem society demands, it will play a
vital role not only in the affairs of southem Africa and of
that continent, but indeed of the world.
77. One of the mmt important issues which has come up
for discussion before the thirty·first session of the General
Assembly is that of the events now unfolding in southem
Africa. Angola, by its geographical position and by its
valiant efforts, has proved to the international community
that it is willing, ready and eminently competent to
contribute its share to the solution of the problems of
Zimbabwe and of South Africa itself. We of the non-aligned
group are heartened by the fact that Angola has now taken
its rightful place in the international community. \Ve
extend every good wish to tlle people of Angola and we are
convinced that the entire international communi.ty as one
will do aIl it can to ensure that Angola will be enabled not
only to benefit from membership in this OrgarJization and
the United Nations system but even more to contribute, as
I am sure it will, a degree of maturity, wisdom and
intemational goodwill to the tasks which the international
community, working through this Organization, has set for
itself.
78. In conclusion, may I say that, with the admission of
the People's Republic of Angola, we stiH have one isolated
colony in Africa struggling for its independence. I refer to
Zimbabwe. Angola is a neighbour of Zimbabwe and Angola
wiII have a role to play in the early and speedy settlement
of the problems that are facing that country, and we are
convinced that in the case of Zimbabwt" and in the case of
Namibia, another Territory adjacent to Angola, the Govemment and tile people of Angola will assume their rightful
responsibilities and help us of the international community
to find solutions which will not only justify what we in this

___J.

1279

Assembly declllred in 1960 when we adopted the Declara·
tion on decolonization but also enable us fully to imple.
ment it without delay and with complete satisfaction to the
peoples of Afriea and of tbe world.
79. Mr. DA COSTA LOBO (portugal): A few moments ago
the People's Republic of Angola became the one hundred
and forty-sixth Member of the United Nations.
80. The world being what it is today, when full participa·
tion in internationallífe requires an increasing utilization of
multilateral channels, we can say that the admission of a
State in tllis Organization gives that State a higher status in
the international community. As for the United Nations,
which obviously aims at universality, the admission of a
new Member brings it closer to what it should be. So, ifwe
accept the two previous statements, I think that we can
correctly conelude that this is a very important event for
both Angola and the United Nations.
81. In this respect let me just add that for Portugal also, as
a Member of the United Nations and as a friend of Angola,
this occasion is in both respects a very important event and
a source of deep satisfaction.
82. I shouId like to recan very briefly that on two previbus
occasions my country has expressed before organs of the
Unit'ld Nations its support for the admission of Angola to
this Organization.

83. Although Portugal is not a member of the Security
Council, our delegation appeared before that organ on
23 June 1976 in order to sUPPOrt Angola's request for
admission to the United Nations. At that time the
Permanent Representative of Portugal stated:
"The admission of Angola to the United Nations, if
approved, will represent the last page of the record of
decolonization of tite African Territories under Portuguese administ~ation, which, after a long and painful
struggle for liberation, during the last few years obtained
their independence and their right to become Members of
the United Nations as well as full members of the
international cornmunity".3
84. And less than two months ago, speaking in the general
debate in the plenary General Assembly, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Portugal made the following statement:
"The Portuguese Government defends and actively
supports admission of the People's Republic of Angola as
a full Member of the United Nations. When a State
remains outside the United Nations, it is a1ways the
United Nations that is incompleto". [22nd meeting,
para. 270./
85. If I may elaborate OIi that last observation, I would
submit that, if every State, regardless of its size or
geographical situation or the political affiliation of its
Government, may contribute through its admission to the
United Nations to rendering this Organization less incom·
plete, that contribution is particularly important in the case
3 Sec Officia/ Records 01 the Security Counci/, Thirty-first Year.
19.'12nd meeting.

..

'"', ' _ ' \ - , . . .
f'
...------------------------!!fIlII!!!!~I!II!I!!!!!I!II-~~~~~~...,."""""
~,.¡;¡;;~-;....
,0

.,:

-_.:JI'"

-~--

1280

General ÁIlICImbly - ThIrty-fhat S_on - P2cnuy Mootlnp

of a eountry in an area-an area tltat still includes two
Non-Self.Goveming Territories-that ls certalnly very insuf·
ficiently represented in the United Natlons. The admission
of Angola does not completely correet the situation, but it
improves the situatlon and brings new hope for a furtlter
amelioratlon.

ex-Portuguese colonies, Angola was tite major prize-Ángola
witlt its oil, diamonds, iron ore, uranium and coffee; Angola
witlt natural resources tltat have hardly been touched yet.
Angola was tite country to conquer. Angola was tite
tifeboat of a dying colonialism, tite tifesaver of a moribund
imperialismo

86. May 1 add tltat this event is taking place at a time
when tite consideration of tite problems of soutltem Africa
in tite United Nations has acquired a particular significance,
and 1 think tltat we should welcome tite possibility of tite
partlcipation of Angola in tite disl:ussion of tltese problems.

93" Angola's importance goes far beyond Angola's own
borders. Angola is the key to Namibia; Angola was the
shortest way to Zimbabwe. Angola opened tite doors to
Soweto; indeed, Angola is South Africa itself. Ifit had not
been for the victory of MPLA and tite valiant strugg1e
waged by FRELIMO, change would not have occurred so
soon in southern Africa. It is now elear to everyone tltat,
tltanks to the sacrifices and the gallant struggle waged by
MPLA, a new era is dawning on the southem African
horizon. The day when the Africans in that part of the
world will regain tlteir dignity is now coming eloser. The
strugg1e will be hard, but a vitória é certa.

87. This is not tite proper occasion to dwell at lengtlt on
tite historical, linguistic and cultural tinks between Portugal
and Angola. 1 should like on;y to point out tltat if tltese
links are important for tite bilateral relations of tltose
countries, they may also prove positive elements in tlteir
co-operation at tite United Nations.
88. We hope tltat this co-operation, which naturally will
take into account points of view and concerns of different
regions of tite world, will contribute to dealing more
realistically witlt certain intemational problems, and consequently to tite greater effectiveness of tite United
Nations. For our part, we look forward with deep interest
to this co-operation, into which we intend to put the best
of our efforts.
89. Mr. FERNANDES (Guinea-Bissau): It is a great
pIeasure for my delegation to welcome to tite United
Nations our friends from tite People's Republic of Angola.
We do tltat not only on behalf of our own Government, but
also on behalf of the Governments of tite Republic of Capll
Verde, the People's Republic of Mozambique and thel
Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe.

90. This is not tite rust time tltat 1 have had tite privilege
of speaking on behalf of Cape Verde, Sao Tome and
Principe, and Mozambique; indeed, during the long strugg1e
for nationalliberation 1 have had the opportunity to speak
in many forums on behalf ofPAIGC4 of Guinea-Bissau and
Cape Verde, MLSTPs of Sao Tome and Principe,
FRELIM05 of Mozambique and MPLA of Angola.
91_ Today 1 stand here welcoming to this world body tite
last member of an organization founded son:e 15 years ago
and known as tite Conference of Nationalist Organizations
of Portuguese
Colonies,
encompassing all
the
ex-Portuguese African colonies. 1 should add that this
occasion has a particular significance for me, since 1
witnessed the founding of the Conference as a young man
involved in the hard and difficult strugg1e for the dignity of
Africn.
92. It is not by accident that it is only now that tite
People's Republic of Angola is being admitted to this world
body. Angola's path to liberty is covered with the blood of
thousands and thousands of Angolans. It has been a
particulaily difficult path because Angola represents the
crown . jewel of intemational imperialismo Of all the
4 Partido Africano da Independencia da Guiné e Cabo Verde.
5 Mo\imento de Liberta<;iío de Sao Tomé e Príncipe.
6 Frente de Liberta<;1io de Mo<;ambique.

----,:.~

94. It was very sad for tite delegations of ex-Portuguese
colonies to see a State Member of the United Nations
utilizing its veto power to prevent Angola fromjoining-this
world body. Fortunately this obstaele was overcome last
week with an abstention in the Security Council. We do
think that the time has come for the United States to forge
a new relationship with Angola, a relationship based on
respect for each other's sovereignty and each other's right
to choose its own allies. As President Neto very ably put it
in apoem:
"See, here are our hands
Open to the brotherhood of man,
United in certainty
For the future ofman.
For right, for peace, for friendship".

95. Angola, because of its natural resources and its size,
ranks among the very few countries in Africa-and probably
in the third world-tltat can rapidly achieve a high degree of
economic development and self-sufficiency. Are we, then,
to assume that this natul'al wealth is somehow a curse
rather than a blessing; that tltose who not only have refused
to extend a helping hand to tltis young nation, but have
actively workeu to prevent its political independence from
being achieved, would rather see it joining tite ever-swelling
number of poor nations? Are we to assume that that heroie
country, in spite of its nchness, is condemned to remain
impoverished and dependent upon international solidarity?
Has Angola been used to prove that the poor will always
remain poor and the rich will grow even richer? Are
ideology and cold-war tactics being used in an effort to halt
the creation of a true, wealthy and sovereigr. nation in the
very heart of Africa?
96. We do not know the answers to all those questions. We
just have an eerie feeling that sorne occult and sinister force
is trying to prevent Angola from joining the ranks of the
wealthy nations and that interests are working hard to
widen the gap between the poor and the rich nations.
97. During our association with MPLA Jver almost 20
years <lf strugg1e we have seen candid and honest leadership
dedicated to the cause of Angola and to the cause of Africa.
We have seen courageous fighters laying down their lives on

- ~~~--------=------:~:::""-------------:>--~

.~_

.._-

84th ¡neotlnl - 1 Docomber 1976
1281
the rugged path of independence, sacrificing their Uves for
For the future-h ere are our eyes
an ideal. One has only to mention Hojy na Henda, among
for peace-o ur voices
many others.
for peace-o ur hands
from Africa, united in love."
98. That ideal has partly been achieved, for Angola is now
independent politically. However, the torch is still lit
104. Mr. CORREA DA COSTA (Brazil): Although Ambas·
because a luto continua. That torch has not changed hands.
sador Jackson of Guyana has in bis capacity as chairman of
It will be carried by the very same hands which were able to
the group of Latin-American States had the opportu nity to
conquer political independence, to iIIuminate the darkest
express to the Assembly tite feelings of our region on the
corners of ignorance, misery and disease. The vast majority
occasion of the admission of Angola to the United Nations,
of Angolans are today still lying and languisbing in th;:"se
the Brazilian delegation wishes to add its own welcome to
dark corners of ignorance. Knowing the MPLA leadership as
another Portuguese-speaking State as it joins our Organizawell as we know it, we feel very confident and very sure
tion.
that a luta continua e a vitória é certa.

n
n
t.
e

d

n

.e

o

It

e
o
t,

y

99. The struggle will continue because Namibia is not free.

n

The struggle will continue because Zimbabwe is still
dominated by a minority. The struggle wiII continue
because the tragedy of Soweto still exists and a régime is
massacring our brothers and sisters in the name of

e
.e

apart/zeid.

,e

IS

100. We are hoping that reason will prevall in the land of

is

apart/zeid and that before too long Pretoria will come to its

it

senses and prevent another war like tbe one which took
place in Angola. But i, there ever should be another such
war, the people will take things into their own hands and be
victorious, as was MPLA.

o
;e

n
lt

it
101. Angola has shown uso It stands as an example to the
world and demonstrates that with sacrifice and struggle the
enemies of the people- whether they employ colonial
machinations or manoeuvres or naked military aggression as
did South Mrica-c an be defeated. MPLA has made
Angola's victory a reality. With a committed and talented
leadership, in particular the strong fUld determined
Mr. Neto, Angola has won.
y

102. The Angolan struggle for independence began as a
struggle agalnst Portuguese colonialism but grew and
became a struggle agalnst the powerful forces of imperialism before Angola was able to achieve final victory. The
struggle in Angola and the victory involved not just the
defeating of Portuguese colonialism and its a1lies. The
struggle in Angola hllS been and continues to be a
commitment marked by sacrifice to build a new life for the
people of Angola free of the exploitation of man by mano

,f
l,

e
d
e
n

g

e

,

n

103. The spirit of Angola was very important to the
victory over colonialism. It reflects a cor.:lmitment to
solidarity and to s~pport for the continuing struggle for
freedom in southern Africa. This spirit was captured in the
words of President Neto in a poem written sorne 20 years
ago. He sald:

's

e
It
e
e
e
e

"Our eyes the life-blood
are turned towards hands beckoning love in all the world
hands in the future-inspiring falth in the vitality ofAfrica,
fue human land of Africa,
of far·flung Africa
regenerating under the sun of hope
creating bonds of brotherhood in freedom from want,
from the yeaming for peace,
the blood and the seed.

o

o
P
l.

n

'--"-

...

105. Ov~r the last two years we have had tite plellSure of
receiving in our midst Guinea-Bissau, Cape Verde, Sao
Tome and Principe, and Mozambique. Those are nations to
which we Brazilians are closely bound by ties of history and
blood. The admission of Angola in 1976 completes the
process of tite accession of Portuguese-speaking African
States to membership in the United Nl1tions. With aIl those
five countries Brazil malntalns diplomatic, economic and
cultural relations based on our Iinguistic and historical
identity. We share with them common interests and
aspirations as developing countries.
106. Admission to the United Nations completes the
gradual process of international recognition of a new Stnte.
At the same time it is for that State the beginning of a new
cyde of responsibilities within the framework of the
Charter of the United Nations. To the Orga¡1itation, the
entry of each new Member ftlpresents a factor of strength
which brings it ever doser to tlle goal of universality. It
should therefore be a matter of rejoicing for a11 of us that a
new State should seek admission to the United Nations,
thus indicating its desire to contribute in a positive way to
our efforts and to the acrnevement of the purposes of the
United Nations. Our satisfaction is increased when an
African State is involved, for we have all witnessed the
creative contribution which independent Africa has made
to ourwor k.
107. Through its admission to the United Nations Angola
acquires the possibility of utilizing manifold forms of
co-operation and understanding through which its self·
determination may be exercised without outside pressures
and its national identity may be projected in Obr como
munity of nations.
108. It is therefore with well·founded satisfaction that we
warmly greet the new Member of the Organization.
109. Mr. PETRlé (Yugoslavia): On this occasion my
delegation wishes to express its great satisfaction at the fact
that the People's Republic of Angola has today by a
unanimous vote of the General Assembly been admitted to
membership in the United Nations, thus becoming the
newest Member of the world Organization.
110. The admission of this newly liberated African coun·
try to our Organization is first and foremost a great tribute
to its heroic struggle for freedom as well as to its policy of
independence, non·aIignment and dedication to the principies on which the United Nations is founded.

-. -- -- -- -- -- -- --

-- -- -~ -- -~.".!.s
- ~--~.~ ~~--,-

"

\

.-

."

.!
1282
111. The entry of Angola into our Organization consti·
tutes an important c:ontribution to the struggle for tite final
llquidation of colonialism and racism, particular1y in
southem Africa, in which the United Nations must con·
tinue to play an active role. Witb Angola as its new
Membcr, our Organization has made another significant
step forward towards achieving universality, thus strengtb·
ening its role in intemational relations.
112. Even before its admlssion to the United Nations, the
People's Republic of Angola bad fully affirmed ¡tself on tlle
intemational scene-by its liberation strugg1e and its role in
the fight for the final liquidation of co10nialism and racism
in southem Africa, and its admission totlle ranks of OAU
and, recently, to tIle non·aligned movement at tIle summit
conference of non·aligned countries in Colombo, where it
played an active role. We believe that Angola will make a
significant contribution to tIle activities of the United
Nations.
113. We wish to congratulate warmly the Foreign Min·
ister, Mr. dos Santos, and the delegation of the People's
Republic of Angola, with which Yugoslavia maintains the
most cordial relations, on the admission of their country to
the United Nations, as one more victory for tIle people of
Angola in the strugg1e for independence, for peaee and
security and for the building of equitable intemational
relations freed from colonialism and from any form of
domination.
114. Mr. CAMARA (Guinea) (interpretatian {ram
French): After a long and cruel domination, lasting nearly
five centuries and characterized by racial discrimination,
slavery and doméstic serviee, all based on colonialist and
imperialist exploitation, the Angolan people, under the
leadership of their distinguished party, MPLA, fmally
triumphed over all machinations and proclaimed its inde·
pendence on 11 November 1975. The various stages which
marked this heroic struggle are known to everyone and,
despite the use of puppet organizations using the words
"liberation" or "total independence" in tIleir titles, such as
FNLA7 or UNlTA,8 the truth finally triumphed witll
Africa's victory in Luanda. The recognition of the People's
Republic of Angola by more than 100 States Members of
our Organization at the time was resounding proof of that
reality, which is now indisputable. With regard to the legal
foundation of this independence, won at such a price, this
no longer needs to be demonstrated despite the Machiavellan attempts of the imperialists to challenge it.
115. Since tIle Security Council and the General Assembly
have recognized that Angola's seat in the United
Nations should no longer be vacant, the delegation of the
Party·State of Guinea takes this opportunity to pay a
well-deserved tribute to tIle Angolan people, who have
WiOUght their own freedom. Tha Guinean delegation
includes in' this tribute all the progressive Govemments and
organizations which have always given unconditional support to MPLA, because, without the courage and determi·
nation of the Angolan people, mobilized by MPLA, without
tIle firmness of the African States wholly committed to tIle
stubborn defence of the higher interests of Africs, and
7 Frente Nacional para a Liberta<;ao de Angola.
8 UniilÓ Nacional para a Independencia Total de Angola.

iIl

----_"!II!II

- - ... -----~77-I!i':.::O=--- ......

without the invaluable contribution of certaln fclendly
countries moved by the most selOess spirit of lntematlo·
nalism, such as Cuba and the Soviet Union, there can be no
doubt that the imperialists would have added a striking
victory to tIleir sinlster score. It follows that the wealth of
experienee accumulated through the independence of
Angola should enable us to speed the liberation of southem
Africa as well, for the intentlon of the imperialist conspiro
acy was nothing less than to make Angola and Mozambique
a neo·colonialist cardan sanitaire to protect tIle minority
racist regimes of South Africa and Rhodesia, in defence of
the interests of international imperialismo
116. On tIlis day, which will go down in history, fighting
Africa feels itself once again honoured in evoking the
memory of the martyrs of Benguela, of Lobito and of
Luambo, and in applauding tIle victory of Angola.
117. After Angola it will be the turn of southem Africa.
The struggle continues.
118. Mr. MONDJO (Congo) (interpretation {rom French):
Among the countries of Africa which openly declared tIleir
alliance with the People's Republic of Angola, the People's
Republic of the Congo enjoys pride of place. Between our
two countries, our two peoples and our two Heads of State
tIlere is such an affinity that tIle victory of MPLA and tIle
independence of Angola have been perceived by the people
of tIle Congo as a whole as tIleir own victory, their own
independence. The same is true today when tIle People's
Republic of Angola has officially made its brilliant entry
into the United Nations.
119. To those who maliciously wonder about tIle reasons
for such entllusiasm, we would reply that the Congo sees in
Angola tIle image of its own qualities: hated and despised
by imperialism and colonialism, it has tIle will to defend a
dearly bought independence and the determination to move
forward with a view to promoting general development
once peace and security have been restored.
120. The struggle against imperialism, colonialism and
neo-colonialism is a major component of tIle national
policy of tIle People's Republic of the Congo, which regards
the Angolan people's recent victory over the coalition of
puppet, Fascist and racial-imperialist forces as a historie
event of major importance.
121. Moreover, in the message he addressed to llis counter·
part, the Head of State of tIle People's Republic of Angola,
on the occasion of the first anniversary of the independence
of tIlat fraternal country, the President of tIle People's
Republic of the Congo, Comrade Marien Ngouabi, hailed
once again tIle constancy with which the Angolan people
had manifested their support for those who were still
fighting for their freedom from the colonialist and racist
yoke, and expressed rus great admiration for the decisive
contribution made by the Angolan people to the great work
of liberation of the oppressed peoples.
122. In truth, tIle relations between the peoples of the
Congo and Angola do not date from today. To know how
tIlese two peoples have been nourished by tIle highest ideals
we must neeessarily look into the past and evoke a part of
tIleir common history, a period from the life of the ancient

'!!"'I"'--------~,.....----------------II_~

./.

,:l
¡

~~

BII!!!!IIIIlIIlIllllllllllllll~~"""IIIII!IIIIIIIIIIJIIIII!lI!III!IIIIIlIlIIIIIII~'"
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ._if.

...

84th meeting - 1 Daetmber 1976

clendly
mation be no
triking
Dlth of
nce of
mthem
onspirmbique
inority
lDCe of

fJghting
ng the
and of

Africa.

rellcJz):

ld their
'eople's
len our
)f State
and the
people
lir own
'eople's
t entry
reasons
sees in
lespised
efend a
,omove
opment

I

¡ro and

¡ational
regards
ltion of
historie
:ounterAngola,
mdence
~eople's

, hailed
people
lre still
d raeist
decisive
atwork

Kingdom of the Congo, which, of course, included a large
part of Angola.
123. In his "History of African Civilization", Frobenius,
who contributed much to the destruction of the mistaken
mcist arguments of Gobineau conceming the supposed
superiorlty of Westem civilization over that of the so-ca11ed
"primitive" peoples, writes:
"At the end of the Middle Ages, the first European
navigators [discovered], in the Kingdom of the Congo, a
teeming mass of people dressed in 'silk' and 'velvet'; great
States, well-ordered down to the smallest details; powerful sovereigns and opulent industries. They were civilized to the very marrow of their bones! "9
Further on, the German ethnologist writes:
" ... vi11ages, the main streets of which were lined on
each side for miles by four rows of palm trees, and the
dwellings of which, each decorated in a charming manner,
were so many works of arto Every man carried elaborate
weapons of iron or copper, with inlaid blades, and with
handles covered in snakeskin. Everywhere there were
velvet and silk materials. Every cup, every pipe, every
spoon, was a work of art fu11y worthy of comparison with
the creations of the European Roman style... the
manners, the moral law of the whole people, from the
smallest child to the oldest man... were marked by
dignity and grace ..."10
124. What remains, in our day, of that picture with all its
many a~cts, rangin~ from power to glory, from charm
to dignity, from harmony to peace? The reply imposed by
the verdict of history is that slavery, colonialism and
capitalist exploitation devoured everything.
125. However, they were unable to prevent the birth of
the revolutionary conscience of the desc p ndants of the
ancient Kingdom of the Congo, who are increasingly
fascinated by the ancient heroism.
126. The poot Agostinho Neto and the researcher Théophile Obenga, for example, seem to have found in their
works the ways by which one may reach down to the roots
of that civilization.
127. While the poet Agostinho Neto, in a song entitled
"The Raising of the Colours", anticipates his revolutionary
action and almost forete11s Angola's adrnission to the
United Nations, Théophile Obenga, in his "Pre-colonial
Central Africa",' 1 goes right back to the earJiest times and
describes with strict accuracy the successive phases in the
everyday Jife of the ancient Kingdom of the Congo. If he
pores over that past and the g1orious exploits of the time in
this way, jt is by no means in arder to lu11 himself with
dreams of sorne kind of paradise lost, but rather to gain full
possession of them so as better to use them in his relations
with the presento

owhow
st ideals
lpart of
ancient

9 Uo Frobenius, Histoire de la civilisation africaine, 3rd ed.
(Paris, Gallimard. 1952), p. 14.
10 Ibid.• p.lS.
11 Théophile Obenga, Afrique central précoloniale: documents
d'histoire vivante (Paris, Présence africaine. 1974).

________I

..- - -..

i of the

1283

128. In the rnind of the people, the poet is defined as a
dreamer. This is not the case with Agostinho Neto, who
became a man of acUon. To recover the freedom and
dignity of his counby had become for him IÍD historieal
imperative. Bom out of the ashes of eolonialist and
capitalist exploitation, and at fue price ofthe blood ofits best
sons, the People's Republic of Angola is therefore necessarily the antithesis of all imperialist forces of oppression.
129. And it is the MPLA of President Agostinho Neto
which, over the years, has been able to galvanize, channel
and direct the revolutionary struggle of the Angolan people.
It was able to rise to the height of that historie act by
proclaiming, under fire from a coalition of puppet and
imperialist-Fascist forces, the legal independence of Angola
and by laying down, even now, the objective bases for true
independence.
130. As I have tried to show, the total support of the
People's Republic of the Congo for the People's Republic
of Angola is not lirnited either to a time or to specific
circumstances. It has its roots in the depths of the history of
our two peoples, which share the same destiny. Moreover,
for ayear now, urged on by Presidents Marien' Ngouabi and
Agostinho Neto, the People's Republics of the Congo and
Angola have embarked on the course of true co-operation
based on strict respect for the independence of each State.
131. It will thus be understood why Congo felt like a
dagger blow the veto cast against the adrnission of Angola
to membership in the United Nations, just as it will be
understood why it is today one of the first to greet with
exultant enthusiasm the solemn adrnission of the People's
Republic of Angola into the international community.
132. So much courage, so much daring, so much heroism
cannot ¡eave us indifferent. The extraordinary experience
of its leaders, who so magnificently led the Angolan people
to victory over a particularly harmful form of colonialism,
will surely contribute to the positive solution of the
problems facing our Organization.
133. For us it is a question of 'enriching the United
Nations with the different contributions of new Members,
and not of impoverishing it by ensuring the triumph of the
right of veto. Ideological, linguistic and cultural differences,
paradoxically, should be what makes the strength of the
United Nations, for without them it would be difficult for
us to seek, and especially to fmd, the elements for new
spiritual progress.
134. We warmly welcome the presence in this Assembly of
the first delegation of the People's Republic of Angola, led
by Comrade José Eduardo dos Santos, Deputy Prime
Minister.
135. The struggle continues. Imperialism wil1 not succeed.
136. Mr. VERRET (Haiti) (interpretation from French):
The Republic of Haiti could not have failed to support
draft resolution A/31/L.22 and Add.l, especially because
throughout our history we have consistently supported the
struggle of peoples for independence. Bound to Africa by
ties of blood and of history, the Republic ofHaiti is happy
and rejoices at the release of a sister Republic from the

----------I----------------••

\1l!!!I~~II!!!~~IIJ!IIiI'IIlF~~~~-

!!!!!!l• • • •

~.,."---.'\-~~.

L

1284

Genenl Auembly - Thirty·ftnt Scuion - Plenuy MOCItings

ebRins of colonialismo On the occasion of this h.~FPY event
for all peoples who love justice and liberty, the delegation
of Haiti extends to the Republlc of Angola aod to its
delegation present hero its sincere wishes for success, and
hopes that with its valuable contrlbution in various fields of
human endeavour it wl1l not fail to promote tIle work of
peace and progress which the United Nations pursues.
137. Mr. CHESSON (Liberia): Today, to the satisfaction
of a11 peace.loving peoples around the world, the news shall
go forth from tbis podium that once again in the history of
this great Organization, founded 31 years ago, the shackles
of colonialism and slavery of the peoples of Africa have
been broken and destroyed; once again, a people of our
own kith and kin has been granted the fu1fl1ment of its
greatest aspiration-self-determination and freedom.
138. Liberia, one of the 10ng.freed nations of Africa and a
constant supporter of se1f-determination and freedom for
all the peoples of this one world, happily rejoices with our
brothers and sisters of the People's Republic of Angola.
Liberia assures that great country and its people of its
support and continued co-operation.
139. May success and peace crown Angola's ilvery effort!
140. Mr. MUTUNGA (Kenya): It is a great joy for my
delegation to welcome the sister State of the People's
Republic of Angola to membership in our Organization. It
has been my Govemment's view that Angola should have
been admitted to the United Nations as soon as it became
independent. We all know why its admission was delayed,
and it is not my de1egation's intention to open a debate on
that matter on this happy occasion.

i

~.

I

1

141. The peoples of Angola and Kenya have had a long
common history; both our countries have waged bitter
struggles to dislodge the colonialists from our soll. The
brotherly bonds between our two peoples were amply
demonstrated during the consultative meetings held by
Angola's leaders in Kenya under the chairmanship of my
President. What my President stated then I wish to reiterate
now: Angola's independence is but one step towards the
total decolonization of our beleaguered continent. We
pledge ourselves to join hartds with our brothers in Angola
to work concertedly towards our ultimate goal of liberating
every inch of Africa from the yoke of colonialists. We are
confident that, with the admission of the People's Republic
of Angola, our Organization will have new ímpetus to push
for a just solution in the decolonization of the remaining
colonial pockets in southern Africa.
142. It is my delegation's earnest hope that, with the
admission of the People's Republic of Angola, the longdesired objective of universality of our Organization and
the admission of the oilier States which sti11 rernain outside
it will soon be achieved without much difficulty. We are
convinced that the admission of those States will gleaíly
enhance peace and make the Organization truly universal
and international.

1
1).1

I

143. In concluding this short statement, I should like once
again to welcome the People's Republic of Angola to
membership in our Organization and to aswre it of our full
co-operation and support. I call on the other Member States

to extend their co.operation and render all possible
assistance to the People's Republic of Angola in its efforts
to reconstruct the country and rid itself of the effects of
colonization.
144. The PRESIDENT: I call on the Minister for Foreign
Affalrs of the People's Republic of Angola, His Excellency
Mr. José Eduardo dos Santos, to address the General
Assembly.
145. Mr. DOS SANTOS (Angola):12 Recalling here the
memory of our he roes who have fallen in the two wars of
nationa! liberation, we wish first, on behalf of the Angolan
people, their vanguard, MPLA, the People's Republic of
Angola and Comrade President Agostinho Neto, to express
our natural joy and revolutionary pride at this further
victory of being admitted as a Member of the United
Nations.
146. Permit me to expreso to you, Sir, OUT most sincere
congratulations on your election to the presidency of the
United Nations General Assembly.
147. We should like also to convey to the President ofothe
previous session our appreciation and admiration for the
way he discharged bis difficult mandate.
148. To the Secretary-General we address our greetings
:md sincere thanks for the interest and effort he has
devoted to the liberation of peoples and the special
endeavour he made with a view to the admission of the
People's Republic of Angola to membership in this Organization.
149. The Angolan people had been victims of colonialism
for almost 500 years, and for about 15 years, led by their
vanguard, the MPLA, they waged the longest armed struggle
for liberation that has taken place on the African continent.
150. Throughout those 15 years, many were the distinguished voices raised in this Assembly and in all the
United Nations specialized bodies and agencies in defence
of the Angolan people's legitimate aspiration to independence, freedom, peace and progress.
151. After the proclamation cf our independence and
when the admission of the Peopk ' Republic of Angola to
the United Nations was jeopardize by the ímperialists and
their direct or indirect collaborators, our young Republic
had already eamed the support of a large number of
Member countries of this Organization. To them we extend
our thanks.
152. Meanwhlle, we make very special mention here of all
the countries which, upholding the same ideological principies as those that guide the Angolan revolution, have long
given unconditional support to our struggle. To them we
express our most revolutionary greetings, our militant
solidarity and thi~ certainty: that the People's Republic of
Angola will continue to fulm its internationalist duties for
peace and for freedom.
153. For many years now imperialism has been oppressing
and exploiting the Angolan people, first through Portuguese
12 Mr. dos Santos spokc in Portuguese. The English version of his
statement was supplied by !he delegation.

~:

"'••...

._!lI!~! I _I__._IIII!I._III!IIIIIIIII!IIIIIIIlI!III!IIIIIIlIIII!!!III"-"'_
I !I
_" -_ _"-_""IIIIlIIJI.-""~""_--"''''-''''IIl'''I'lIllllll!ll----'''

1IIIIj'[

!lIII
__

all possible
I in its efforts
the effects of

lr for Foreign
lis Excellency
the General

lling here the
e two wars of
¡f the Angolan
¡ Republic of
:to, to express
t this further
lf the United

r most sincere
¡idency of the

resident oHhe
ration for the

our greetings
he has
i the special
Ilission of the
in this Organi·
~ffort

of colonialism
s, led by their
auned struggle
can continen 1.

were the disInd in all the
:ies in defence
n to indepen·

pendenee and
: of Angola to
nperialists and
lung Republic
le number of
lem we extend

tion here of all
eological prin·
tion, have long
. To them we
our militant
's Republic of
alist duties for

een oppressing
Igh Portuguese

.ish version of !lis

84th meeting - 1 December 1976

colonlalism and, more recently, through the intermediary
of Angolan traitors and invading regular !ll'mies and
mercenaries, with a view to establishing neo·colonialism in
Angola.
154. During the Angolan people's first liberation war, not
only did imperialism sustain the Portuguese colonial régime,
which carne to use arms from the countries of the Nortll
Atlantic Treaty Organization to exterminate our people,
bllt it also promoted the setting up of puppet groups, a
counter·revolutionary weapon to be used inside our
country.
155. MPLA was organized under difficult conditions, at a
time marked by a cruel colonialism, when forced labour,
the total denial of human rights and the plunder of our
wealth were the sole law and the only morality of the
oppressors.
156. Overcoming all difficulties, MPLA succeeded in
bringing together all truly nationalist forces and, labor·
iously, started the armed struggle against Portuguese colo·
nialism.
157. During that first long national war of liberation
started on 4 February 1961, thousands upon thousands of
compatriots perished, decimated by napalm, ruthlessly
massacred, tortured in colonialist prisons or tom to pieces
by counter·revolutionary bands in imperialist payo Not even
chemical warfare was overlooked by our enemies, who thus
subjected thousands and thousands of Angolans to hunger
and disease.
158. After the thwarting of its efforts to perpetuate
colonialism as the inteilTlediary for its in terests, imperialism
organized a vast plot to prevent the true liberation of the
Angolan people. Indeed, with utter disregard for the most
elementary principies of morality and legality, before and
even after the proclamation of the independent and
sovereign People's Republic of Angola, our country was
subject to invasions supported and perpetrated by United
Nations Member countries.
159. Imperialism, not satisfied with its invasion from our
northem border, reinforced its contingents and war matériel there, sent bands of mercenaries to our country and
invaded us in the south with Vorster's neo-Nazi and racist
army.
160. Those invasions of Angola from the north and south
were witnessed in silence by the majority. of countries
following our .liberation process. At no moment did the
United States and its satellites pro test against such flagrant
violations of intemational law and of our people's sover·
eignty.
161. Faced with the violence of the invasions, the People's
Republic of Angola had no hesitation in appealing for
internationalist soJidarity from friendIy and progressive
countries.
162. Thus, as a result of our request, carne the prompt
internationalist response of the majority of soeialist coun·
tries and of progressive African countries, the most out·
standing without any question being the d/'1cisive support of
the Soviet Union and the Republic of Cuba.

!

1285

163. In any event, in our proclamntion of independence
and our constitutionallaw, we define fue socialist countries
as our people's natural allies. This is why the Soviet and
Cuban help, as well as that oC other progressive countries
and organizations of the world, not only stems from the
ideologieal option of our revolution but is also part of the
inalienable exercise of our sovereignty.
164. And it is surprising that those who either directly or
indirectly plotted the invasion of our country should later
come and protest the presence in Angola of forces which, at
the request of our State, carne for the purpose of driving
out the invaders. We do not understand, therefore, why the
Ford/Kissinger administration invoked the presence of
Soviets and Cubans in our country as justification for
non·recognition of the People's Republic of Angola. As a
matter of fact, as regards the United States, that is a
country which still maintains armed forces precisely on
Cuban territory. Furthermore, it is a country which
occupied the territory and measured the people of Viet
Nam, a country which maintains armed forces in various
independent countries, including the Federal Republic of
Germany, and a country which has its ~mned forces, on
land and sea, in so many parts of the world... 1 the name of
what morality and what right can imperialism challenge
internationalist help for the People's Republic of Angola
against invaders which it itself supported?
165. The Angolan people have always shown their admi·
ration for the Chinese revolution. They do not yet
understand how a soeialist country, which China says it is,
can support puppet groups who wanted to counter our
people's liberation and who still want to attack OUI'
independence. AIso incomprehensible is China's continued
attitude of open opposition to the People's Republic of
Angola. The unnatural alliance between the People's
Republic of China and imperialism and South African
racism assumed its most eloquent form in the fact that
mercenaries paid in American dollars who were captured by
the People's Armed Forces for the Liberation of Angola,
were killing Angolan people with Chinese weapons, made
by the Chinese proletariat.
166. As we have been victims of the intentions of sorne
and the lack of understanding of others, it is important to
refer herl'! to the principies which guide the foreign policy
of our State.
167. On 11 November 1975, in the procIamation of our
independence, it was reaffirmed that the sovereign People's
Republic of Angola will maintain diplomatic relations with
all countri.es in the world, on the basis of the principies of
mutual respect for national sovereignty, non-interference in
the internal affairs of each State, respect for territorial
integrity, non-aggression, equality, reciprocal advantage and
peaceful coexistence.
168. And if we defend and fulfIl those universally
accepted principies, we are entitled to demand of others
that they fulfIl them in relation to our country.
169. The foreign policy of the People's Republic of
Angola is founded on the principies of non-alignment,
which we have fol1owed since the founding of MPLA. It is
non·alignment seen as active and operative~ that is, based on

----------...=-=_....,....-=zc::='!""''*;;;¡.iF-..'"'';-::;.:c;Ef''::_===~.~~-.::••.".-:'--.,"""'!ll!!I,:>;<:~ -~."
'\
-..

,.(.'

~.

!,'

,"

_.

1';

General Aucll'lbly - Thirty·fint SeaIon -I'kinuy Meetifty,r.

1286

soUdarity with aU oppressed peoples of the world, and the
stnlggle against colonialism, neo-coloniaUsm and impe.
rialisrn, with a view to full self·determination and indepen.
dence.
170. We emphasize, for obvious reasons, arUcle 16 of our
constitutionallaw, which states:
"The People's Republic of Angola shall not join any
international military organization, nor shall it allow the
installation of foreigo military bases on its national
territory."
171. In the text of the Proclamation of lndependence,
thanks are expressed to all the African peoples and
countries that were at our side, to the socialist countries, to
the Portuguese revolutionary forces and to the progressive
organizations and Govemments in Western countries which
were able to understand and support the Angolan people's
struggle.
172. In this way it is clear that we make a distinction
between capitalist States which were and are able to
understand our struggle and those which tolerate, promote,
assist or practise a policy of direct or indirect aggression
against the People's Republic of Angola.
173. Also clearly expressed in the Proclamation and in the
constitutional law is our adhesion to the principIes of the
charter of OAU and of the Charter of the United Nations.
174. Guaranteeing here and now our scrupulous fulfl1ment
of the above principIes, we express the hope that the
historic mistakes committed against our peopt::: and State
by sorne countries will be repaired in the future in the name
of peaee and the progress of mankind, because those are the
values pursued by the Angolan revolution.
175. Our adrnission to the United Nations is not just a
victory of the Angolan people; it is a victory of alI peoples
who 10ve peace and freedom, a victory of aH countries and
progressive forces that supported our struggIe.
176. Yet it is an incomplete victory, because we are not at
the same time celebrating the admission to the United
Nations of the glorious Socialist Republic of Viet Nam.
177. It has been once again demonstrated that the veto

.-------------

of Angola, and also condemned the abuse of the right of
veto by the United States.
180. Thus the Co,uneil of Ministers of OAU, meeting in
Port Louis, Mauritius, at its twenty·seventh ordinary
session, stated, among other considerations legitimiZing the
claim of the People's Republic of Angola to United Nations
membership, that.:
" ... the veto of the United States of America against the
adrnission of the People's Republic of Angola to the
United Nations constitu tes a violation of the spirit of the
UN Charter and complete disregard for the principIe of
universality thus constituting a challenge to a1l OAU
member ~:itates". {See A/31/196 and Corr.l, annex,
reso/ution CM/Res.492 (XXVIII)./
In its conclusions, it stated, among other things, that it:

"Strong/y condemns the anachronistic stand taken by
the United States of America which flouts the funda·
mental principIes of international law as reflected by the
inadmissibility of interference in the internal affairs of
the People's Republic of Angola". {!bid./
181. Also, at the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non·Aligned Countries, held in Colombo
from 16 to 19 August 1976, a resolution was drawn up on
Angola's request for admission to membership in the
United Nations.
182. The United States of America was condemned in that
resolution, the veto being regarded as an outraga and a
violatiop. of the United Nations Charter and of the principIe
of universalitv, as welI as an affront to all member States of
the non.align~d movement. Nevertheless, the United States
opposed its voice to that of the international community
and, in a gesture of inadmissible abuse of power contrary to
and in violation of the spirit of the United Nations Charter,
sought of its own accord to impede the entry of the
People's Republic of Angola into this Organization.
183. And now, out of mere captice, the United States has
decided to veto the admission of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam as a way of opposing the legitimate rights of a
people who have suffered in their flesh every form of
aggression and violation perpetrated by the very country
which now exercises the right of veto.

has been exercised in this Organization more as a form of

'1

abuse of power than as a right. For this reason, we also
regard the veto as anachronistic and we take the same
position as those who are calling for an end to that
prerogative, which is, in any event, contrary to the principIe
of the equality of States and Members of this Organization.
As regards the People's Republic of Angola, the use
178.
of the veto by the United States W2S aboye aH an insult to
the international community, to OAU and to the non·
aligned movement. The People's Republic of Angola was, in
fact, already a member of those two organizations, which
incorporate a substantial number of countries in the world.
179. At the sa.-ne time, both OAU and the non-aligned
countries showed their unconditional support for the
admission to the United Nations of the People's Republic

--......iIIi----"JI'J'==:::O--_.....

..,-

"!II!!

- -_ _~---..., - .

184. This is yet another reason why we consider it
inadrnissible that there should still be anyone within the
internationaI community who can sit by with folded arms
when faced with the abuse of the veto by a courltry which,
in the recent past, was also the oppressor of the Vietnamese
people.
185. The Angolan people's victOlY over imperialism and
its agents has had the practical effect of increasing the area
of freedom and peace in the worId. But imperialism cannot
accept the fact of each people choosing its own destiny by
itself and for itself. Hence it is still seeking, at all costs, to
impede the irreversible advance of the Angdan revolution.
Thus the threats and provocations against the People's
Republic of Angola continue; close to our country's
northern and sou thern borders, bases of puppet armies and

_::-¡.

~_. .- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

.-

, .:
~"'.'~

.

-

...

84th meeting - 1 December 1976

)use of the right of

f OAU, meeting in
y·seventh ordinary
ions legitimiZing the
a to United Nations

America against the
of Angola to the
I of the spirit of the
for the principIe of
llenge to all OAU
/Id Corr.1, annex,

. things, that it:

Itic stand taken by
flouts the funda·
as reflected by the
internal affairs of

mercenaries are agaln being installed and violations of our
territory are still taking place here and there, by the South
African regular army among others.
186. Furthermore, the myth of the Cape route is stiU
being insisted on, and the liberation of the peoples of
southem Africa is being demagogically but ludicruously
misrepresented as a threat to world peace.
187. Seeking to weaken the liberation struggles of the still
oppressed peoples and knowing that the nationalists will
pursue the struggle un ti! final victory, the imperialists are
trying to deceive· revolu tionaries with a purported policy of
dialogue.
188. But meanwhile they continue direct or indirect
support for the Sallsbury and Pretoria régimes. And it must
be asked here if it is by supplying armaments and nuclear
reactors to the racist minorities in South Africa and
so-called Khodesia that one defends the legitimacy of the
.majorities.

1287

manded here of South Africa lit the meeting on 26 March
1976,13 and this request \Vas the subject of a recomo
mendation. But the fact is that Sou.th Afri~a conti~ue~, as it
has been doihg for many years 111 relation to lÍs illegal
occupation of Namibia, to make a dt'lld letter. not only of
the principIes that guide the United 1\1 ;tions but also of any
resolution or recommendation formulated here.
196. The Angolan people reiterate their demand in respect
of the due reparations to be made by South Africa and
hope that the Assembly will show solidarity with our claim,
once again condemning the execrable Vorster régime which,
in addition to oppressing, massacring and plunderin~ the
peoples of South Afríea and Namibia, wished and still
wishes to export the disgrace of our times to our free,
independent and sovereign Angolan land.
197. The material damage suffered as a result of the South
African invasion has already been estimated at a minimum
of $6.7 billion.

I

d.¡

189. Imperialism sees in the southem part of our con·
tinent a kind of reserve permitting it to pursue oppression
and exploitation.

. Heads of State or
, held in Colombo
In was drawn up on
lembership in the

190. The plunder of our resources, with special emphasis
on raw materials for military purposes, and the setting up
of military bases to facilitate the policing of the world are
decisive factors which explain the tragic situation now
being experienced in southern Africa.

condemned in that
an outraga and a
md of the principie
II member States of
, the United States
aUonal community
, power contrary to
~d Nations Charter,
the entry of the

191. After the independence of Angola and Mozambique
and the consequent reduction of imperialist zones of
influence, together with the redoubled efforts of the
patriots of Namibia, Zimbabwe and South Africa, the
United States of America and South Africa, basing themselves on the fiction of an imminent danger, threw
themselves into the adventure of creating a South Atlantic
pact and drawing Latin American countries into it. We wish
to have it dearly on record that this is an avowedly
offensive military pact against southern Africa and there·
fore a threat to world peace, and should be vehementIy
condemned by all peace·loving peoples.

~anization.

e United States has
Icialist Republic of
litimate rights of a
lsh every form of
, the very country

y we consider it
anyone within the
r with folded arms
ya country which,
of the Vietnamese

lr imperialism and
increasing the area
imperialism cannot
its own destiny by
ing, at all costs, to
.ng01an revolution.
ainst the People's
to our country's
puppet armies and

192. As is well known, the invasion we suffered from the
north and south by regular armies, puppet movements and
mercenary bands caused a drain on our country's economic
activity.
193. The South African invasion alone destroyed a large
number of bridges which are important for distribution
networks of essential goods and ruined a large part of our
stock of trucks, while the rest were stolen and taken across
the border. The same happened to our fishing fleet.
194. Nor did factories, public institutions and so forth
escape the bloody tide of Vorster's army, which, in the
depths of despnir and defeat, transformed its flight into a
kind of re'l'enge against our people. The wave of crimes did
not fnil to inc1ude the extermination of thousands upon
thousands of head of cattle whenever it was not possible for
the enemy to take them across the border.
195. Due compensation for the material damage caused to
the People's Republic of Angola has already been de·

198. As world opinion is aware, our country and people
also suffered invasion by bands of mercenaries who, as has
been more than praved today, spread de:ith and destruction
and were engaged and paid by imperialismo
199. Considering the current phenomenon ofthe employ.
ment of mercenaries and the absolute necessity to punish
all future manifestations of it, we think that the draft
Luanda convention on the menace of mercenaries to Africa,
calling for the prevention and suppression of this practice,
which was drawn up by a commission of inquiry made up
of eminent jurists and intellectuals fram every continent
and which has already been adopted by OAU and \.he
non·alignment movement, merits due consideration and
subsequent adoption by all international bodies.
200. But despite all difficulties, in the 12 months of
independence, sorne of them lived in war, our people, our
revolutionary vanguard, MPLA, and the Government of the
People's Republic of Angola, have been working intensively
and selflessly to eliminate the aftermath of war and bliJ1d
the foundations of a new society. And in this frrst take-off
for national reconstruction the reason for our victory has
once again been proved: MPLA's identification with the
masses of the people. Indeed, in every province nf the
country the people are engaging in the tasks of national
reGonstruction through voluntary work campaigns; agriculture is starting to be rebom out of chaos, and the same is
true of industry, a sector which was virtual1y pa.ralysed at
the time of independence.
201. Having very recen tly passed our first year of indepen·
dence, we take pride in having placed in our pev2i·s hands
health and education which, now nationaliZed, have be·
come free of charge. Banking has been nationalized. Large
agricultural and industrial units abandoned by the colonialists have also been nationalized.
202. The people's power law having been promulgated, it
has already started to be P'lt into effect, so t~at power may
indeed be exercised by the worker and \ass.
13 See Official Records of the Security
1900th meeting.

--------------~

st Year.

:es

.',-

~

"

m.,_
'\

_~-

.e-

Gcncnl AJscmbly - Thirty·fIot Sealon - Plenuy Mcetin¡s

1288

203. Our glorious anned forces have also undergone
transfonnations and, from the guerrilla army that t.i.ey were
less than ayear ago, they have now become a J'')gular force,
without, however, losing their revolutlonary characteristics
as a people's anny existing to defend the people's interests.
204. To the losses suffered during the first liberation war
must now be added ilie incalculable damage caused by the
imperialist invasion. Today the Angolan people are waging
their third strllggle-pe'ltapS the most difficult one-which
is the struggle for national reconstructicn.

205. Within the context of a practically destroyed economy, boycotted by certain capitalist countries and demographically weakened by the death of a large number of
compatriots, among them highly vU:uable cadres, we pro·
claimed independence and started national reconstruction.
We therefore eount on the help of the intemational
community and the United Nations and submit ror the
consideration of this Assembly the setting up of an
intemationaJ national reconstruction fund amounting to
$300 million which, we hope, will be welI received among
countries Members of this Organization.
206. During the fIrst liberation war, thousands of
Angolans found exile the only way to flee from colonial
tyranny. In the second liberation war, too, many Angolans
leffthe country, a large number of iliem because they were
forced to do so by the puppets or because they were taken
in by their demagoguery. The present number of refugees,
who are now speeding up their retum to our liberated
country, is about 1 million. Our Govemment, in aceordance
with the limited means at its disposal, has been planning the
requisite facilities for the retum of such. a large number of
compatriots. We are a1ready starting to benefit from the
help of the Office of the United Natiolls High Cornmissioner for Refugees, a1though this help faUs very far short
of meeting our minimum needs.
207. The present intemational situation is characterized
by an appreciable change in the balance of forces in favour
of national liberati~n, peace, progrells, social justice and, in
particular, the ellinination of the exploitation of man by
man, and is conducive to the consolidation of détente on 8.
world·w~de seale, the elimination of the threat of war and
the progressive development of eonditions favouring dis·
armament-aIl of which are absolute necessities.
208. The progress aemeved in the field& just mentioned,
together with the gradual tendency to abolish all ma.nifestations of inequality, discrimination and exploitation in
intemational economic relations through the effeetive
estabiishment of a new world economk order, merits our
unequivocal adhesion ¡¡nd consequent support.
209. The People's Republic of Angola, conscious oí its
responsibilities before Africa and tlle world, cannot fail to
express from this intemational rostrum its total solidarity
with ihe oppressed peoples of the whole world and
particularIy with those still subject to the colonial yoke, as
in Namibia, Zimbabwe, South Africa, Djiúouti and Puerto
Rico.
210. We are especi""ly ccmcemed about Zimbabwe, where
the colonial Power is alToiding its responsibilities by looking

s-~

upon an ilIegal régime like that of Ian Smith as a valid
negotlator at tltil present talks taking place in Geneva.
Smith and his group are nothing but British settlers and the
Zimbabwean problem is a colonial question which can be
discussed only between the nntionalist forces and Great
Britain. The views upheld by the true nationalists of
Zimbabwe ilierefore deserve our unequivocal support.

::! ! l .• We also avail ourselves of the opportunity to con·
demn most vehemently the violations of the territory of the
People's Republic of Moznmbique by lan Smith's racist
anny.
212. With regard to Namibia, owing to its geographical
position, it represents for intemational imperialism not
only a source of wealth but also a support base for the
countless acts of aggression to which our young Republic
has been subject.
213. We 'here fore regard it as fundamental to give
unreserved support to the conditions stipulated by the
Souili West Africa People's Organization as a viable solution
to Namibia's self·determination and independence, al·
though we do not cease to consider that armed struggle is
stiII the soundest way of winning ilie legitimnte right of.the
peoples of southem Africa to independence in the face of
the obstinacy of the minority, racist and Facist Pretoria and
Salisbury régimes.
214. The South African régime, together with certain
well-known news agencies, is clamouring about thousands
of Angolan "refugees" in Namibia, hiding the real facts,
which are: the daily violations of our tenitory, tIle
infilt:ation of armed bands with officers and training
provided by mercenaries und South African lUmy officers,
the destruction of en tire villages near the border, and the
massacre and confinement of members of the defenceless
population, including mingled elements from the defunct
puppet groupings iliat went with the S(lut~ African anny
during the military counter·offensive launched by our
glorious anned forces and that are now transfonned into
and presented as "refugees".

215. In Souili Africa, where ilie people are still subjected
to the ignominious apartheid system, the struggle is
assuming new prospects and proportions, after the bloody
events in Soweto. The South African people, directed and
guided by their legitimate representative, the African
National Congress of South Afriea, will know how to
destroy the current régime, the last bastion of racism and
fascism on our continent.

216. Thus we once again affinn our unconditional support
for and our solidarity as militants with the struggle of the
peoples of Zimbabwe, Namibia and Souili Africa for their
ir:dependence.
217. Within this context of tIle liberation of peoples, we
do not wish to fail clea,'ly to rcaffirm: our militant
solka.-ity wiili the fighting people of East Timor, under the
co: ' 'lr t il'sdersmp of their vanguard, FRETILIN,' 4 fighting
w':pons in hand in defence 'of the Democratic Republic of
;:as~ T~mor. invaded by foreign regular forces; our uncondi·
14 Frenltl Revolucionária de Timor Leste Independente.

.>

tioHal

bd by
teaito
indep
heroil:
zionis1
rights,
Organ
this c(
of I&r'
suppo
sovere
Como
the FI
Mayal
milita!
ofKo
territo
suppa
for t
darity
agains
Puert
mate
ilIegall
progre
the a
North
Chilea
which
and as
people
policy

218.
waged

.84th meeting - 1 December 1976

tional SllppOrt for the heroic struggle of the Saharan peop!e,
h:d by the Frente Polisario, against tlle occllpation of their
tenitory and for their right to self·detennination and
independence; our llnreserved solidarity with the just and
he ro il: struggle of the Arab people of Palestine against
zionism and for the restoration of their inalienable national
rights, andel' the leadership of tht: Palestine Liberation
Organization, their sole legitimat~ representative. And in
this connexion we reitera te our demand for the withdrawal
of I&raeli forces from the occupied AraD lands; our total
support fm the safeguarding of the unity and national
sovereignty and territorhl integrity of the Republic of the
Comoros, which is c1early threatened by the manoeuvres of
the French Government aimed at separating the island of
Mayotte from the territory of the Comoros as a whole; our
militant solidarity with the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea in its legitimate struggle for the reunification of its
territory, without any foreign interference; our unlimited
support for the struggle of the people of the Somali Coast
for their right to independence; our unconditional solio
darity with the struggle of the Latin American peoples
against neo-colonialism and imperialism and, in particular,
Puerto Rico's struggle for independence, Panama's legitimate rig'lt to achieve total sovereignty over its Canal
il\ega1ly occupied by the United States, the struggle of the
progressive Governments of Guyana and Jamaica against
the aggressive campaigns of destabilization organized by
North American imperialism, and the just st,'uggle of the
Chilean people against Pinochet's criminal Fascist junta,
which is vi.olating with impunity the most elementary rights
and aspirations of Chileans; and our support for the Cypriot
people in the defence of their ~erritoria! intcgrity and their
policy of non-alignment.

1289

peace in southern Africa and the "'orld. We therefore feel
proud to be able to reaffirm in this Assembly that Angola,
because it is a factor for peace, wUl be !1nsparing in its
efforts, together with other States Members of the United
Nations, to seek to eliminate the sources of tension which
still exist in the world and particularly in Africa.
219. The glorious People's Armed Forces for the Libera·
tion of Angola will remain vigilant against a1l violations of
our borders, ready to crush any new imperialist adventures
aimed at hampering the consolidation of our independence.
The armed forces will never direct their efforts outside our
national territory. On the contrary, they will remain at the
service of our people, natioaa! reconstruction and peace.
220. We must express thanks here for the great regar',!
shown for the delegation of the People's Republic of
Angola on this historic day for our people and our country.
221. We are living at a time when the international scene is
characterized by the advance of the progressive forces and
desperate imperialist attempts to halt the march of history.
The Angolan people, MPLA and the People's Republic of
Angoh solemnly reiterate from this rostrum-on this first
day of December, Angolan Pioneer's Day, the day of those
who will continue our revolution-the intention to fight
alongside the other peoples and progressive countries of the
world against the exploitation of man by man and for
freedom and peace.
222. It is not without reason, therefore, that we end with
our people's watchwords: the struggle continues; victory is
certain.

218. For the Angolan people, the t\Vo liberation wars they
waged were in thcmselves an important contribution to

----.J-.--------------------------------

The meeting rose al 1.40 p.m.

""'=_lIlI='=-""=;¡¡;_~~..,..
•..,,,.""~=,...\--~
..~-.,..\-l':~-~- --~.-
