S/PV.7253

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7253rd meeting

Thursday, 28 August 2014, 2 p.m.
New York

President:

Sir Mark Lyall Grant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Bliss
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Lamek
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Maes
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Ms. Power

Agenda
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2014/136)

14-51949 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1451949*

Ukraine

S/PV.7253

The meeting was called to order at 2.00 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2014/136)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Feltman.
Mr. Feltman: Once more, we meet today amid
reports of a dangerous escalation of the crisis in Ukraine.
The 26 August official meeting between President
Putin and President Poroshenko, as well as a round of
multilateral talks, have quickly been overshadowed by
alarming new reports of intensified fighting in southeastern Ukraine.
This morning, Ukrainian President Poroshenko
asked the world “to pay attention to the sharply
worsening situation in Ukraine”. We are here because
we are paying attention, but we must also find a
constructive way to urgently address the crisis, the
implications of which go far beyond Ukraine and the
region.
Illegal armed groups operating in the Donetsk
region have reportedly intensified their activities over
the past two days, spreading violence along Ukraine’s
southern coast in the direction of the key strategic port
of Mariupol. It has further been reported that several
small towns and villages in the area are now in the
midst of heavy fighting, while the town of Novoazovsk
has been seized by the armed groups. The southward
spread of fighting, along the border with the Russian
Federation and the Sea of Azov, marks a dangerous
escalation in the conflict. The battle for Luhansk
continues, and hostilities in Donetsk in several key
strategic areas have been spreading.

2/16

28/08/2014

We cannot ignore the deeply alarming reports
of Russian military involvement in this new wave of
escalation. If confirmed, it would constitute a direct
contravention of international law and of the Charter
of the United Nations. The United Nations has no
independent means of verifying that information, and
the Russian Federation has staunchly rejected those
reports.
Today we have been in touch with Ambassador
Apakan, head of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring
Mission. He informed us that there is currently no
Special Monitoring Mission presence in Mariupol and
Novoazosk, although the OSCE is in the process of
deploying a team to those areas. That will be critical
as we seek factual information as to what precisely is
unfolding on the ground.
The situation on and around the border between
Ukraine and the Russian Federation is a particular
concern and remains a key obstacle to the de-escalation
of the situation on the ground, as arms and heavy
weaponry reportedly continue to flow unabated
into Ukraine from Russia. There is an urgent need
to ensure a secure border between the two countries
with international verification, as discussed in the
Minsk talks. In that regard, we take note of the recent
statement made by President Poroshenko that the first
bilateral consultations between the border guards of
Ukraine and the Russian Federation is scheduled for
Saturday, 30 August.
It is also critical that the elections announced for
26 October can take place throughout Ukraine and
become a unifying and reconciliatory mechanism that
will ensure that people throughout the country feel
represented in Kyiv.
Let me from quote
statement of earlier today:

the

Secretary-General’s

“The international community cannot allow the
situation to escalate further, nor can a continuation
be allowed of the violence and destruction that the
conflict has wrought in eastern Ukraine”.
The Secretary-General notes the recent multilateral
talks in Minsk on 26 August, as well as the first official
meeting between the Presidents of Ukraine and Russia.
He calls for continuity of those talks, with a view to
forging a peaceful way out of the conflict, based on
President Poroshenko’s peace plan. All must do their

14-51949

28/08/2014

Ukraine

part to contribute to the peaceful resolution of this
conflict, in a manner that upholds Ukraine’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity.
We have to redouble our efforts to resolve the
conflict in Ukraine. Lives have to be saved. Peace in
Ukraine means peace in the region and beyond.
The Secretary-General remains committed to
using his good offices to help resolve this crisis. We
will keep the Council informed of the collective efforts
of the Organization to help the Ukrainian people and
Government restore peace and stability to their country.
Last week, the Secretary-General sent me to
Kyiv to consult with Ukrainian officials on the way
forward. Under-Secretary-General Valerie Amos,
whose visit overlapped with mine, discussed how
to bolster humanitarian efforts. In her field visit to
eastern Ukraine, she reported on impressive efforts by
the Ukrainian authorities to restore normalcy in areas
regained by the Government from the armed groups.
Currently, Assistant Secretary-General for Human
Rights Ivan Šimonović is in Ukraine, and the United
Nations country team remains engaged in working
with Ukrainian counterparts on humanitarian and
development issues. And we continue to coordinate
with other international partners, including the OSCE
and the Netherlands, on the aftermath of the downing
of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17.
But the immediate focus must be to find ways
to reverse the dangerous escalation of the fighting
that has occurred over the past 48 hours and to move
quickly away from armed conflict and towards political
solutions and dialogue.
The President: I thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Ms. Murmokaité (Lithuania): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this urgent meeting.
Lithuania condemns in the strongest terms the
invasion of Ukraine’s territory by the armed forces of
the Russian Federation as an open and blatant violation
of Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity and a serious blow to peace, security and
stability across the entire region and well beyond.
For months we have watched countless violations
of Ukraine’s unity and territorial integrity — first
Crimea’s annexation, then the war initiated by Russiansupported fringe separatist groups in eastern Ukraine,

S/PV.7253

then provocative manipulations of humanitarian aid
with semi-empty humanitarian trucks, then soldiers
lost on the other side of the border and now Russian
forces on Ukraine’s sovereign territory.
Within the past day, as reported, troops from the
Russian 98th Guards Airborn Division from Ivanovo
have taken over the Ukrainian city of Novoazovsk. New,
previously safe areas of Ukraine have been affected,
expanding the zone of conflict. “There are active
soldiers fighting among us who preferred to spend
their vacation not on the beach, but with us, among
their brothers, who are fighting for their freedom”,
says Aleksandr Zakharchenko, a rebel commander and
the self-proclaimed prime minister of a non-existent
Donetsk People’s Republic, boasting in an interview
on Russian State-run television, adding that there were
some 3,000 to 4,000 Russians among the separatists
ranks.
A member of the Russian President’s advisory
council on human rights, Ella Polyakova, said on
Thursday that she believed Russia was carrying out an
invasion of Ukraine. “When masses of people, under
commanders’ orders, on tanks, armoured personnel
carriers and using heavy weapons, are on the territory
of another country, across the border, I consider this an
invasion.”
Such actions by the Russian Federation are in
gross violation of the Charter of the United Nations, in
particular Article 2, paragraph 4, and other fundamental
principles — as we have said in the Council many times
before — and norms of international law, including
the Helsinki Final Act, the 1997 Treaty between
the Russian Federation and Ukraine on Friendship,
Cooperation and Partnership and the 1994 Budapest
Memorandum, whereby Ukraine renounced its
nuclear weapons in exchange for security guarantees.
Specifically, Budapest Memorandum articles 1 and
2 impose clear-cut obligations on Russia to respect
the political independence and territorial integrity of
Ukraine within its existing borders of 1994, and not
threaten it or use force by any means.
By now the Council has held close to 30 meetings
on Ukraine. We have heard numerous assurances by
Russia, here and elsewhere, regarding its desire for
a solution to the crisis in Ukraine. All of this time,
however, instead of seeking that solution, Russia has
been escalating the situation, as the flow of weapons,
equipment, mercenaries and now troops has continued
across Russia’s borders into the territory of Ukraine.

14-519493/16

S/PV.7253

Ukraine

Let us be clear: weapons do not fall into the
hands of rebels out of the blue sky. Had it not been
for Russia’s continuous, active support, the illegal
separatists — a clear minority in the region they claim
to represent — would have long ago run out of steam
and weaponry. Eastern Ukraine would have been
getting back on its feet, flows of internally displaced
persons (IDPs) would have stopped and reversed, and
no more lives would have been lost.
This conflict has already claimed too many lives.
Even moderate estimates show that over 2,000 have
been killed since April. The Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs has noted over 200,000 IDPs
and about 3.9 million people affected by conflict as of
15 August. People are dying in Ukraine because of the
criminal acts carried out by the illegal separatists and
their Russian supporters. Soldiers who are citizens of
Russia are also now losing their lives in this criminal
war against the State of Ukraine. As reported by
various sources, the mothers of Russian soldiers are
seeking answers regarding their children, at least four
hundred dead. Journalists who are trying to investigate
and report on soldiers’ graves in Pskov have been
threatened and harassed.
How many more lives need to be lost and people
maimed for Russia to realize its folly of aggression
against Ukraine? Ukraine does not need any more
Russian so-called humanitarian convoys. Ukraine does
not need more Russian tanks, troops or rearmament of
separatist bands. What Ukraine needs is a most urgent
return by Russia to the internationally accepted norms
of behaviour, compliance with international law and
respect for the Charter of the United Nations — for
which Russia, as a permanent member of the Council,
bears a special responsibility.
Lithuania calls on Russia, in the strongest of terms,
to return to its senses and to comply with the purposes
and principles of the Charter, immediately withdraw
its military forces, weaponry and equipment from the
sovereign territory of Ukraine, secure its borders, cease
the shelling of Ukraine from Russian territory, and
urgently end all support to the illegal armed separatist
groups in the east of Ukraine.
President Poroshenko’s peace plan must be
urgently implemented. As for the Geneva statement,
whose non-implementation is so often lamented by
Russia, that statement, as well as any ceasefire, must
be implemented by all sides, including the illegal
separatists and including Russia itself. Anything less
4/16

28/08/2014

than that is equivalent to a cynical demand for Ukraine’s
unconditional surrender. Like any sovereign Member
of the United Nations, Ukraine has the right to defend
itself, as per Article 51 of the Charter of the United
Nations. That right cannot be taken by anyone.
For too long now we have watched Russia’s creeping
attack against Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity. And because it was happening one step at a
time, our response has been like that of the proverbial
frog in boiling water.
Once international laws been brazenly broken, as
they are vis-à-vis Ukraine, it would be naïve to think
that such disregard for international norms of behaviour
will stop at that and will not creep even further. Are we
really ready to take such risks?
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I too would
like to thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman for his briefing.
The information coming to the Council from the
ground is quite disturbing. The actions carried out by
the separatists and the intensification of fighting in
urban areas have brought about serious humanitarian
consequences. Today we call upon all parties for
restraint, to protect the civilian population and to
respect international humanitarian law, bearing in mind
the hundreds of thousands of terrorized and displaced
persons.
Russia’s support for the separatists, in violation
of Ukraine’s territorial integrity, is inadmissible. The
presence of Russian soldiers on Ukrainian territory and
their direct participation alongside separatists in the
taking of lives in Novoazovsk must not be tolerated.
As the President of the French Republic recalled this
morning, Russia must respect Ukraine’s sovereignty; it
must halt its support to the separatists and call on them
to accept a bilateral ceasefire. That is the framework
in which a lasting political settlement must be sought,
but Moscow must also agree to de-escalation measures.
That presupposes the immediate halting of the delivery
of military materiel to the separatists. It also assumes
control along the Russian-Ukrainian border. On those
issues we expect signs from Russia that will finally
enable us to engage in a serious dialogue that benefits
everyone. The prolongation or escalation of the conflict
is not in the interests of Ukraine or Russia or the
international community.
Although the face-to-face meeting in Minsk
between Mr. Poroshenko and Mr. Putin on 26 August
led to few concrete results, it was a positive step in
14-51949

28/08/2014

Ukraine

that it allowed for direct contacts between the two
Presidents, after the 6 June meeting in Benouville.
The Ukrainian crisis is one of the worst crises in
Europe since the end of the Cold War. Our objective is
to ultimately achieve a lasting political solution to this
crisis, which has lasted for far too long. As long as Russia
pursues escalation, it will not take the opportunity to
resume political dialogue. We will therefore maintain
the pressure. That is why the European Union adopted
a substantial package of economic sanctions against
Russia on 29 July. The sanctions will be maintained
and will increase if the escalation continues. We hope it
will not reach that point, as that is not in the interest of
Russia or of anyone else.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): We extend
our thanks to Mr. Feltman for his briefing on the
situation in Ukraine.
Jordan expresses its deep concern about the
escalation of the crisis in Ukraine and the developing
situation. Jordan reaffirms the need for respect for
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and to
refrain from any provocative action that could threaten
peace and security. Such conduct will only complicate
matters in eastern Ukraine and negatively impact
international efforts towards peace. We call upon all
parties to refrain from using military means and to
cooperate in forging a peaceful solution based on the
Charter of the United Nations, the rules of international
law and all the efforts made in recent months, including
agreements signed between the two parties.
Access for humanitarian assistance is urgently
needed to enable the delivery of assistance by the
International Committee of the Red Cross and other
humanitarian relief organizations. Such assistance
must not be politicized. It must remain a humanitarian
task to help those in need.
We also reiterate the need to translate the outcome
of the Belarus summit into real progress in peace talks
and the release of all hostages. In that regard, we call
upon both parties, Russian and Ukrainian, to continue
talking and consulting. Hopefully, that will lead to
peace between the two parties. We also hope that peace
can be linked to political and economic interests for the
good of the peoples of both parties. Such cooperation
would enable the increased risks that threaten the
security of Russia and Ukraine and all of the region to
be eliminated.

S/PV.7253

Jordan calls upon the United Nations and all of the
parties to take steps in the correct direction to bolster
political dialogue between Russian and Ukraine, and
to build on the efforts made to protect the security
and stability of Ukraine, including establishing
mechanisms that would protect civilians and make
sure that assistance reaches those who need it. Jordan
believes that real peace between the two parties would
require political will on the part of all parties, as well
as goodwill and a realization that provocation, military
or otherwise, will not lead to peace, but only to more
escalation and a worsening of the situation.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey
Feltman for his briefing.
We are very concerned by the serious deterioration
in the situation in the areas controlled by the separatists
in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions resulting from
increased fighting in those regiоns. We are also very
concerned by reports of renewed fighting in the southeast of Ukraine near the city of Mariupol, during which
the separatists took control of the city of Novoazovsk.
For several days, there have been increasing
numbers of reports of incursions by Russian regular
troops and military vehicles into Ukrainian territory.
We are also concerned by reports of bombings of
Ukrainian territory from Russia and violations of
Ukrainian air space. All unilateral military action
by the Russian Federation in Ukraine, whatever the
pretext, including humanitarian, would constitute a
serious violation of international law and would be
viewed as such by the international community. We
cannot allow the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine to be violated.
The presence of Russian fighters among the
separatists, including among their leaders, is quite
unacceptable and must be condemned in the strongest
terms. That presence has been reported primarily in
various reports of the United Nations Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights on the situation
in Ukraine. It has also been recently recognized by
a separatist leader in Donetsk, who explained in a
Russian television interview that the latest success of
the separatists would not have been possible without
the help of Russian servicemen.
Today we are witnessing a new, dangerous stage
in the escalation of violence in Ukraine despite
official Russian proclamations calling for dialogue

14-519495/16

S/PV.7253

Ukraine

and de-escalation. We urge the Russian Federation to
immediately cease all forms of hostile activity along
the border, in particular the inflow of weapons, military
advisers and military staff into the conflict zone, and to
withdraw its forces from the border.
Given the ongoing deterioration on the ground, we
need to find a lasting political solution to the crisis.
That is becoming ever more urgent. In that regard,
we welcome the efforts undertaken by the SecretaryGeneral to promote dialogue between Ukraine and the
Russian Federation, in particular through the missions
of Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman to the
region.
The dialogue between Ukraine and Russia,
initiated in Geneva and Berlin, must be pursued in
order to restore the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Ukraine. We welcome the meeting held the day
before yesterday in Minsk between the Presidents
of the Russian Federation and Ukraine, in particular
in the presence of the European Union. We hope that
those talks will lead to concrete results, and especially
to the establishment of a road map based on President
Poroshenko’s peace plan. We hope that consultations
between Russia and Ukraine to ensure better control
of the borders will be held soon and that the parties’
discussions will lead to the release of prisoners held by
illegal armed groups.
The trilateral talks initiated by the Chairperson in
Office of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) are key in that regard, as is the
deployment of OSCE observers to the two border posts,
Gukovo and Donetsk, along the Russian-Ukrainian
border. We hope that the mandate of the mission will
be expanded so that it can contribute to the effective,
comprehensive and bilateral control of the RussianUkrainian border. Securing the border is key for the
restoration of peace, as it will put an end to the flow of
arms and weaponry to the separatists.
The solution to the Ukrainian crisis can only be
political. The Russian Federation must be an integral
part of the effort to find a political solution, rather than
continue to fuel the crisis, which dates back to another
era.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey
Feltman for his briefing and express our appreciation
for the efforts that the Secretary-General has continued
to undertake to end the current situation in Ukraine.

6/16

28/08/2014

Chile would like once again to express its deep
concern about the serious escalation of the crisis in
eastern and southern Ukraine, especially in the regions
of Donetsk and Luhansk, and now in Novoazovsk. It
is essential to reverse the escalation immediately to
ensure that those regions return to peace and security,
because the situation there is already very dangerous
and unpredictable. For all those reasons, we call on the
parties to exercise maximum restraint and moderation
and to cease all fighting immediately.
Our country would like to reiterate once again, as
we have done consistently since the start of the crisis
in Ukraine, that there is an obligation to respect the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Ukraine, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and international law, as well as to observe the
principle of non-intervention and non-interference in
the internal affairs of another State. That principle has
also been enshrined, inter alia, in the Helsinki Final
Act, which created the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), of which Ukraine and
Russia are both signatories, as well as the Budapest
Memorandum on Security Assurances, both of which
documents apply fully to both Russia and Ukraine,
among other States.
In that connection, therefore, we would like to
also state that the parties involved should refrain from
carrying out actions that are incompatible with the
Charter of the United Nations and international law.
With that in mind, Chile would like to make an appeal
for the immediate withdrawal of all foreign troops
present on Ukrainian territory, unless they have been
expressly authorized by the legitimate authorities of
that country.
We are very concerned by the humanitarian and
human rights situation in the southern and eastern
parts of Ukraine, especially the growing number of
internally displaced persons and the situation of ethnic
minorities. We are also concerned about the increasing
violations of human rights that have been recorded
in those areas, which makes it essential to restore the
rule of law in that region. In that connection, we would
like to note that humanitarian aid initiatives should be
implemented with full respect for the sovereignty of
Ukraine and in accordance with the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and international law.
We hope that the observation mission, in close
cooperation with the special monitoring mission of

14-51949

28/08/2014

Ukraine

S/PV.7253

the OSCE, will continue to play a constructive role in
mitigating the tensions on the ground.

rocket launchers travelling towards Telmanove, south
of Donetsk.

As we have stated previously, we would like
to reiterate that accountability should be ensured
regarding all violations and abuses of human rights so
as to ensure that those responsible, whoever they are,
are brought to justice.

In the past 48 hours, separatists have conducted
operations to seize the coastal town of Novoazovsk and
several villages inside Ukraine near the Russian border.
Reports that regular Russian armed forces are involved
are deeply concerning. The latest developments
indicate a new and even more dangerous escalation of
the crisis, which appears to be moving to a wider area of
Ukraine, including the southern land route to Crimea.
All of that points to the use of force by Russia against
Ukraine. That would be a flagrant breach of Ukraine’s
sovereignty and a blatant violation of the Charter of the
United Nations.

Once again, we would like call upon the parties
to seek a peaceful solution to the crisis through direct
political dialogue, to refrain from unilateral measures
and to support international mediation efforts, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 68/262.
In that regard, we welcome the meeting between
the Presidents of Ukraine and Russia in Minsk on
26 August, and we encourage them to continue those
contacts and to intensify them in order to achieve a
peaceful and rapid solution to the crisis in Ukraine.
We would also like to highlight the various
initiatives of the Secretary-General and, overall, of the
entire United Nations system. They have tried since the
very beginning of the crisis to find a peaceful solution
to it.
Chile believes that the time has come for constructive
participation in an inclusive process that ensures the
rule of law, fundamental freedoms and respect for
human rights, as well as the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Ukraine, in order to ensure
conditions that will enable the Ukrainian people to
determine its own future sovereignty in a peaceful and
democratic way.
Mr. Bliss (Australia): I thank Mr. Feltman for his
briefing. We recognize the ongoing efforts that the
Secretary-General, Mr. Feltman and other colleagues
are making to resolve the crisis.
There is now overwhelming evidence that
significant numbers of Russian troops, armoured
personnel carriers, tanks and other equipment have
moved into Ukrainian territory. There are credible
reports that Russian combat soldiers equipped with
sophisticated heavy weaponry are operating inside
Ukraine. Large quantities of advanced weapons,
including air-defence systems, artillery tanks and
armoured personnel carriers, are being transferred
to separatist forces in eastern Ukraine. Russian
paratroopers have been captured in Ukraine, and
there are reports of funerals being held in Russia for
Russian troops killed in Ukraine. Yesterday there were
reports of some 100 tanks, armoured vehicles and

The latest developments come against a backdrop
of other serious incidents, including the killing by
separatists of the Lithuanian Honorary Consul in
Luhansk, on 22 August; the parading by separatists of
captured Ukrainian soldiers in Donetsk on 24 August, in
blatant contravention of the prohibition on humiliating
and degrading treatment of prisoners of war, the Geneva
Conventions and customary international law; and a
Russian helicopter attack on a border post in Luhansk
oblast on 25 August, in which four border guards were
killed. Despite claims by Russia of non-involvement in
the conflict, we have the public statement of 28 August
by separatist leader Zakharchenko claiming that some
3,000 to 4,000 Russians have fought in separatist ranks
since the conflict began.
We are also deeply concerned about Russian
Foreign Minister Lavrov’s announcement on 25 August
that a second aid convoy would be sent to Ukraine this
week, despite the fact that the first proceeded without
the agreement of the Ukrainian Government or the
participation of the International Committee of the Red
Cross. Australian Foreign Minister Bishop described
the aid convoy situation, on 24 August, as one in which
Russia showed flagrant and reckless disregard for
international norms and international law. Any further
aid convoys must be sent only with the agreement of the
Ukrainian Government.
The 26 August talks in Minsk had the potential to
provide a useful forum for finding a diplomatic way
to end the crisis, but at the same time that Russia was
engaging in those talks further escalation was occurring
in southern Ukraine.
Some immediate steps must be taken. Russia must
immediately withdraw its military equipment and

14-519497/16

S/PV.7253

Ukraine

personnel from Ukrainian territory. Russia should
withdraw all support for the separatists and ask them
to lay down their arms so that the conflict can be
brought to an immediate end. Russia must also control
its border. That is the only effective way to prevent
troops and equipment from entering Ukraine and is key
to establishing a ceasefire, as has been said by other
speakers. Strenuous efforts must be made to engage in
political dialogue. That depends on Russia.
While the focus of the discussion has been on
developments in the past 48 hours, we must not
lose sight of the need for the full implementation
of resolution 2166 (2014). The Netherlands Mission
has just circulated to Council members a letter on
its response to the Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17
crash. Significant progress has been made by the
Netherlands in identifying the remains of the victims
and repatriating them to their own countries. The letter
also states that the independent investigation into the
cause of the crash is ongoing and that the Netherlands
remains fully committed to ensuring accountability for
the perpetrators.
Australia is working closely with the Netherlands on
the response to the crash and fully supports its efforts.
In order for those efforts to succeed, it is imperative that
all States fully implement the provisions of resolution
2166 (2014).
Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his
readiness to give a briefing to the Council on the urgent
situation in Ukraine.
Chad would like to express its serious concern
with regard to the rapid deterioration of the situation
in Ukraine, in particular in the Donetsk region. The
meeting of the two Heads of State — Mr. Poroshenko
and Mr. Putin — on Tuesday, 26 August in Minsk
is, in our view, a new step towards de-escalating the
tension. However, only two days later, reports indicate
an intensification of the fighting in the Luhansk and
Donetsk regions and the presence of 1,000 Russian
volunteers who are supposedly fighting in the Ukrainian
territory alongside pro-Russian separatists. The new
escalation is a cause of concern for Chad.
As we have repeated many times, the solution
to the crisis in Ukraine must be political and should
be reached through an inclusive, direct dialogue on
the basis of respect for the territorial integrity and

8/16

28/08/2014

sovereignty of Ukraine in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations.
Ms. Power (United States of America): This is
our twenty-fourth meeting to try to rein in Russia’s
aggressive acts in Ukraine. Every single one of those
meetings has sent a straight-forward, unified message:
Russia, stop this conflict. Russia is not listening.
We said it when Russia flagrantly violated
international law by occupying Crimea. We said it
after the shocking downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight
MH-17, which took the lives of innocent men, women,
children and infants from 11 countries. And we say
it today, as Russia’s soldiers, tanks, air defence and
artillery support fight alongside separatists and open
a new front in a crisis manufactured in and fuelled by
Russia. But Russia is not listening.
Instead of listening, instead of heeding the
demands of the international community and the rules
of the international order, at every step Russia has come
before the Council to say everything except the truth.
It has manipulated. It has obfuscated. It has outright
lied. We have therefore learned to measure Russia by
its actions and not by its words.
In the last 48 hours, Russia’s actions have spoken
volumes. On 26 August — just this past Tuesday — after
meeting with Ukrainian President Poroshenko in Minsk,
President Putin spoke of the need to “end bloodshed as
soon as possible”. Yet the same day satellite imagery
showed Russian combat units south-east of Donetsk, in
eastern Ukraine. That same day in Luhansk, Ukraine
detained regular Russian army personnel from the 9th
Brigade. In response, Russia claimed that the soldiers
had wandered into Ukrainian territory by mistake.
That, supposedly, in a time of conflict along one of the
most carefully watched borders in the world.
The day after the Minsk talks, Russia fired Grad
rockets from inside Russia at Ukrainian positions in
Novoazovsk and then attacked with two columns of
Russian armoured vehicles and tanks. Russian armoured
vehicles and Uragan multiple rocket launchers are
positioned on the outskirts of that town as we speak.
Russia’s force along the border is the largest it has
been since it began redeploying forces there in late May,
and includes significant numbers of combat aircraft and
helicopters. Russian unmanned aircraft routinely cross
into Ukrainian airspace.

14-51949

28/08/2014

Ukraine

Other Russian deployments into Ukrainian
territory include advanced artillery and air-defence
systems not found in the Ukrainian inventory. Those
artillery systems have shelled Ukrainian positions
outside Luhansk city in conjunction with the recent
separatist counteroffensive.
One of the separatist leaders that Russia has armed
and backed said openly that 3,000 or 4,000 Russian
soldiers had joined their cause. He was quick to clarify
that those soldiers were on vacation. But a Russian
soldier who chooses to fight in Ukraine on his summer
break is still a Russian soldier, and the armoured Russian
military vehicle he drives there is not his personal car.
Meanwhile, in Russia, family members of Russian
soldiers are holding funerals for their loved ones who
have been killed in the fighting in Ukraine. They are
demanding answers about how their loved ones were
killed. Journalists who try to cover the funerals are
being harassed and threatened by armed men. Yet still,
according to the Russian Government, the soldiers
were never there. They were never in Crimea either,
until Russia announced that those soldiers who were
never there had annexed Crimea.
The last 48 hours fit into a well-established
pattern for Russia. Each step has paved the way for
the one that followed. And yet, in spite of all of those
outrageous actions, Ukraine has repeatedly sought a
political solution to the crisis. It has repeatedly sought
a path to de-escalation. Despite the pattern, President
Poroshenko showed up in Minsk to meet with President
Putin. In contrast, President Putin was still unwilling
acknowledge the most basic facts, facts that we all
know, namely, that Russia has armed, equipped and now
joined illegal separatists fighting in Ukraine. Serious
negotiations are needed — urgently needed — but
Russia has to stop lying and has to stop fuelling the
conflict.
The mask is coming off. In its recent acts, we see
Russia’s actions for what they are: a deliberate effort to
support and now fight alongside illegal separatists in
another sovereign country.
Russia has claimed that Ukraine is not interested
in a ceasefire. But let us be clear: Ukraine has every
interest in a ceasefire, as do we, as long as it a real
one. But Russian separatists not only have no interest
in observing a ceasefire, they cynically use the time to
rearm and wait for additional soldiers and supplies to
flow across the border from Russia.

S/PV.7253

In the face of those deeply alarming actions, the
most important question for us now is not what we
should say to Russia; rather, the most important question
is what we should do to make Russia listen. Throughout
the crisis, the United States has, in close coordination
with our European partners — the European Union and
the group of seven (G-7), exerted targeted, effective
pressure so that the message is heard, so that Russia
begins to de-escalate rather than escalate and so that
the reasonable peace plan put forward by President
Poroshenko is adopted and implemented. In the face of
Russia’s continued aggression and blatant disregard for
the Charter of the United Nations and the Helsinki Final
Act, we will continue to work closely with our G-7 and
European partners to ratchet up the consequences on
Russia.
I understand that there are real costs felt by citizens
of countries when their Governments take such actions.
It has costs for businesses that trade with Russia and
sell to Russian markets, from small-scale farmers to
big factories. Those costs are considerable, and nobody
should take them lightly.
But let us be clear: if unchecked, the damage that
Russia’s blatant disregard for the international order
poses is much, much greater. Those rules and principles
have taken generations to build, with unparalleled
investment — countless lives have been lost in the
process of establishing and defending those principles,
and every single one of us has a stake in defending them.
A threat to the order — the international order — is a
threat to the peace and security of all of us. Those are
the rules that Russia is flouting when it illegally seizes
territory and when it arms, equips and fights alongside
illegal groups in neighbouring countries.
Ukraine is one of roughly a dozen countries that
share a border with Russia. Let me conclude with a
couple of questions. How can we tell those countries
that border Russia that their peace and sovereignty
is guaranteed, if we do not make our message heard
on Ukraine? Why should they believe that it will be
different, if tomorrow President Putin decides to start
supporting armed separatists and allowing soldiers
on vacation to fight in their countries? And, just as
important, what message are we sending to other
countries with similarly alarming ambitions around
the world, when we let Russia violate the rules without
sufficient consequences? In the face of that threat, the
cost of inaction is unacceptable.

14-519499/16

S/PV.7253

Ukraine

Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for
his briefing. We take this opportunity to reiterate our
full support for the Secretary-General’s good offices,
including Mr. Feltman’s recent visit to Ukraine.
The Republic of Korea is closely monitoring
the events in eastern Ukraine, and we are deeply
concerned about the continuing escalation of tensions.
We had hoped that the Minsk meeting between the
two Presidents would be a turning point in finding a
diplomatic solution to the crisis. But, on the contrary,
the situation on the ground has further deteriorated.
In particular, we are alarmed that the separatist armed
groups have pushed their way into the southern city
of Novoazovsk, opening a dangerous new front in the
ongoing crisis.
We are also seriously concerned about the report
that indicates the involvement of Russian troops in the
latest round of fighting inside Ukraine. We hope that it is
not true. We hope that Russia’s explanation is true, that
there are no Russian troops inside Ukraine. Otherwise,
that would constitute a gross violation of Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity and would bring
the crisis into a new dimension. We strongly oppose
any outside military intervention in the situation in
Ukraine.
In the light of the volatile situation, we stress that
a genuine solution to the crisis can be found only with
an immediate cessation of hostilities through dialogue
between all the parties concerned. In that regard, we
hope that President Poroshenko’s plan for a road map
towards a ceasefire with the armed groups can offer a
sound basis for the de-escalation of tensions.
The stability and prosperity of Ukraine are critical
not only to peace in Europe but also far beyond it. We
once again reaffirm our full support for Ukraine’s
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-Genera Jeffrey
Feltman for his briefing on the situation in Ukraine.
Argentina reiterates its concern at the continued
deterioration in the security situation in the east and
south of Ukraine and at the escalating violence.
It is especially imperative that all parties strictly
conform, in their actions, to international law and the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. In that
regard, we recall the obligation of all States to settle

10/16

28/08/2014

their international disputes by peaceful means, so as
not to threaten international peace and security, while
acting in full accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, upholding the principles set out in Chapter I,
Article 2, and recognizing the significant role of the
relevant regional organizations.
The only possible solution is one that is reached
through dialogue and negotiation — we have said
that before and we reaffirm it. Any confrontational
rhetoric or any interference in matters that fall within
the domestic jurisdiction of States, whether they be
military, political or economic, must be avoided. In that
regard, we welcome the meeting held on 26 August in
Minsk between the Presidents of Russia and Ukraine.
We hope that it will lead to new meetings in order to
resolve the differences politically. Similarly, we echo
the Secretary-General’s call for continuing discussions
with a view to forging an solution to the conflict. We
acknowledge the intense efforts and good offices of
the Secretary-General. It is necessary for the parties to
unconditionally observe human rights and international
humanitarian law and ensure proper accountability
with regard to the violations and abuses of human
rights and international humanitarian law that have
been committed.
Finally, as we have done in the past, Argentina
emphasizes
the
Security
Council’s
primary
responsibility for ensuring the maintenance of peace
and security, in accordance with the role assigned to it
by the Charter. We regret that so far, despite the many
times we have met to discuss the situation in Ukraine,
the Council has not been able to overcome its division
and play a positive role to help the parties find common
points on which they can base a political and diplomatic
solution. It is therefore crucial that we redouble our
efforts to create conditions so that dialogue, which is
so urgent, can begin in such a way that solutions can
be found to the disagreements. In particular, the actors
with the greatest influence should use constructive
diplomacy. We reaffirm that the international
community must focus its efforts on bringing the
parties into a constructive dialogue and find a peaceful
way out of the situation, with full respect for human
rights, international humanitarian law and the rights
of all minorities and while framing its actions strictly
within international law and the Charter of the United
Nations.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Feltman for his briefing.

14-51949

28/08/2014

Ukraine

The current situation in eastern Ukraine is
tantamount to a dangerous escalation of the conflict
between separatists, rebels and Government forces.
New fronts have been opened in the conflict, and it is
now spreading to a wider geographical area. Needless
to say, that further complicates what was already a very
difficult and delicate situation with an ever-increasing
array of actors. Reports of Russian troops and military
equipment moving into Ukrainian territory are a major
concern to all of us. We note, however, that the Russian
representative to the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, Andrey Kelin, has emphatically
denied the reports.
We therefore urge both Ukraine and Russia to
resolve their differences peacefully and through
genuine dialogue and negotiation. Existing, relatively
credible frameworks such as the friendship treaty
between the two countries and the 17 April Geneva
statement are valid points of departure towards
reconciliation. Indeed, President Putin and President
Poroshenko must maintain their dialogue and build on
it like a scaffold: it is the only valid path to a mutually
acceptable diplomatic solution to the crisis. A military
solution, in our view, is not a viable one. A ceasefire
should be urgently negotiated and agreed as the first
necessary step in ending the conflict, which has left
2,000 people dead, more than 3,000 wounded and tens
of thousands displaced from their homes.
For its part, the Government of Ukraine must
continue to accommodate the legitimate aspirations
of all components of its citizenry and protect their
interests. We are confident that strident efforts towards
greater inclusiveness will foster the necessary national
cohesion. That has the potential of reducing hostilities
and acts of agitation and of establishing the foundations
for building a peaceful, prosperous and united nation.
Throughout our engagement on this issue, we have
consistently stressed the need to uphold universally
agreed principles and the sanctity of international law.
That of course begins with respect for the principles
embodied in the Charter of the United Nations, and
those are the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of all States. Those are the principles that
guide Nigeria’s position and have informed our stance.
We believe that only a diplomatic solution, which
is achievable by direct dialogue between the parties,
can resolve the current conflict. We urge those with
influence on the warring parties to exert that influence

S/PV.7253

and to bring it to bear on the situation in the interest of
wider international peace and security.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his briefing.
China is deeply concerned and worried about
the continued worsening of the armed conflict in
eastern Ukraine, which has caused great loss of life
and property. In the current situation, all the parties
concerned must exercise restraint so as not to escalate
it further.
China has stated on many occasions its principled
position on the question of Ukraine. On this occasion, I
will refrain from repeating it.
I wish to emphasize the following. The crisis
in Ukraine can be resolved only by political means.
The priority now is for all the parties concerned to
achieve a prompt ceasefire, persevere in efforts to
promote a political resolution of the crisis in Ukraine,
fully accommodate the legitimate rights, interests
and aspirations of all regions and ethnic groups of
Ukraine and take into full consideration the legitimate
concerns of all parties, thereby achieving a balance of
their interests. The international community should
urge the parties concerned to make good use of
various mechanisms for dialogue and liaison, increase
communications and act in a manner that is conducive
to mutual trust.
China supports all efforts that would contribute to
easing the situation, resolving the crisis and promoting
a political solution.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this emergency meeting
of the Security Council to address recent developments
in eastern Ukraine. I thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his
comprehensive briefing. We recognize the SecretaryGeneral’s good offices and the efforts by Mr. Feltman
to find a solution to the crisis.
Rwanda, like all other members of the Security
Council, is extremely alarmed at the rapidly
deteriorating situation in eastern Ukraine. The regional
summit held on 26 August in Minsk — where Presidents
Petro Poroshenko of Ukraine and Vladimir Putin of
the Russian Federation met for the first time since the
election of the former in May — had raised hope for a
ceasefire and a diplomatic solution to the conflict.

14-5194911/16

S/PV.7253

Ukraine

Unfortunately, the past few days were marked by
renewed fighting in eastern Ukraine, particularly in
the Donetsk region, where the town of Novoazovsk
has fallen into the hands of armed separatists who now
threaten to take over the strategic port city of Mariupol.
In that regard, we were troubled by the information
provided by one of the leaders of the armed separatists
that 3,000 to 4,000 Russian nationalists had joined
their ranks. We are also concerned at the accusations
of border crossings by Russian elements into Ukraine.
It is clear that the rise of tension and rhetoric between
Ukraine and the Russian Federation could, if not
properly addressed, lead to a full-blown conflict
between the two countries, thus further threatening
international peace and security and worsening a very
dire human rights and humanitarian situation in eastern
Ukraine and the wider region.
The situation in Ukraine has been on the agenda of
the Security Council since the end of February. We have
been constantly meeting on this crisis. We have held 24
meetings, as Ambassador Power of the United States
informed us. But, unfortunately, we have been unable
to take any meaningful decision, with the exception of
our adoption of resolution 2166 (2014), on 21 July, on
the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17.
In any case, given the division in the Council, it
is unlikely that a solution will come from New York.
Only a genuine dialogue among Ukrainians, coupled
with diplomatic talks between Ukraine and the Russian
Federation, with the support of the United Nations
and regional organizations, can provide a sustainable
solution to the crisis. We believe that President
Poroshenko’s peace plan and the Minsk process can be
a viable framework for achieving that goal.
I will conclude by once again calling on all parties
in Ukraine to respect the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Ukraine. Armed groups must
cease hostilities, lay down their weapons in order to
de-escalate the situation and give peace a chance. In
that regard, we urge all the original stakeholders to use
their influence and to work towards peace and stability
in the region.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The current escalating situation in southeastern Ukraine is a direct consequence of Kyiv’s
reckless policy of waging war on its own people. With
the support and under the influence of a number of
well-known States, the Kyiv authorities have torpedoed
all the political agreements for settling the crisis in
12/16

28/08/2014

Ukraine arrived at in the Geneva declaration of 17 April
and the Berlin declaration of 2 July. Not to mention the
authorities’ abandonment of their previous positions in
the agreement of 21 February, which opened the door
to a real possibility for a civilized way out of the crisis.
President Poroshenko’s unilateral proposal for
a so-called peace plan was also merely another step
on the road to further escalation, since the truce was
predicated on capitulation on the part of the insurgents.
That is all against a backdrop with no real steps towards
launching a political process or negotiating with
representatives of the regions. Where is the inclusive
national dialogue promised by Kyiv, the constitutional
reform, the decentralization of authority and the special
status for the Russian language? All we are seeing is a
fight with dissenters and a situation in which political
parties and media that do not toe the line are banned.
President Poroshenko has frequently made
peaceful-sounding statements. Only yesterday he
commented on the results of the high-level meeting in
Minsk, saying that Kyiv’s chief goal was peace, and
that they sought decisive action capable of bringing
peace to Ukraine. He also spoke of some new urgent
plan for resolving the crisis. Where is that plan? Or is
it yet another distracting manoeuvre while concealing
an attempt to resolve things by force? We hope that
the Kyiv leadership will not squander the positive
opportunities presented by the Minsk meeting.
Meanwhile, the Ukrainian armed forces, without
consideration for any standard of international
humanitarian law or simple moral precepts, have
been indiscriminately attacking cities, residential
neighbourhoods and infrastructure targets. They are
using artillery, machine guns and air attacks, using
phosphorous explosives banned under international
conventions and ballistic rockets. In the so-called
anti-terrorist operations area there are 4 million people.
Hundreds of thousands of them have been sitting in
cellars without water or electricity for weeks, and food
and medicines are practically unobtainable. The overall
number of deaths now exceeds 2,000, and it is growing
exponentially. The number of people, including
refugees, who have moved from Ukraine to Russia is
now more than 814,000.
The media are reporting horrendous losses in
the Ukrainian army, confirmed by mass protests in
Ukraine against mobilization. Hundreds of Ukrainian
servicemen are ending up on Russian territory for
various reasons. We give them food, water and medical
14-51949

28/08/2014

Ukraine

treatment and send them back to Ukraine. We hope
that the Kyiv authorities are treating the nine Russian
paratroopers we have heard so much about in the past
24 hours just as humanely. However, it is reported that
they were detained with their own documents and with
unloaded weapons, which hardly resembles a diversion
force in a conflict zone. Everyone knows that there are
Russian volunteers in eastern Ukraine; no one conceals
the fact. One could wish that there could be similar
transparency in certain other countries. Let us hear
what our American colleagues have to say about what
dozens of American advisers are doing in the Ukrainian
Defence Council building, or how many American
mercenaries from so-called private military contractors
are fighting thousands of kilometres from their shores.
How come American weapon systems have shown up in
the Ukrainian armed forces?
Our American colleague asked an eloquent
question — what message can Russia’s neighbours
send? To my dear colleagues I say this. I would
suggest that they send a message to Washington, D.C.
: stop interfering in the internal affairs of a sovereign
State. Stop stirring up objectionable regimes. Limit
your geopolitical ambitions. Then not only Russia’s
neighbours but many other countries all over the world
would breathe more easily. And another thing: stop
speculating about the downed Malaysian plane. So far
Russia alone has made a contribution to the conduct of
a transparent and essential investigation of that tragedy.
From everyone else we have heard no information,
nothing but insinuations. For some reason, even the
question of how the Ukrainians obtained recordings of
their air traffic controllers’ conversations is some kind
of dreadful secret. Stop that speculation.
Russia has been attempting to send humanitarian
aid to the residents of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions
who so urgently need it. Not long ago, despite the
desperate opposition of various intrigue-mongering
members of the Security Council, the first Russian
humanitarian convoy arrived in Luhansk under the
auspices of the International Committee of the Red
Cross. Preparations are now being finalized for
dispatching a second convoy. An agreement on that was
confirmed today in a telephone conversation between
Russia’s Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Sergey
Lavrov, and Ukraine’s Foreign Minister Klimkin.
We should remember that the Council does not exist
in order to spread conjecture and exchange accusations,
but to take decisions that might help to resolve crises.

S/PV.7253

Today we propose that Council members make the
following statement to the press:
“The members of the Security Council
expressed serious concern about the worsening
situation in south-eastern Ukraine and called for a
speedy and unconditional ceasefire. The members
of the Security Council called for an inclusive
political dialogue on Ukraine based on the Geneva
declaration of 17 April 2014 and the joint Berlin
declaration of 2 July 2014. In that context, the
Council noted the role of the contact group and
strongly urged that the process be resumed without
delay within the framework of the contact group.
“The members of the Security Council urged
the international community to step up its efforts
to provide humanitarian aid to the people of the
Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine.”
That is the end of the draft statement by the Security
Council to the press. We propose that we vote on this
statement here and now around this table.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
I thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing. The United
Kingdom is deeply alarmed by the escalation of
Russian military intervention in eastern Ukraine over
the past 72 hours. Formed units of the armed forces
of the Russian Federation are now directly engaged
in fighting inside Ukraine against the armed forces of
Ukraine. Those units consist of well over 1,000 regular
Russian troops equipped with armoured vehicles,
artillery and air defence systems. That incursion is a
clear violation of sovereign Ukrainian territory by the
Russian Federation. It is a clear breach of international
law and a contravention of the Charter of the United
Nations.
Russian denials of that reality fit into the pattern of
Russia’s dishonest approach to Ukraine from the very
beginning of the crisis. We all remember that Russia
denied that it had any extra military personnel on the
ground in Crimea right up until its illegal annexation
with military force. Russia has denied providing
military support to the separatists. In fact, Russia has
been transferring significant quantities of advanced
weapons, including tanks, armoured personnel carriers
and artillery, to separatist groups for several months.
As of today, the separatists’ arsenal includes up to 100
main battle tanks, 80 armoured personnel carriers,

14-5194913/16

S/PV.7253

Ukraine

100 man-portable air defence systems, 500 anti-tank
weapons and more than 100 artillery pieces. Almost all
of those have been directly supplied by Russia since the
conflict started.
In the past three weeks, that support has increased
significantly, no doubt in response to Ukraine’s success
in liberating territory from the separatists. On 7 August,
50 vehicles, including tanks, armoured personnel
carriers and BM-21 Grad multiple rocket launchers,
crossed from Russia into Ukraine at the Chervono
Partizansk border crossing. On 15 August, a convoy
of 23 armoured personnel carriers crossed close to
where the Russian humanitarian convoy was awaiting
customs clearance. The following day, a further
convoy of 84 military vehicles crossed the border.
The evidence is overwhelming, and plenty of it comes
from the Russian military itself. On 13 July, armoured
vehicles flying Russian flags were photographed by a
Russian serviceman crossing the Ukrainian border at
Izvaryne, Donetsk. On 31 July, a Russian soldier posted
photographs of himself operating military hardware
inside Ukraine. His photographs included images of
himself inside an SA-11 missile launch system — the
very weapon that appears to have been used to shoot
down Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17.
Russia has also denied that it has shelled Ukrainian
territory. In fact, over just five days, between 14 and
19 August, Ukrainian armed forces were fired upon
from positions inside Russian territory on at least 21
separate occasions, with weapons systems ranging
from heavy mortars to Grad rockets. Now we see
irrefutable evidence of regular Russian forces operating
inside Ukraine. For some months, Russia has deployed
small groups of its special forces operating under the
command of the main intelligence directorate of the
Russian armed forces in support of the separatists.
Those forces have been responsible for coordinating
attacks and facilitating communications and transfers
of equipment and personnel. Their presence is clear
from their communications. Over a single 24-hour
period from 29 to 30 July alone, there were 45 separate
instances of Russian secure military radio transmissions
originating from inside Ukrainian territory.
Today, NATO has released satellite imagery, taken
on 21 and 23 August, of Russian self-propelled artillery
units inside Ukraine in the vicinity of Krasnodon,
Luhansk province. On Monday, 10 Russian paratroopers
belonging to the 331st Regiment of the 98th Svirsk
Airborne Division were captured near the village of

14/16

28/08/2014

Dzerkalne, 20 kilometres inside Ukrainian territory.
We have satellite imagery confirming the deployment
of Russian armoured vehicles supported by artillery
south of Donetsk close to that location. Today, another
Russian soldier, Petr Khokhlov, serving with the 9th
Motor Rifle Brigade, was captured in Luhansk.
It is simply not credible for Russia and its proxies
in Donetsk and Luhansk to keep claiming that those
serving members of the Russian armed forces are in
Ukraine by accident or on holiday. Nor is it credible
for Russia to continue claiming to the whole world,
including to the Russian people, that Russian soldiers
are not present on Ukrainian territory. The increasing
number of Russian casualties and captured soldiers
gives the lie to that. Russia can no longer pretend that
it is not a direct party to this conflict. Indeed, this
conflict would no longer exist without direct Russian
military involvement in support of the separatists.
President Putin has said that Russia is willing to
find a peaceful solution to the conflict. Those words
have little value against this clear pattern of escalating
Russian military involvement in eastern Ukraine.
Violating international law and the Charter of the United
Nations in such a brazen manner is not compatible
with Russia’s responsibilities as a permanent member
of the Security Council. We again call on Russia to
immediately withdraw its military forces from Ukraine,
stop its flow of weapons to the separatists and instead
help to secure a political solution to the crisis.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Pavlichenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman for his briefing earlier today.
It has already been half a year since the Council,
on 28 February, first took up the issue of Russia’s
aggression against Ukraine (see S/PV.7123). The
aggression started through the military occupation
and annexation of a huge part of Ukrainian sovereign
territory, the Autonomous Republic of Crimea. It then
proceeded by means of a hybrid war against Ukraine,
the sponsorship of terrorism and the supply of arms and
mercenaries to illegal armed groups in the eastern region
of our State, along with intensive artillery shelling from
Russian territory and regular violations of Ukrainian
air space by military aircraft, helicopters and drones.
That was followed by the downing of a civilian aircraft

14-51949

28/08/2014

Ukraine

by terrorist groups using Russian-supplied surface-toair missile systems, killing all 298 passengers and crew
on board. The next red line was the illegal crossing of
the Ukrainian State border by a so-called humanitarian
convoy dispatched by Russia without authorization
from the Ukrainian Government and in violation of
international agreements and procedures.
Russia has been putting its troops along the border
with Ukraine. As of now, over 45,000 military, about
160 tanks, 1,360 armoured battle vehicles, 390 artillery
systems, 150 Grad missile systems, 192 military
aircraft and 137 helicopters are deployed in the vicinity
of our border.
The situation has dramatically changed now.
Russia has launched a direct military invasion of
Ukraine with its regular armed forces. Last night, two
military convoys crossed the Ukrainian State border
and advanced towards the village of Telmanove with
seven tanks, one BMP-2 and a truck with soldiers,
and towards the town of Novoazovsk with five T-64
tanks, two BMP-2s, and two trucks with soldiers. After
shelling the positions of Ukrainian forces from Russian
territory and from the district of Sjedove, Russian
troops seized Novoazovsk.
More than 10,000 civilians have been held hostage
by the Russian invaders. Psychological pressure is
exerted against the citizens of Ukraine, and threats of
psychological violence are heard.
On 24 August, two battalion tactical groups from
the armed forces of the Russian Federation, reinforced
by tank units, crossed the State border of Ukraine near
the village of Berestovo in the Donetsk region, just
500 metres from the Ukrainian State border. It was
reported that none of the Russian military equipment
bore license plates and that some combat vehicles were
painted with two white stripes to resemble Ukrainian
combat vehicles in a counter-terrorism operation zone.
The troops wore Russian army combat uniforms without
insignia. Currently, the combat units I have mentioned
occupy several villages in the Donetsk region,
including Pobeda, Glinka, Amvrosiivka, Telmanovo,
Granitny and Sontseve, and are constructing fortified
strongholds.
On 25 August, Ukrainian armed forces detained
10 soldiers near the town of Dzerkalne from the 331st
Regiment of the 98th Sibirsk Airborne Division of
the armed forces of the Russian Federation. All their
identities were revealed. We have serious doubts that

S/PV.7253

fully armed Russian troops could have lost their way
and penetrated 25 kilometres into Ukraine. We possess
abundant evidence, including video footage of troops
and Russian soldiers now in detention, as well as Russian
armoured vehicles and tanks with full documentation
proving that they belong to the Russian military. That
leaves absolutely no doubt about the direct Russian
invasion of Ukraine.
We consider the Russian Federation fully
responsible for the daily death toll among Ukrainian
civilians and military as well as for the deterioration
of the humanitarian situation in Donbas. We demand
that the Russian Federation immediately withdraw all
its troops from Ukrainian territory to save the lives
of both Ukrainians and Russians. We demand that the
Russian Federation establish effective control over
the Ukrainian-Russian border under the control of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
which would exclude illegal supplies of military
equipment, weapons and militants to Ukraine. We
demand that Russia release all Ukrainians who are
being held hostage. We have been open to all diplomatic
initiatives and have participated in every negotiation
format. The President of Ukraine has offered his peace
plan for descalation, which Russia has deliberately
undermined.
While demonstrating his full readiness for peace
negotiations with Russia during their meeting in
Minsk, President Poroshenko made it clear that the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine, as well
as the European aspirations of the Ukrainian people,
were not negotiable. In view of the open Russian
military aggression, Ukraine reserves its right to act in
accordance with Article 51 of the Charter of the United
Nations, which empowers every State Member of the
United Nations with the inherent right of individual
or collective self-defence if an armed attack occurs
against a Member of the United Nations. We call
upon the international community to provide effective
assistance to Ukraine to resist Russian aggression.
Will the international community keep witnessing
silently as the fundamental principles of international
law are being grossly disrespected? The entire
democratic world is being challenged, and the actual
world order is being destroyed. Or will it finally speak
with one voice and act? The choice is not tactical;
the choice is fundamental. The world is challenged
by a military nuclear might that is ignoring universal
principles and craves absolute power. How many more

14-5194915/16

S/PV.7253

Ukraine

red lines have to be crossed before this challenge is
addressed?
We call upon the Council to fulfil its Charter
responsibility and take urgent measures to stop the
aggression against a sovereign State Member of the
United Nations.
The President: The representative of Lithuania has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Ms. Murmokaité (Lithuania): We note the request
by the Russian Federation. I am also very well aware
of certain labels that my delegations has been given.
In spite of that fact, since those labels have been
repeated on various occasions — “killer amendments”
and things of the kind — we appreciate the drafting of
the statement referred to by the representative of the
Russian Federation. However, we would like to have a
little bit more time to look into the text seriously.
In our opinion, some of aspects are not reflected
in that text. For one, we are very well aware of the
information that separatists have been preventing the
provision of humanitarian assistance to the population.
Humanitarian assistance has been offered by the
Government of Ukraine. A call to the separatists not
to prevent the delivery of humanitarian assistance is
something that we should like to see in the text, as well
as some other amendments that we might come up with.
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to say a few words to our
Ukrainian colleagues.
First, as he did in a previous statement, hinting
at Russia, the representative of Ukraine — just as the
representative of the United States did — mentioned
the Malaysia Airlines flight. Could he please tell the
Council why Ukraine has not published the transcripts
of the air traffic controllers’ converstations? Could he
at least tell us if they have provided them to the Dutch
authorities.
Secondly, I should like to make a more substantial
comment — and I understand that perhaps in
Washington, D.C., or in Brussels they might not know
about this, because for them it does not really matter
whether it is Ukraine or some country in Latin America
or Africa or wherever. But I am trying to understand.

16/16

28/08/2014

When they announced the so-called Poroshenko peace
plan, which mentioned the need for insurgents to
capitulate, did the politicians in Kyiv not understand
the kind of consequences that could lead to? I do not
understand this. I mean: we know our region. We
know how close our ties are. That was an obvious step
towards escalation and disaster, which is what we are
seeing. Could they not understand that insurgents could
not simply lay down their weapons, give up and leave
for Russia and have Ukrainian tanks enter Luhansk and
Donetsk?
I do not understand. If someone had advised them to
do this, then that person either did not understand what
he was doing or was simply trying to provoke, trying
to completely destabilize the situation in Ukraine and
make life difficult for Russia. If the representative of
Ukraine could provide an explanation for this, I would
be very grateful.
The President: The representative of Ukraine has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I now
call on him.
Mr. Pavlichenko (Ukraine) (spoke in Russian):
I wish to thank the representative of the Russian
Federation for his questions. With regard to
his first question, I can tell him decisively that
Ukraine is participating actively in the work of the
intergovernmental commission investigating the
incident. My Government is cooperating in good faith
with its international partners. I believe that a report on
the Commission’s work and the initial findings of the
investigation is to be published in the near future.
As for the Russian representative’s second
question, I would like to say the following. Our
President, including at the meeting with the Russian
President in Minsk, has spoken clearly of our readiness
for further dialogue in resolving the situation in eastern
Ukraine. It was clearly stated that we are ready to
engage in negotiations on a whole range of issues. The
only topic that cannot be discussed is the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Ukraine and our European
integration, which is what our people desire and have
decided upon.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 3:30 p.m.

14-51949
