S/PV.7402

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7402nd meeting

Monday, 9 March 2015, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . .

(France)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Hmoud
Mrs. Jakubonė
Mr. Haniff
Mrs. Schwalger
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security
European Union

15-06387 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1506387*

S/PV.7402

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.

(spoke in English)

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security
European Union
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Ms. Federica Mogherini, High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
of the European Union, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

I warmly welcome Secretary-General
Ki-moon, to whom I give the floor.

its
Ban

The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I
thank you, Sir, for convening this meeting on a very
important subject. At the outset, I am very pleased to
welcome Ms. Federica Mogherini, High Representative
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy of the European
Union (EU).
The fathers of the Charter of the United Nations
showed great foresight by envisaging a global and
collective security architecture that clearly defined
a place for regional agreements. Today in the area of​​
security, the United Nations is working closely and in
various ways with different regional structures. We
share the burden, provide support for and take the lead
in operations if we are asked to do so. The challenges are
too complex for one organization or one nation to meet
alone; hence the need for partnerships and innovation.
The strategic partnership between the European
Union and the United Nations is deeply rooted. Our
organizations share the same values and are both
committed to the collective and peaceful management
of security issues in order to prevent conflicts. In a
time of multiple crises, it is more necessary than ever to
strengthen this partnership for peace, human rights and
sustainable development. It is also more necessary than
ever that Europe overcome the frictions and internal
difficulties it faces if it is to remain effective in the
major missions it undertakes beyond its borders.

2/26

09/03/2015

In recent years, the United Nations and the EU have
made significant strides in working together for peace
and security around the world, but we still encounter
difficulties in mobilizing early action before a situation
visibly deteriorates. Rapid and effective political
engagement remains the single most important element
for success in our preventive diplomacy efforts. The
EU, which has helped to prevent conflict within its
own borders, helps others to resolve their differences
peacefully. It is a key actor in many international
negotiations, such as the P-5+1 nuclear negotiations
with Iran, the Middle East peace process and the
Belgrade-Pristina dialogue. EU support for United
Nations diplomatic efforts in Libya has been invaluable.
I also appreciate the EU’s support for mediation and
its funding for the United Nations stand-by team of
mediation experts.
The European Union is also one of our strongest and
most reliable regional peacekeeping partners, together
with the African Union (AU). The implementation of
the EU’s 2012 plan of action to enhance support to
United Nations peacekeeping has played an important
role. We look forward to working with the EU on a
follow-on action plan for the next few years.
The Central African Republic, Mali and Somalia
are excellent examples of the comprehensive and
complementary nature of the United Nations/
EU partnership. In Mali, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali is working very closely with the EU Training
Mission and Capacity Building Mission for the Sahel
and Mali. We are also benefiting from the uniformed
contributions of 13 European Member States.
The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
has been working effectively with the EU-led
peacekeeping force, and we are on track for a seamless
handover by mid-March. This experience shows the
tremendous potential for EU operations to deploy as
bridging mechanisms to United Nations missions. In
Somalia, building on the positive experience of the
security strategy designed with AU and EU support in
2013, the Security Council has mandated another joint
planning exercise to take place in 2015. I look forward
to continuing our joint efforts to assist Somalia in
advancing along the path charted in Vision 2016.

15-06387

09/03/2015

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The United Nations and the EU are not acting alone
in Africa. The African Union’s partnership with both
organizations and its role in addressing conflict are key
components of the peace and security architecture on
the continent. Our three organizations are also playing
important roles in addressing the threat of Ebola in
West Africa.
The EU, with the capabilities of its Member States
as well as the standing capacity of the EU Battlegroup,
is also an indispensable partner of the United Nations on
rapid response. Given the magnitude of the challenges
we face, it is our responsibility to continue exploring
scenarios where we can put our combined efforts to
use. Both of our organizations are engaged in important
reviews this year. Our peace operations review is under
way, and the panel engaged in European consultations
last month. Member States are also evaluating the
Organization’s peacebuilding architecture, and there is
a 10-year review of progress on resolution 1325 (2000)
on women and peace and security. The European Union,
in turn, will be undertaking a comprehensive security
and foreign policy review of its own.
Allow me take this opportunity to once again express
my condolences to the families of the victims of recent
terrorist attacks in Paris and Copenhagen. Terrorism
requires a global and holistic response that upholds
human rights and does not exacerbate the problem.
I value the United Nations-EU High-level CounterTerrorism Political Dialogue and our cooperation to
prevent violent extremism through capacity-building
initiatives in challenged regions and countries. I am
also grateful for the financial contributions that the
European External Action Service has made to key
United Nations counter-terrorism capacity-building
initiatives. Europe must look both outwards and
inwards in order to foster global peace and security.
The United Nations is strongly committed to
working with the European Union and all other players
in helping to discourage the phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters, who pose dangers within and beyond
Europe. We must also collectively work towards a
peaceful, political resolution to the conflict in eastern
Ukraine, which threatens not only the country, but
the broader European region and even international
peace and security. While we all recognize that much
remains to be done, our joint work over the past years
has developed a solid foundation on which to build and
deliver results for the people we serve.

S/PV.7402

The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I wish to warmly welcome Ms. Federica Mogherini,
as she is participating in the Council’s proceedings for
the first time in her new capacity. I now give her the
floor.
Ms. Mogherini (spoke in French): It is an honour
for me to address the Security Council in my first
months as High Representative of the European Union
(EU). I thank the French presidency of the Council for
this opportunity to discuss our partnership.
(spoke in English)
I would like to thank the Secretary-General not
only for his briefing, but most of all for his friendship
and for the excellent cooperation we have established
already during these first months.
Today is my first Security Council meeting in my
current capacity, but it is the fifth on United NationsEU cooperation. This regularity is testimony to our
deepening relationship and also to the importance that
the United Nations and the EU place on this relationship.
In February last year, the Security Council adopted
its first presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/4) on
cooperation between the United Nations and the EU,
encouraging us to strengthen our institutional relations
and strategic partnership. And we all know how much
this is needed, in particular in these difficult times. It
has been a tumultuous year in the world. Hopes for a
more peaceful and cooperative global order have been
shattered by blatant violations of international law,
the spread of terrorists groups, crises with disastrous
humanitarian consequences, and the outbreak of
diseases with the potential to destroy entire regions. We
did not resign ourselves to the challenges; we rose to
them together. And where cooperation among different
forces prevailed over confrontation, things have started
to change in the right direction.
Europe’s commitment to multilateralism — with
the United Nations at its core — arises from our values
and beliefs. But it is also an act of realism. The threats
we face have never been so complex, as the SecretaryGeneral very rightly said. They require complex,
articulated responses. The time when super-Powers
thought they could split the world into spheres of
influence is long gone, we should all realize that. The
number of regional and global actors has multiplied,
and none of them can realistically aspire to facing the

15-063873/26

S/PV.7402

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

challenges or truly benefiting from the opportunities
alone. We need cooperation more than ever. The new
global order will be multilateral, or it will not be.
We see the strategic partnership with the United
Nations as a key relationship, but I should also
underline the importance to us of regional partners,
notably the League of Arab States, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the African
Union, and our regional interlocutors in Latin America,
the Caribbean and Asia. Multilayered partnerships
under the guidance of the Security Council, which has
the primary responsibility for international peace and
security, will be the only possible foundation of the
future global security agenda. With that in mind, I will
address a few issues I am sure we all put at the top of
our agenda, starting with Libya.
We need to put the country back on track, and
there is not much time left. Libya needs a united and
effective State, or chaos will prevail. Like the Council,
we strongly support the tenacious efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General León to bring
the parties together. Libya’s factions should know
that Europe and the whole international community is
ready to help them rebuild their country by all possible
means. The European Union is ready and willing to
provide all kinds of assistance, in strong coordination
and permanent with the United Nations and with other
regional players, but first of all with our Libyan friends.
We need the Libyan factions to take the first step. Libya’s
political leaders should now make every effort to find
the necessary compromises to grasp this last chance to
agree on a transitional national unity Government. That
should happen within days, not weeks, as time does not
work on our side.
With the deepening crisis, the Daesh franchise
has been spreading thousands of miles away from the
Levant. With no State control on Libya’s coasts or land
borders, human traffickers have already been able to
put at risk the lives of too many migrants. We have
witnessed the destabilizing effects of the conflict on
the entire Sahel and sub-Saharan regions. Terrorism,
uncontrolled migrations, regional instability — a unity
Government in Libya is vital for addressing all these
issues. It will be vital, first of all, for giving all Libyans
the security and the decent living conditions that their
country can offer and that they deserve after so many
difficult years.

4/26

09/03/2015

But these are not simply Libyan problems; they
concern all of us. So it is in our common interest and
our common responsibility to contribute in all possible
ways and, as a matter of urgency, to solve them. Strong
cooperation between the United Nations and the EU,
which we have developed in these months working on
the Libya crisis, is crucial. I expect that in the coming
months such cooperation will become even more vital.
Tackling terrorism means closing all the spaces where
extremism flourishes. It is a security challenge, of
course, but we should not forget its political and cultural
dimensions. As I said, defeating Daesh in Libya requires
a political agreement among the country’s factions.
The same applies to Syria. This is one of the reasons
the European Union fully supports the United Nations
efforts for peace. Staffan de Mistura’s work for local
ceasefires can pave the way towards a political solution
to the crisis. We hope it may be the first move in the
direction of a Syrian-led transition after too many years
of bloodshed. At the same time, the grave violations
committed against the civilian population demand
accountability and an end to impunity.
The EU is united in its support for the work of the
Council, in particular its resolutions 2170 (2014) and
2178 (2014). I call on all countries to swiftly implement
those resolutions with full respect for human rights
and the rule of law. We believe that long-term stability
and security can go hand in hand with respect for
human rights and freedoms. Respect for human rights
and international humanitarian law are key factors
for peace and stability and a guiding principle for the
European Union. At last week’s meeting of the Human
Rights Council, I personally underlined the strong
commitment of the European Union to the human rights
bodies and mechanisms of the United Nations. There
is no stability without democracy; there is no security
without human rights. Stability and security cannot
exist without a fair trial system, a serious commitment
towards good governance, the rule of law and the fight
against corruption. Stability versus democracy or
security versus human rights are false dilemmas. We
should never fall into that trap.
But the fight against terrorism is a battle for hearts
and minds, too. Daesh and other terrorist groups are
trying to revive a fabricated clash of civilizations. We
will not forget that the first victims of their attacks are
Muslims — Sunni and Shia — Arabs, Africans and
Asians. This is not a clash of civilizations; this is not
a fight between Islam and the West. This is a criminal

15-06387

09/03/2015

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

misuse of a noble religion to perpetrate terrorist attacks
in a fight for power.
As we have all realized, Daesh is good at
propaganda. We need to counter its narrative both in
our home countries and abroad. We need to work on our
own European challenges when it comes to integration,
opportunities, dialogue and respect. We need to work
more with our partners outside Europe. We will follow
up on the outcome of the Washington, D.C., Summit on
Countering Violent Extremism, in particular through
fostering cooperation, which includes education through
engaging more with local communities, especially in
the Horn of Africa. That is where we plan to hold our
annual plenary session of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Forum Horn of Africa Working Group, which will take
place in Uganda on 17 to 20 March this year.
We stand ready to facilitate further forms of
dialogue, including the possibility of creating a round
table of eminent persons from Europe and the Islamic
world to encourage intellectual exchanges and promote
dialogue on the roots and ramifications of terrorism in
our societies. On education, the European Union will
host a regional experts’ meeting in early summer to
involve the European Union’s Radicalisation Awareness
Network, and with the United Nations, we will explore
options to host a high-level side event during the
General Assembly’s seventieth session in September to
promote the message for enhanced global partnerships
in countering violent extremism.
We all know how war, terror and poverty force
millions of people to leave their home countries in search
of a better future. We need to face the phenomenon of
migration under many perspectives — international
aid, crisis management, border control, integration,
social inclusion. All those issues need to be tackled
effectively, but there is one thing we should never
forget; this is a matter of human lives — saving human
lives.
We cannot let the Mediterranean, the cradle of
millennial civilizations, turn into a grave for tens of
thousands of innocent people. Along with my colleagues
responsible for internal affairs and migration, we are
promoting deeper cooperation among EU member
States to find political and operational solutions to
prevent further tragedies. At the same time, we are
stepping up efforts to support the work of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the International Organization for Migration, and

S/PV.7402

we must face collectively, in solidarity, our duty to
provide for the needs of refugees and asylum seekers.
There is much work to be done to guarantee that
refugees are welcomed in our societies. They should all
be provided with an opportunity to pursue their own
happiness and to contribute to the development of the
new communities.
Social cohesion, solidarity, the protection of human
life — these values are at the core of the European
project. This is a test the European Union cannot
fail, but we will never succeed alone. Addressing
uncontrolled migration is not just a task for Europe;
it is a responsibility we share. Countries of the region
are already making an effort that calls for all our
international support, starting with Jordan, Lebanon,
Turkey, Tunisia and many EU countries. I can guarantee
we are doing our part and will be doing so even more,
but we need all countries to stand up to the challenge. It
is a common interest and a common moral duty, since
we need to work together for the stability of regions that
in our world are facing terrible threats.
Yesterday in Kidal, a rocket attack on a camp
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali killed 2 Malian children
and a Chadian United Nations peacekeeper, and injured
11 peacekeepers and 3 civilians. No more than two
days ago, a terrorist attack in Bamako claimed the
lives of several people, including a security officer
of Belgian nationality working for the EU delegation
in Mali. Those acts strengthen even more our resolve
to help fight terrorism throughout the region and to
conclude a peace agreement in Bamako. In Mali the
EU is providing both civilian and military training
missions for the reconstruction and retraining of the
armed forces. This is part of a coherent medium-term
strategy to build up African national capacity, enabling
them to replace in due course the United Nations peace
support operation.
I am pleased that the Security Council is travelling
to Africa later today, as cooperation among the African
Union, the EU and the United Nations is key to regional
stability, and we have long-standing partnerships with
both organizations. In the field of security and peace
support operations, these partnerships increasingly
overlap, and it is time to reflect on how this trilateral
cooperation works and could work even better. As
was reaffirmed at the EU-Africa Summit in Brussels
in April 2014, the EU is committed to supporting
Africa’s efforts to manage its own security. We have

15-063875/26

S/PV.7402

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

supported the African peace and security architecture
from the outset and aim to give practical help at all
levels — national, regional and continental — to enable
its implementation.
The EU has put its money where its mouth is. In the
10 years since 2004, the EU has provided €1.2 billion
in support of the African Union-led peace operations
through the African Peace Facility. All in all, 16
Common Security and Defence Policy missions and
operations have been deployed on the African continent
so far, bringing practical support and concrete results
in a number of fragile or post-crisis countries. In the
Central African Republic, the European Union force,
under a mandate from this Council, has been working
closely with both the African-led International Support
Mission in the Central African Republic, and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic, to provide
vital protection for the civil population in Bangui.
Indeed, we feel our cooperation with the United Nations
in the planning and conduct of that mission has been
exemplary. Off the Horn of Africa, Operation Atalanta
has helped drive piracy from the seas.
To prevent conflict, however, nothing works better
than transparent and accountable Government in which
all citizens and groups in a country feel represented
and protected and that their concerns are heard, their
needs are taken care of, and their active participation
is welcomed. Hence, the efforts of the African Union
and the United Nations to encourage good governance,
the fight against corruption, and the full respect of
constitutional rule are fundamental building blocks to
prevent crises.
Through strong cooperation among the African
Union, the United Nations and the European Union,
we can combine our efforts to the greatest effect as we
face the immediate challenges and build capacities to
address the underlying causes in a comprehensive and
long-term perspective. This year, Africa has had to cope
not only with crisis and conflict; last week in Brussels,
we sent a message of hope but also of continued
determination to fight Ebola. That fight will not stop
until we see an end to the disease and the recovery
of the countries, societies and communities affected.
It is a fight that is based on cooperation, partnership,
trust, and ownership of the response, in particular of
local communities. It has been a fight that has been
conducted primarily in West Africa by the people and
authorities of the three most affected countries. It has

6/26

09/03/2015

also been very much a collective effort. The lead role
of the United Nations has been crucial for all of us. It
has expertise, experience and global convening power.
I would like to pay tribute to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his work in rallying international support.
It has been very important, and will continue to be so.
As we focus on the southern border of Europe and
on the neighbours to the south of our own southern
neighbours, we have to face the events in the eastern
part of our continent as well. What has happened in
Ukraine over the past year is the most serious crisis in
Europe since the Balkan Wars. And let me add here that
the Balkans offer us all, today, reasons to be proud and
optimistic. Exactly 20 years after Srebrenica, we see
how far peace, democracy and regional integration can
go, if we invest in it.
But in Ukraine, today, achieving a sustainable
solution is urgent, not least due to the death toll and the
humanitarian impact of the conflict. The cost of that
crisis in terms of human lives is huge; almost 6,000
people have been killed and many more injured. And
let us not forget the number of refugees and internally
displaced persons. Fundamental norms of international
law, enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
are being challenged. That cannot go unanswered. The
European Union condemns the illegal annexation of
Crimea and Sevastopol as a violation of international
law. That is also the position of the United Nations,
as expressed in the 2014 General Assembly resolution
68/262.
Let me say that the United Nations counts. It was
important that the package of measures adopted in
Minsk on 12 Feb was endorsed by the Security Council.
The ceasefire is fragile and no effort should be spared
to sustain it. The withdrawal of heavy weapons is only
a first step. The swift and full implementation of all
points of the Minsk Agreements by all sides is key to
bringing about a sustainable political solution to the
conflict.
We will continue to support the implementation
of the Minsk agreements, notably through in-kind
and financial contributions to the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special
Monitoring Mission. I am constantly in touch with
the United Nations Secretary-General, as well as the
Secretary General of the OSCE, Mr. Lamberto Zannier,
to ensure that our respective support is effective and
well coordinated. We are also grateful to various

15-06387

09/03/2015

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

United Nations agencies for coordinating international
humanitarian efforts and for their objective reporting
on the human rights situation.
Our policy towards Ukraine is crystal clear — we
want to put an end to the conflict. We need to put an
end to the conflict and to safeguard the territorial
integrity of Ukraine. But we also have to make sure
that Ukraine becomes a functional State that honours
the aspirations of its peoples. Whoever wishes to push
towards those goals will find Europe’s door wide open
for cooperation. Europe was built on the principle of
cooperation, both within its borders, and with our
neighbours. We want to keep that as a core principle of
our policies. The conflictual, complex world we live in
needs more cooperation, not less, everywhere.
The most recent crises should not distract us from
the Middle East peace process. Let us not forget that
another war was fought in Gaza no more than six months
ago. We should all put our best efforts into restarting
the peace process. The alternative to peace is not the
status quo. If we do not mend the wound, it will only
get worse. If we do not act, more violence will come.
We need action. For that reason, my first visit as High
Representative was to Gaza, Jerusalem, Tel Aviv and
Ramallah in the Middle East. Europe is ready to take
its part of the responsibility in restarting the process,
which is why we took the initiative of hosting, a few
weeks ago in Europe, a Quartet meeting — the first one
in over a year, at principals level. We need to recreate
the international framework that can lead to a solution.
We all know that the only way to resolve the conflict is
through an agreement between the parties that ends the
occupation which began in 1967, that ends all claims,
and that fulfils the aspirations of both sides.
There is no other solution than a two-State solution,
with a secure State of Israel and an independent,
democratic, sovereign and viable State of Palestine
living side by side in peace and security and mutual
recognition. We also know that we need to facilitate
a regional framework that can support a solution. Out
of the current regional crises, we have the opportunity
to redefine a different balance that would be peaceful
for all, but we have to start from the fundamentals: we
need to protect the viability of the two-State solution.
Israel should renew its commitment to halt all new
settlements in the West Bank and should resume the
transfer of Palestinian Authority revenues, in line
with its obligations. The Palestinian factions should
set aside their rivalries with a view to moving towards

S/PV.7402

real national reconciliation, and restore governmental
control in Gaza.
As I mentioned previously, I visited Gaza a few
months ago. The humanitarian situation faced by the
population of the Gaza Strip must be addressed urgently.
Basic infrastructure and services must be restored.
The European Union has welcomed pledges made by
members of the international community towards the
reconstruction of Gaza; those pledges now need to be
honoured as a matter of urgency. The European Union
calls for a fundamental change of the political, security
and economic situation in Gaza, including the end of
the closure, and responses to Israel’s legitimate security
concerns.
Direct negotiations between the parties should
resume as soon as possible. The international
community must take its responsibility in facilitating
the resumption of negotiations. We are ready to do our
part. The Quartet must redouble its efforts to facilitate
a renewed peace process and, in doing so, reach out
to all stakeholders, in particular in the region, to make
sure that the push for peace is supported and embraced
by all key actors. In that context, allow me to recall that
the Arab Peace Initiative remains a cornerstone of any
future peace.
The regional turmoil reinforces the sense of
urgency. As Daesh challenges our frontiers, and the
frontiers and sovereignty of existing States, Israel and
Palestine have the chance to mutually recognize their
borders and their right to security. Peace in the Holy
Places could lay out the most resounding message
against extremism, for the region and the whole world.
Speaking of the Middle East and of cooperation
between the European Union and the United Nations,
we cannot forget the European Union’s role — and
my personal one — as a facilitator in the talks with
Iran. Our aim is ambitious, and at the same time very
realistic: we need an agreement that both satisfies Iran’s
legitimate aspirations to a peaceful nuclear programme,
and guarantees the security of the region and the whole
world.
The only possible deal is one that guarantees
the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear
programme. There is still work to be done, and the next
weeks will be crucial ones. But, we have never been so
close to what could be a turning point in the history of
Iran’s relationship with the West and with the region.
We should not waste such a historic opportunity.

15-063877/26

S/PV.7402

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Just before I conclude, allow me to look ahead.
The year 2015 is a crucial year for the United Nations;
not only will we celebrate its seventieth anniversary,
but we will also see crucial processes coming to their
conclusions and new ones taking shape — processes
that will determine the global agenda for decades to
come. The results will influence global security for a
generation or more.
We are in the midst of discussions on the post2015 agenda. We must advocate a truly transformative
agenda. It must address the economic, social and
environmental dimensions of sustainable development
in a balanced way, and everywhere in our world.
Peaceful societies and freedom from violence
are crucial ingredients, and peace is not possible
without development and respect for human rights.
Understanding these interdependencies should make
us even more committed to supporting the efforts of
the Secretary-General for a truly transformational and
comprehensive approach to poverty eradication and
sustainable development this year.
This year is also the twentieth anniversary of the
Beijing Declaration and the fifteenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). It is a unique
opportunity for us all to support the United Nations in
its work for the advancement of gender equality, the
empowerment of women and girls and the fight against
all forms of violence against women. I am pleased to
have just attended the opening session of the fifty-ninth
session of the Commission on the Status of Women.
This is an important year, too, for our common
work on peace. When peace fails, we must be willing
and able to act decisively and, often, quickly. Most
often the United Nations is called upon to take the lead.
The result is that United Nations peacekeeping is facing
ever-increasing demands. The United Nations needs to
adapt its response to crises that are ever more complex
and increasingly involve a large number of non-State
stakeholders. Conflicts have changed; so must the
means to respond to them.
The EU fully supports the review of United Nations
peace operations the Secretary-General launched last
year. The review is timely and very necessary. We look
to the Security Council to take on the leadership role
as prescribed by the Charter. The world expects the
Security Council to respond decisively and timely to
the crises we face.

8/26

09/03/2015

Our Union, the European Union, is built on the
same values and the same vision of a cooperative world
order that led to the foundation of the United Nations,
70 years ago. In 70 years, the threats to peace have
evolved continuously, and so must we. Our tools need
to be updated so as to meet new challenges. But our
hopes and aspirations — to save future generations
from war, fight for democracy and human rights, and
promote social progress — are still the same. The
European Union is confident it can play a key role in
working towards a more peaceful future. We seek the
cooperation of others in the world, under the guidance
of the United Nations. We will only succeed if we all
do our part. We will only succeed if the nations of our
world are truly united.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Mogherini for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Secretary-General for his statement. I also
think the High Representative for her detailed briefing.
When I make a statement on behalf of Spain, I
begin with a formula stating that I fully align myself
with the statement made by the representative of the
European Union, which usually follows those made by
members of the Security Council. On this occasion,
it preceded mine and I would like to say that I align
myself especially closely and enthusiastically with the
statement the High Representative has just made on
this, her first visit to the Security Council of the United
Nations.
The European Union, as the High Representative
said, is a community of values and principles – values
and principles that were reflected some 70 years ago in
the Charter of the United Nations and which we fully
share. Those values and principles are shared by a great
many regional organizations. I would like to say that
the principal value shared by the European Union and
all such regional organizations — and, of course, by
the United Nations — is precisely that of preserving
international peace and security.
The relationship between the United Nations and
European Union is marked by two major milestones:
the first was the Joint Declaration of 2003 and, more
recently, the adoption of presidential statement
S/PRST/2014/4 in 2014. The relationship between

15-06387

09/03/2015

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

the two organizations could not be more fruitful and
positive. There are many very clear examples of farreaching and effective cooperation, but I will limit
myself to two: first, the civil and military missions of
the European Union, and especially those in situations
where joint operations have been carried out; and
secondly, all of those areas in which the European
Union provides training and equipment assistance.
That is all to say that the European Union, the Security
Council and the United Nations constantly strive
to work together, and I would like to underscore the
effective work of the delegation of the European Union
and its team to that end.
Turning to the future, I would focus on two
challenges facing the European Union and United
Nations in their joint work. First of all, I believe there is
a need to further fine-tune rapid response mechanisms.
Secondly — and this is absolutely fundamental — is
tripartite cooperation among the European Union, the
United Nations and our African friends in the African
Union.
The High Representative addressed in great
detail the many crises affecting our world today. I
will refer to only a few of them very briefly because
she said everything there is to be said, and I fully
subscribe to what she said. I would simply say that I
agree that the Middle East peace process must succeed
and we therefore support the appointment of a high
representative of the European Union in that regard.
With regard to Iran, I fully agree with her remarks;
we must ensure that Iran can access nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes and that its neighbours in the region
can live fully in peace. Spain chairs the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), and in
my capacity as its Chairman I assure the Council that I
value extremely highly the personal commitment of the
High Representative to the Iranian dossier.
With regard to Libya, as the High Representative
said, this issue constitutes a clear threat to peace and
security in the Mediterranean and the European Union.
Our ultimate aim is for the Libyan people to be able
to live in peace. The principal victims of any crisis in
Libya are our friends the Libyan people. We therefore
welcome the fact that, as the High Representative said,
the European Union will spare no effort in rebuilding
Libya and supporting the political process there, where
we commend the efforts of Bernardino León, who has
our unequivocal support.

S/PV.7402

With regard to Ukraine, above all we must prevent
further suffering for the Ukrainian population. I believe
that there are clear before-and-after scenarios for the
Minsk agreements of 12 February. Subsequently, there
has also been before-and-after scenarios for the Security
Council’s endorsement of the Minsk agreements, which
allows the Council to monitor the Ukrainian crisis
closely. Clearly, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe plays an important role with the
support of the European Union.
I would like to dwell further on Africa because Africa
and Europe really do share common challenges, such
as the fights against terrorism, poverty, radicalization
and piracy. Several of these are shared challenges for
Africans and Europeans alike because Europe cannot
accept an Africa that is in crisis. That is why we always
support, and Spain will always support, development,
peace and prosperity on the African continent. We
support the idea that Africans should always be the
masters of their own destiny when it comes to resolving
crises through the African Union and international
and subregional organizations on the continent. We
therefore welcome in particular the European Union
support for the operationalization of the African Peace
and Security Architecture, the establishment of the
African Standby Force and the African early-warning
and conflict-prevention mechanisms. The recent joint
meeting of the Ambassadors of the European Union
Political and Security Committee and of the African
Union Peace and Security Council was an excellent
example in this regard.
In conclusion, as perfectly reflected in the
statement of the High Representative, the European
Union, through its Common Security and Defence
Policy, is carrying out tireless work for international
peace and security in the same areas as the Council is.
Our joint cooperation must continue to make progress
and be strengthened on the basis of the fundamental
values that we share: respect for the law, human rights
and egalitarian and comprehensive development for
all persons and nations. Spain, as a member of the
European Union, will defend those principles above all.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his statement
this morning, and let me join others in welcoming High
Representative Mogherini to New York to brief us
today, in the first of many such briefings, I hope.

15-063879/26

S/PV.7402

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

At the outset, I would like to offer condolences
on behalf of the United Kingdom to the families of
those killed and injured in two terrorist attacks in
Mali over the weekend, among them United Nations
peacekeepers, United Nations staff and European
Union (EU) delegation staff.
The importance and value of the United Nations
cooperation with the European Union and other
regional organizations speaks for itself. In 1945,
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
specifically encouraged regional arrangements to play
their part in the pacific settlement of local disputes, and
the following 70 years have borne out that foresight.
The European Union, just like the United Nations
itself, arose as a direct consequence of the Second
World War. Building closer ties among European
Union countries to foster mutual understanding and
cooperation has led to a more secure Europe, which
has delivered increased prosperity for citizens of EU
member States. The echoes of Article 1 of the Charter
of the United Nations are clear to see in that progress.
Both organizations champion human rights, the rule of
law, development and the pacific settlement of disputes.
Among many other things, International Women’s Day,
celebrated yesterday, highlighted the role that women
play in international peace and security, another issue
to which both organizations give particular emphasis.
By championing those values, both organizations
contribute to the maintenance of international peace
and security. That is apparent in Somalia, where an
African Union mission with United Nations and EU
logistical and financial support has helped drive back
Al-Shabaab and allowed for the re-emergence of a
legitimate Somali Government working for the Somali
people. In the Central African Republic, an EU force
helped bridge the transition from an African Union
mission to one from the United Nations. The European
Union is also actively supporting the United Nations
peacekeeping mission in Mali.
EU support to transitions has worked successfully
in reverse as well. The EU force in Bosnia has taken
the place of the United Nations peacekeeping mission
there, supporting stability in that part of Europe and
allowing the people of Bosnia to choose their own
future. The continued presence of Operation Althea
of the European Union-led peacekeeping force, with
a mandate under Chapter VII of the Charter, is vital

10/26

09/03/2015

to preventing any return to the violent ethnic divisions
that once plagued the region.
Aside from peacekeeping, the EU leadership of the
E3+3 negotiations with Iran on the nuclear dossier is
another strong example of how our cooperation can help
counter nuclear proliferation and preserve international
peace and security. That we may be close to a deal is
in large part due to the diplomatic efforts of former EU
High Representative Catherine Ashton, and I hope that
under the guidance of High Representative Mogherini
we will soon see a successful outcome to the talks.
The EU is also supporting United Nations efforts
in Libya and leading on the dialogue between Belgrade
and Pristina.
While the EU can and does support the United
Nations in a number of ways, there are situations in which
the United Nations is unable to take action because of
the position of certain Council members. In the face of
such situations, the European Union can still speak out
and act based on the shared values I have set out. This
is particularly the case with regard to the situation in
Ukraine. When the Council failed to condemn Russia’s
illegal annexation of Crimea last year, the European
Union delivered a clear message and backed it up with
clear consequences for Russia. As Russia increased
its support for the separatists in eastern Ukraine and
the violence there escalated, the EU ratcheted up the
sanctions regime. As Ukraine’s economy suffered, the
EU provided significant financial support. With the
Minsk agreements, an end to the hostilities is possible,
but implementation of the agreements needs to be
verified and effectively monitored by the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, if trust is to
be rebuilt.
EU/United Nations cooperation has proved its
worth on numerous occasions. The two organizations
will continue to work together, complementing each
other’s efforts and thereby strengthening the purposes
and principles of the Charter.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): My delegation
commends, with thanks, the French presidency for
convening this briefing on the cooperation between the
United Nations and the European Union (EU). We thank
the Secretary-General for his remarks this morning.
Let me warmly welcome Ms. Federica Mogherini, High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
of the European Union. We thank Ms. Mogherini for
her very comprehensive briefing, especially on the

15-06387

09/03/2015

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

global challenges we face in the world today and on the
multifaceted cooperation between the European Union
and the United Nations.
It is well established that the cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations strengthens
United Nations efforts to maintain international peace
and security, prevent conflict and restore stability in
post-conflict situations. Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations provides the framework
for the participation of regional and subregional
organizations in matters related to international peace
and security under the Security Council’s authority.
Such organizations complement the work of the United
Nations with comparative advantages, providing
knowledge of specific regional issues and better
understanding of the causes of conflict.
The current security challenges demand the
strengthening of cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations in crisis management,
conflict prevention, mediation, peacekeeping, conflict
resolution and peacebuilding, which no country or
organization can meet alone. We therefore acknowledge
the European Union’s commitment to multilateralism.
Its cooperation with the United Nations, in focus and
scope, is a clear demonstration of that.
Angola values greatly the Joint Africa-EU Strategy
and the road map adopted at the fourth EU-Africa
Summit, held in Brussels in April 2014, which provides
the long-term framework for Africa-EU relations, to be
implemented on the basis of jointly identified priorities,
including peace and security, democratic governance,
human rights, sustainable development and global
and emerging issues. The Africa-EU partnership also
enhanced the dialogue between the African Union (AU)
Peace and Security Council and the EU Political and
Security Committee. The annual meetings between
these two bodies are important tools in supporting AU
efforts in the area of peace and security.
The EU provision of capacity-building in Somalia
and its direct and sustained effort in support of the
African Union Mission in Somalia from its beginning
has played an instrumental role in bringing stability
and, we hope, sustainable peace to that country. We are
now beginning to see some good signs of this.
In Mali, the EU remains committed to supporting
the stabilization process at the political, security,
humanitarian and development levels through the
implementation of the framework of the EU Strategy

S/PV.7402

for Security and Development in the Sahel in response
to the complex challenges in Mali and in the region of
the Sahel. We welcome the launching on 19 January of
the EU Common Security and Defence Policy mission
in Mali to help Mali ensure the return of constitutional
and democratic order.
The Central African Republic is one of the most
notorious cases of extensive cooperation between the
European Union and the United Nations, as well as
other regional organizations. The establishment, on
19 January, of an EU military advisory mission to
provide expert advice on the reform of the security
sector is a decision that will have an important impact
on the country’s stabilization.
I strongly commend the EU for its support to Guinea
Bissau, a brother country to which we are particularly
attached. As Guinea Bissau’s main development partner,
we are particularly pleased that the European Union has
lifted the restrictions to cooperation with Guinea Bissau
after the return of constitutional order to the country
and the push made by the present authorities to change
the military leadership. The cooperation extended by
the EU to Guinea Bissau in conflict prevention and
the provision of water and energy, aimed at restoring
the basic livelihood of the people of Guinea Bissau,
is most welcome. The budgetary support that is being
given to the State is another means to provide the
conditions for a decent life to the country’s citizens. We
also value the cooperation in capacity-building aimed
at strengthening institutions, improving governance,
promoting national reconciliation and macroeconomic
stability, and the allocation of resources for projects
addressing cross-cutting issues, such as gender, child
protection, the environment and the support of civil
society organizations of Guinea Bissau.
We acknowledge and welcome the leading role the
EU is playing in finding solutions to crisis situation in
the Western Balkans, in particular the involvement of
the European Union in the normalization of relations
between Serbia and Kosovo. Angola also commends the
commitment of the EU towards the diplomatic efforts
aimed at finding a political and peaceful solution to
the Ukrainian conflict and the continued economic and
humanitarian assistance to Ukraine.
Angola encourages the EU to maintain the
influence it is exerting towards finding solutions to a
number of global issues, which have been presented
very well today to the Security Council by the High

15-0638711/26

S/PV.7402

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Representative. We therefore would like Ms. Mogherini
to come back to the Security Council to strengthen this
important cooperation between our two bodies.
Mrs. Jakubonė (Lithuania): I cordially welcome
the European Union’s High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, Ms. Federica Mogherini,
to the Council, and thank her and Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for their briefings.
In a world that is getting flatter, cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
is not an option, but an essential element of preventing,
managing and resolving conflicts. The European Union
(EU) has been the most reliable partner in promoting
the United Nations principles and strengthening respect
for the rule of law. It has been one of the biggest donors
of humanitarian aid. As the Secretary-General pointed
out during the most recent debate on this issue (see
S/PV.7112), the EU is a champion of human rights
and a steadfast partner in promoting the Millennium
Development Goals, advancing gender equality and
tackling climate change. We see tangible results of this
cooperation, as reflected in the first-ever presidential
statement on institutional and strategic partnership
between the United Nations and the EU (S/PRST/2014/4),
adopted under the Lithuanian presidency a year ago.
The threat of terrorism has put the collective efforts
of the international community to an unprecedented
test. While this threat is not new, the recent tragic
developments in Iraq, Nigeria, the Sahel region and
elsewhere, including on European soil, attest to the
capacity of terrorism to spread and transform. It is
only through institutional cooperation that we are
able to meet the pressing need to shape and implement
effective counter-terrorism policies.
The landmark resolution 2178 (2014) provides
important guidance in this regard, and is high on the
agenda of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, which
Lithuania chairs. In December last year, the Committee
heard a briefing (see S/PV.7351) by Ms. Mara Marinaki,
Managing Director for Global and Multilateral Issues of
the European External Action Service, on the European
Union’s role in the areas of common interest. Lithuania
recently joined the counter-messaging working group
of the Global Coalition to Counter the Islamic State
of Iraq and the Levant, which is in line with the EU’s
strengthened commitment in the field.
As reaffirmed at the EU-Africa Summit in
Brussels last April, the EU is committed to supporting

12/26

09/03/2015

Africa’s efforts to manage its own security. The EU
continues to provide targeted assistance, notably via its
Common Security and Defence Policy missions, and to
financially contribute to African Union peacekeeping
operations. The Central African Republic, Mali and
Somalia are some examples where the EU and the
United Nations work hand in hand to restore peace
and bring stability. Continued and more systematic
interaction of the United Nations, the EU and other
regional and subregional organizations, in particular
the African Union, is crucial for ensuring an effective
collective response to the global challenges, such as
an unprecedented Ebola outbreak in West Africa. The
European Union has been a key partner in the United
Nations and national efforts to eradicate this disease.
The EU plays an active role in encouraging parties
to resume the Middle East peace process. We commend
High Representative Mogherini for her personal
engagement, including her recent initiative to seek
further engagement of regional partners, in particular
Saudi Arabia, Jordan and Egypt. At the same time, the
EU, together with its member States, remains one of the
major donors of the Palestinian Authority.
The situation in Libya remains a matter of grave
concern. Overcoming existing differences and forming
a Government of national unity is urgent in order to save
the country and prevent the spread of radical extremism
and terrorism in the region. We fully support Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Bernardino
León’s efforts in this respect. The Council must be
particularly careful with its decisions on the lifting of
the arms embargo and consider the impact of such steps
on the wider region.
We appreciate the efforts of the High Representative
aimed at reaching a comprehensive solution to Iran’s
nuclear issue in the framework of E3+3 negotiations.
A successful outcome of this negotiation would lead to
greater stability and security in the entire region and
beyond.
The EU, together with the United Nations, has
to continue working actively to facilitate a political
solution to the Syrian conflict, which is the only way
out of this tremendous tragedy. We look forward to the
EU regional strategy for Syria and Iraq, as well as the
Daesh threat. Ensuring accountability for war crimes,
crimes against humanity and violations of international
humanitarian law must remain a priority.

15-06387

09/03/2015

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Turning to the European neighbourhood, we
are confident that the stabilization and association
agreements between the EU and Kosovo and Bosnia
and Herzegovina will contribute to the overall stability
of the region. EU engagement in and commitment to
facilitating the Belgrade-Pristina dialogue remains
crucial. We look forward to furthering the process of
normalizing the relations between the two capitals
as Serbia and Kosovo continue on their respective
European paths. The commitment of the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to undertaking reforms in the
framework of the EU accession process is a solid signal.
Lithuania remains concerned about developments
in the South Caucasus, where Russia continues to pursue
a policy of de facto annexation of the Georgian regions
of Abkhazia and South Ossetia under the guise of socalled alliance and integration treaties, in violation of
Georgia’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Positive signals are badly needed in Ukraine.
This conflict, caused by Russia’s aggression towards
its neighbour, undermines the international system
that emerged out of the ashes of the Second World
War and threatens international peace and security.
Ceasefire agreements have been repeatedly broken
by Russia-sponsored militants, causing thousands of
deaths, massive displacement and enormous suffering.
By adopting resolution 2202 (2015), the Council
put its weight behind the Minsk agreements and the
implementation of the package of measures. We must
make sure that the ceasefire does not end up as badly
as the previous ones. EU sanctions must be maintained
as long as destabilization is ongoing. Further measures
should be discussed if the Minsk accords are broken
again.
Both the EU and the United Nations should continue
providing support to the Special Monitoring Mission
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE). The monitoring of the whole section
of the Ukrainian-Russian border that has until now
allowed a free flow of Russian weapons, fighters
and mercenaries into the militant-held area should
be ensured. The OSCE monitors should be provided
with unrestricted, safe and secure access to all areas.
Consolidated United Nations, EU, OSCE and Council
of Europe efforts are needed in order to ensure secure,
safe and unrestricted international access to the whole
territory of Ukraine, including Crimea and along the
border with Russia. We should also carefully study the

S/PV.7402

peacekeeping option, as requested by the Ukrainian
Government.
International efforts to support the Ukrainian
Government and its people in dealing with the
humanitarian crisis facing the country should be
stepped up. Lithuania has contributed to the joint
operation organized by the European Commission and
Union member States through the EU Civil Protection
Mechanism and is providing bilateral and multilateral
support in response to growing humanitarian needs in
the country.
Finally, we look forward to the High Representative’s
further briefings to the Council.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to welcome the High Representative
of the European Union (EU), Ms. Federica Mogherini,
to the Security Council and to thank her for her
first — and valuable — briefing since her assumption
of her duties, which we hope will signal continued
cooperation and interaction between the United Nations
and the European Union. I would also like to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his own valuable
briefing.
In the complex environment in which we live
and face various regional challenges, the cooperation
of the United Nations with regional and subregional
organizations has become ever more important to the
realization of international and regional stability and
peace, and an increasingly necessary strategic option
in dealing with many issues and in achieving the
aspirations of the United Nations, its Member States
and peoples of the world.
Jordan believes that regional challenges require
regional solutions and the establishment of sound
partnerships among different organizations. They also
require paying greater attention to relationships between
the United Nations and such regional organizations as
the European Union, the African Union and the League
of Arab States, which would enhance the role played
by all these organizations in addressing regional issues
and their containment. There is no alternative to the
important role played by these regional organizations
in the maintenance of peace and security in their
respective regions. As regional organizations, they are
better able to understand the nature of the regions, their
needs and the challenges they face.

15-0638713/26

S/PV.7402

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The active role played by the European Union in
international forums and in its bilateral and regional
partnerships, not only with countries within Europe and
their neighbours but with many other countries of the
world, adds further importance to the United Nations
work to preserve peace, prevent conflict and promote
regional and international security. The common values
and objectives of the United Nations and the European
Union facilitate the work of both organizations in
facing today’s challenges in promoting human rights
and equality and mediation and rapprochement among
conflicting parties.
At the diplomatic and foreign policy levels, the
European Union plays a major role in contributing to
regional complementarity based on joint cooperation.
In the face of global challenges, security threats and
economic pressures in our world today, the European
Union has become involved in many regional or
international efforts to develop a unique and effective
set of tools and mechanisms for promoting political
partnership, economic support and commercial activity,
as well as in dealing with crises and finding appropriate
solutions for them.
Most of the challenges we face are transboundary,
transcending the borders of one country or one region.
The EU is a unique regional organization since it is aware
that the security and stability of one region depends
on what is happening in neighbouring countries and
other regions. In the Middle East, the European Union
plays an active and supportive role in the resolution
of many issues in the region, which it considers to
be one of its highest priorities and major interests in
the foreign policy sphere. The States members of the
European Union and countries of the Middle East also
share the same vital interest and security concerns,
such as terrorist organizations and transborder crime,
which can only be addressed through a strong regional
partnership.
The European Union is also an important member
of the international Quartet, together with the United
Nations, the United States of America and the Russian
Federation, with a view to reaching a comprehensive
solution to the Palestinian-Israeli issue and the
establishment of the independent State of Palestine.
It is also the largest donor to the Palestinian people
and considers the establishment of peace between
Palestinians and Israelis to be one of its major
foreign policy objectives. That in itself indicates
the determination by the European Union to further

14/26

09/03/2015

contribute to the settlement of the Palestinian-Israeli
issue and other thorny issues in the Middle East.
Another example of the active role played by the
European Union is reflected in its great contributions to
assisting Middle Eastern and North African countries
in implementing political reforms, bringing about
democratic transition and providing social and economic
support. In Libya, the deterioration of the situation will
have repercussions not only in neighbouring countries
but also in Europe, the Middle East and the rest of
the world. International cooperation should therefore
be intensified and focus on relaunching a political
dialogue under the auspices of the United Nations to
find the best means to support the Libyan Government
and its legitimate, constitutional institutions as they
face the security and political challenges of confronting
fundamentalism and terrorism so that Libya can finally
and successfully complete its transitional process.
I should also mention the positive role the European
Union has played in its efforts to contain crises and
achieve stability in the Balkans, particularly in Kosovo
and Bosnia and Herzegovina and in Ukraine, as well
as through its contribution to strengthening States’
capacities in order to establish stable societies and
supporting peace, security and the rule of law. The
rapprochement that has been achieved among countries
in the Middle East and those of the European Union has
also had many positive results, including the special
relationship that exists between Jordan and the EU.
We have excellent cooperative relations through the
Euro-Mediterranean Partnership and the Deauville
Partnership, launched under a French initiative in 2011.
Jordan is also the European Union’s premier partner in
the area of technical negotiations, particularly regarding
the establishment of a partnership on migration.
In conclusion, the complex challenges we face show
clearly that strengthening cooperation and coordinating
our efforts, as well as exchanging expertise and lessons
learned between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations, has become ever more vital
as we combat current threats to peace and security by
developing rapid reaction systems for preventing and
resolving crises and ensuring that problematic situations
do not arise. It is important that such cooperation
continues on the basis of our shared values and goals,
and with the aim of maintaining international peace
and security.

15-06387

09/03/2015

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would first like to warmly welcome
Ms. Federica Mogherini, High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, to the Security Council, and we thank her and
the Secretary-General for their briefings.
The Russian Federation has consistently advocated
the development and improvement of cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and subregional
mechanisms on the basis of the Charter of the United
Nations and Chapter VIII of the Charter in particular.
It is on that basis, and within the framework adopted
by the General Assembly in May 2011 in its resolution
65/276, that cooperation should be established between
our global Organization and the European Union (EU).
The European Union is a significant political and
economic player in the international arena, helping to
strengthen multilateralism under the leading role of the
United Nations in combating new challenges and threats
and eradicating poverty. We have seen the added value
that the EU has brought to its cooperation, including
financially, in areas involving individual countries,
particularly the Central African Republic, Mali and the
Sahel region as a whole, and to the efforts to arrive at
a peaceful settlement of the situation concerning Iran’s
nuclear programme.
We have taken note of the contribution of the
European Union’s missions, conducted within the
framework of its Common Security and Defence Policy,
to international conflict-resolution efforts. Despite
the fact that relations between the EU and Russia
are currently being severely tested, we are ready to
continue cooperating with Brussels and all European
Union member States on the wide range of issues where
our interests coincide. Our positions differ on some
issues on the international agenda.
Nonetheless, there are a number of areas where
our cooperation continues, including within the United
Nations. Those include our opposition to such global
challenges as terrorism, religious extremism, piracy,
drug trafficking, transnational crime, illegal migration,
combating the Ebola virus, dealing with the Middle
East peace process and resolving the situations in
Libya and around Iran’s nuclear programme. We are
interested in full cooperation with Brussels, but only
when it is conducted on an equal footing and takes
into account each other’s interests and concerns. We
hope the European Union will shake off the untoward
influence of anti-Russian marginals among its ranks.

S/PV.7402

We have a positive experience of ad hoc joint
security actions, including past operations and missions
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Chad and the Central
African Republic, and currently with the anti-piracy
Operation Atalanta in the area of the Horn of Africa.
In that regard, it is important to remember that in
implementing its crisis-management operations, the
European Union and its member States should always
go strictly by the relevant decisions of the Security
Council. While recognizing the importance of efforts
on the part of Brussels to establish a dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina, we note that the sides must arrive
at any agreements on their own, without any pressure
and without undermining the role of the United Nations.
We have been closely following the work of the
European Union’s Advisory Mission for Civilian
Security Sector Reform Ukraine, which was launched
on 1 December. We assume that among other things,
the mission will help to root out nationalist sentiment
within Ukraine’s law-enforcement and judicial
authorities. At this stage, we see one of its main tasks as
making a legal assessment of the activity of the punitive
battalions of the so-called private armies in southeastern Ukraine and helping to solve the problem of
illegal Ukrainian armed groups. We are also expecting
principled evaluations of the lustration law on cleansing
the Government and of other laws designed to restrict
the rights of certain groups in Ukrainian society. We
do not understand why the European Union has still not
reacted to the fact that, in association with a Ukrainian
national holiday, a day celebrating the creation of the
collaborationist Ukrainian insurgent army that the
Nazis organized to carry out punitive operations in the
occupied territories was declared national holiday.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
despite the growing demand for an effective mechanism
for organizing a division of labour between the United
Nations and regional associations, including the EU, the
leading role of the Security Council in issues related to
the maintenance of international peace and security is
unshakable. It is enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and cannot be subject to review.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank the French presidency for convening
this meeting to discuss the issue of cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations and
arrangements, and Ms. Federica Mogherini, the High
Representative of the European Union, for her briefing.

15-0638715/26

S/PV.7402

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

As we have indicated in previous statements in
the Council, Chile believes that collective action
is vital to enabling our multilateral system to deal
effectively with threats, traditional or emerging. That is
strengthened through the involvement of regional and
subregional mechanisms, as outlined in Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations, as long as it is always
subject to coordination by the United Nations. In that
context, we believe it is essential to continue promoting
increased cooperation at every stage with regional and
subregional organizations in preventing crises and
handling post-conflict challenges. The European Union
has exceptional capacities for taking effective action on
issues related to peace and security and contributing to
implementation of the Council’s mandates. We would
like to emphasize the promotion of the rule of law and
the protection of human rights as an essential dimension
in rehabilitating fractured societies, areas in which we
share the European Union’s concerns.
My country has an interest in supporting the
peacekeeping and post-conflict processes, and it was on
that basis that we participated in the European Union-led
peacekeeping force’s Operation Althea, beginning
in 2003. Based on that experience, we deepened our
cooperation through a crisis-management framework
agreement, designed to strengthen our capacity to
develop peacekeeping and humanitarian missions,
promote development of the civilian component in
future operations and facilitate access to technical
know-how and exchanges.
Through its political and military operations, the
European Union has fostered peace and post-conflict
processes in various countries and regions. Its growing
number of operations in the current decade is a sign
of the increase in new conflicts requiring collective
action and in which the European Union can once
again continue to contribute to the work of the Security
Council. Its involvement in helping to restore countries
affected by crises has been significant, as we have seen
in its support to Mali and Somalia, its military training
missions in the Sahel and the Horn of Africa, and its
Common Security and Defence Policy missions, which
are aimed at improving the capacity of the military and
police forces in those countries. Another highlight is
Operation Atalanta’s efforts against piracy and armed
robbery off the coast of Somalia.
We also note with interest the European Union’s
significant efforts to ensure rapid response and
deployment capacities in the face of armed conflict.

16/26

09/03/2015

It is essential that the growing cooperation with
regional organizations respect the principle of national
ownership, which is highly important in reinforcing
the legitimacy and effectiveness of the various regional
organizations throughout the world.
In conclusion, we refer to a topic of common
interest to both Chile and the European Union, which
is women and armed conflict. We share the concern for
enhancing the protection of women in such situations,
which must include women’s active participation in
post-conflict peacebuilding and decision-making
efforts. That is particularly relevant this year as we
commemorate the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000). It is our belief that regional
and subregional organizations should be active players
in the implementation of that resolution in their political
and military missions in areas of conflict. Furthermore,
they should implement the seven-point plan of action
proposed by the Secretary-General in 2010.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I join my colleagues in
welcoming Ms. Federica Mogherini and congratulating
her on her assumption of the position of High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy of the European Union (EU). I also thank the
Secretary-General and the High Representative for
their respective statements.
Malaysia fully supports the call of the SecretaryGeneral to further expand cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations so that they may work closely together
in preventing, managing and resolving crisis under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
Regional organizations such as the EU have the
resources, expertise and international standing to play
multiple roles, including those of mediator, observer,
donor and peacebuilder, in various conflict areas all
over the world.
As part of the Middle East Quartet, the EU plays a
vital role in contributing to the Middle East peace process
towards finding a sustainable solution to the decadeslong Palestinian-Israeli conflict. We are encouraged by
the commitment shown by Ms. Mogherini, as reflected
in her visit to Gaza last November and her increasing
engagement with the leaders of the Palestinian
Authority. Malaysia welcomes the statement made by
the High Representative last November, which stressed
the need for a Palestinian State as the ultimate goal and
position of the EU, based on a two-State solution with

15-06387

09/03/2015

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

an independent, democratic, viable State of Palestine
living side by side with Israel and its other neighbours
in peace and security.
Malaysia lauds the continuing financial support
by the EU in building institutions and infrastructure
in the occupied Palestinian territories with the aim of
creating a viable Palestinian State. We also welcome
the recognition of the State of Palestine by Sweden last
year, and we hope to see more EU members moving
towards a similar direction in the near future.
As a regional organization that prides itself on its
core values of protection of human rights and the rule
of law, we urge the EU to be at the forefront of ending
impunity in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, especially
in view of the massive atrocities committed against the
Palestinian civilians during the Gaza conflict last year,
the continuing expansion of illegal Israeli settlements
in the occupied Palestinian territories, the continuing
construction of the separation wall by Israel, contrary
to the 2004 advisory opinion of the International Court
of Justice, and, recently, the withholding of tax revenues
by Israel in violation of its obligations under the Paris
Protocol of the Oslo accords.
We have heard repeated warnings from the United
Nations, including from the Secretary-General,
regarding the unsustainability of the situation in
occupied Palestinian territories due to continuing
Israeli occupation. We have also noted the widespread
disillusionment with the Middle East Quartet, especially
on the part of the region. We sincerely hope that the
international community will heed the warnings and
start to tackle the root causes of the conflict, rather than
continue with its piecemeal response of addressing the
symptoms of the crisis. In that regard, we look forward
to the early resumption of negotiations on the Middle
East peace process and we call on the EU, as a Quartet
member, to intensify its efforts towards that end.
Meanwhile, on Iran’s nuclear programme, Malaysia
recognizes the pivotal role played by the EU in
resolving the issue, within the context of the ongoing
E3+3 negotiations with Iran. Following the landmark
Joint Plan of Action of 24 November 2013, we are now
witnessing the potential culmination of a truly historic
agreement, which my delegation hopes will bring about
a final and peaceful resolution to the Iranian nuclear
issue. Malaysia encourages all parties to continue their
efforts towards dialogue and understanding, with a
view to bridging the gaps that remain.

S/PV.7402

On Africa, we commend the role and contribution of
the EU in the African region, from conflict prevention
to conflict management and post-conflict transition
and sustainable development. We also acknowledge
the support of the EU in sharing its technical expertise
to ensure the success of electoral processes in African
countries, including in Burundi.
With regard to the situation in Mali, Malaysia wishes
to take this opportunity to extend our condolences to
the families of victims of the recent terrorist attacks
in Bamako and Kidal, on 7 and 8 March, that killed
civilians and United Nations personnel, including
a staff member of the EU delegation. We strongly
condemn that atrocious act.
We commend the significant role of the EU in
supporting the Algiers process. As a co-mediator, the
EU continues to play its constructive role in assisting
the Malian parties with a view to achieving national
reconciliation and a long-lasting, peaceful solution. We
view that continued commitment of the EU, in close
cooperation with the United Nations and the African
Union, as essential at this particularly crucial juncture.
On Libya, Malaysia notes the ongoing efforts of the
EU in providing humanitarian assistance to asylumseekers in the Mediterranean region. We also welcome
the possibility of the EU’s playing a greater role in
monitoring and preventing the illicit flow of arms and
oil in the Mediterranean Sea, as well as the security
threats posed by terrorism in the region.
The volatile security situation and dire humanitarian
predicament in the Central African Republic require
our sustained attention. The multifaceted involvement
of the EU in the Central African Republic, including
its military operation in the Central Africa Republic
(EUFOR RCA) exemplifies the vital role that the
international community can play alongside the United
Nations in restoring peace and security to the Central
African Republic. We commend EUFOR RCA for
its important contribution to stabilizing the security
situation in Bangui and note the end of its mandate
on 15 March. We welcome the decision of the EU to
deploy the EU military advisory mission to the Central
African Republic, which we hope will continue the
momentum in strengthening the security sector in the
Central African Republic and building the foundations
for long-lasting stability.
Within Europe itself, the Ukrainian crisis is
threatening the security and stability of the region.

15-0638717/26

S/PV.7402

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

We applaud the initiative taken by key EU members,
particularly France and Germany, in engaging with
the conflicting parties to de-escalate the crisis. We
welcome the resulting agreement on the package
of measures for the implementation of the Minsk
agreements, which was subsequently endorsed by the
Council. We call on all parties to fully comply with
the provisions of the agreement to facilitate a final
political solution to the crisis and for the EU to play a
constructive role towards that end. We also follow with
great interest the EU’s recent launching of a review of
European neighbourhood policy in order to build strong
partnerships and to better tackle the challenges faced
by the EU in its relations with its neighbours.
In the western Balkans, we commend the stabilizing
role played by the EU in the post-conflict countries in the
region, such as in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo.
We welcome the breakthrough in normalizing relations
between Kosovo and Serbia, as well as the continuing
commitment by Ms. Mogherini in facilitating the highlevel talks between Pristina and Belgrade on 9 February
2015 in Brussels.
We also fully support the continuing role played by
the EU in further strengthening democratic institutions,
the rule of law and the process of reconciliation; in
capacity-building; and in creating a functioning market
economy in the western Balkans.
By way of conclusion, Malaysia welcomes the
reaffirmation by the High Representative of the EU
that the EU will continue its close cooperation with
the United Nations in upholding the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter. As a Council
member, Malaysia reiterates its commitment to play
a constructive role in further engaging with regional
organizations, especially one as successful and
established as the EU, in maintaining international
peace and security.
Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): New Zealand,
too, welcomes High Representative Mogherini to the
Council and thanks her for her briefing.
New Zealand is a strong believer in cooperation
between the United Nations and regional bodies within
the framework of Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter. While we will always assert the primacy of
the Council and the unique authority vested in it by
the international community, it is clear that local
knowledge and perspectives are essential to our shared
goal of maintaining international peace and security.

18/26

09/03/2015

There is no one-size-fits-all approach to cooperating
with regional organizations. Each has potential to assist
in the Council’s work, regardless of size or resources.
The European Union (EU) provides a good example of
how regional bodies can interact effectively with the
United Nations, but other regional organizations have
their own approach. As we know from our experience
in the Pacific, the United Nations can support longterm stability only through genuine and respectful
engagement with local actors.
The EU’s role in ensuring peace, stability and
prosperity in its own region is well known. With
conflict prevention at the very core of its foundation
and existence, and its proximity to and links with
conflict-beset regions, it is well placed to play a role
across the breadth of the Council’s agenda.
It is not possible to canvass all the possibilities
here today, but there are some of particular and recent
importance.
New Zealand strongly supports the achievement
of a comprehensive nuclear agreement with Iran, and
we acknowledge the E3+3’s constructive role in those
complex negotiations. And, as New Zealand told the
Council during the January open debate (see S/PV.7360),
the Middle East conflict between Israel and Palestine
is an ongoing and serious threat to international peace
and security.
We believe that the Council has a role to play in
bringing the parties to the table, hopefully to negotiate
a two-State solution. We acknowledge the EU’s
considerable efforts towards that same goal.
We also applaud the EU’s part in the international
efforts to manage the humanitarian impact of the Syria
crisis, both within Syria and in the wider region. In
Africa, the EU has demonstrated the value it can add to
the Council’s work through its long-term commitment
in Mali and Somalia, to name but two countries.
In the Central African Republic, which the Council
will visit this week, an EU force has strongly supported
the efforts made by the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic and France to stabilize the security situation.
That force is about to be replaced by an EU military
advisory mission, hopefully foreshadowing the
Council’s continued engagement with the EU and other
stakeholders, so that the people of the Central African
Republic can finally see real peace dividends.

15-06387

09/03/2015

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Looking forward, New Zealand urges the EU to
maintain its focus on conflict prevention, working with
regional organizations, not least in Africa. Given its
history, geography, size and experience, the EU has
particular advantages and perspectives that it can bring
to bear. It is in all of our interests that it should apply all
that to building partnerships that prevent the emergence
or re-emergence of conflict. In doing so, it will always
have the support of New Zealand.
That is because a firm belief in more active
prevention of conflict under Chapter VI of the United
Nations Charter is one of the fundamental reasons why
New Zealand sought membership in the Council, and
we look forward to working with the European Union
in pursuit of that goal.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I should
like to welcome European Union High Representative
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy Federica
Mogherini to the Security Council and to thank you,
Mr. President, and the Secretary-General for your
briefings today.
As you rightly point out, Mr. President, we face
pressing and unprecedented challenges that are as
diverse as they are dangerous. Our approach to each
of them underscores the depth and importance of our
partnership with the European Union (EU), and I would
like to discuss a few of these this morning.
All of us, from countries near and far, have watched
with horror as medieval barbarism has engulfed swathes
of territory in Syria, Iraq and northern Nigeria. Boko
Haram and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) have demonstrated more than a zeal for cruelty;
they have a professed disgust for modernity. Rational
thought, diversity of faith and difference of any kind is
used as justification for crimes so barbaric they shock
our conscience.
And yet, despite this unfolding horror, we see too
many citizens of too many nations, including many of
those represented around this table, travelling great
distances to join this crusade of cruelty. If we are to
advance the cause of international peace and security,
if we are to protect the most basic freedoms of faith,
expression and thought, if we are to prevail over terror,
we must remain strong in our condemnation of, and
united in our resolve to confront, those who facilitate,
conspire or participate in the murderous work of ISIL
and Boko Haram. And when their depraved ideology
manifests itself further abroad, whether in the offices

S/PV.7402

of a French paper that expressed itself through satire
or in the slaughter of innocents shopping in a kosher
market, we must remain resolute in our determination
to defeat this new threat to our global society and our
collective freedoms.
As such, we welcome the European Union’s recent
announcement of a €1 billion package to address the
situation in Syria and Iraq and to advance the fight
against ISIL. The EU’s release of a regional strategy
in February is a valuable addition to the international
community’s response to this crisis.
While we speak often of countering violent
extremism, and we all agreed in resolution 2178 (2014)
that this is an essential element in responding to the
foreign terrorist fighter threat, we know too little about
what works and even lack a shared understanding
of what it means. One Member State’s countering
extremism can become another Member State’s
definition of political repression. We should not gloss
over the potential for manipulation, but neither should
we shy away from tackling the problem of too many
people, in too many countries, signing up with terrorist
organizations that seek to threaten the very fabric of
our civilized world.
Countering violent extremism, therefore, must
be an active process of engagement at the local level
providing services to those who need them, resources to
those without them, building resilience in communities
targeted for recruitment, and highlighting paths to
peace for those being drawn down the roads of terror.
Doing any of this is a lot harder than talking about it,
and that is why the White House convened a high-level
summit focused on countering violent extremism in
Washington last month, to help share best practices,
develop new strategies and seize opportunities. We are
encouraged by the level of support and pledges already
announced by our partners, including the European
Union, to follow up on the principles and goals agreed
upon at the summit. That is a challenge that we must
confront, and we must succeed.
The fight against terrorism unites each member
of the Council. We should be just as unified in our
respect for the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of fellow Member States. Over
the past year, however, we have seen peace in Europe
challenged in the most fundamental manner. Russia, a
permanent member of the Council, has taken it upon
itself to seize territory, sponsor instability and redraw

15-0638719/26

S/PV.7402

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

the international borders of its neighbour Ukraine. We
commend the actions the European Union has taken,
including the imposition of sanctions, to exert pressure
on Russia to de-escalate the situation in Ukraine.
Those sanctions must remain in place until Russia
fully implements its commitments under the Minsk
agreements. We will continue to work with the EU and
to use all available multilateral avenues to seek a swift
resolution to the ongoing conflict, which has caused so
much suffering to the Ukrainian people. The September
Minsk agreements have been signed. The package
of measures to implement the Minsk agreements has
also been signed. Now it is time for those agreements
to translate into changed behaviour. Both Russia and
the separatists it supports are signatories to the Minsk
implementation plan, and we expect Russia and the
separatists it supports to honour the agreements they
have signed.
The European Union and the United Nations are key
partners in the efforts to advance Middle East peace,
including in their role as members of the Quartet. We
remain committed to working with the parties and all
of our partners to achieve a comprehensive and lasting
peace between the Israelis and Palestinians. Despite
some biased accounts of the facts on the ground that we
have heard today, we continue to believe that final-status
negotiations are the only way for the parties to reach a
peaceful resolution.
Of course, in order to ensure peace and stability
in the Middle East, we must ensure that Iran does not
acquire a nuclear weapon. Iran’s nuclear programme is
rightfully a matter of deep and serious concern for the
entire world. We believe that diplomacy is the preferred
route to our shared aim to ensure that Iran does not ever
obtain a nuclear weapon. That is why we continue our
critical work with the EU in the P5+1 negotiations. That
is why we must ensure that Iran cooperates seriously
with the International Atomic Energy Agency. That
is why we must stringently enforce the resolutions
adopted by the Council. We must not allow Iran to
obtain nuclear weapons.
When it comes to peacekeeping, all of us must do
more. The Organization needs the support of advanced
militaries now more than ever. We have seen the role EU
civilian and military operations have played to battle
piracy off the Horn of Africa, to train troops in Mali,
to strengthen security in the Central African Republic,
to build civilian capacity in the Niger. Twenty years
ago, European countries were also leaders in United

20/26

09/03/2015

Nations peacekeeping; 25,000 troops from European
militaries served in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, more than 40 per cent of the Blue Helments
at the time. Today, United Nations peacekeeping
would benefit exponentially from a more diverse array
of troop contributors and other forms of assistance.
As Ambassador Power announced just hours ago in
Brussels, that is why President Obama will be hosting a
summit of world leaders in September in New York to
help ensure that the United Nations and the world have
the peacekeepers needed to address today’s crises.
The values on which the European Union was
founded are the same ones that give strength to the
United Nations. They are the values that catalyse our
collective action and animate our pursuit of peace and
security. They are the values that recognize the strength
and diversity of expressions, richness in diversity of
perspectives, resilience in diversity of belief and faith
in the enduring promise of equality and freedom for
all. As we navigate the many challenges and threats we
confront, we will continue to rely upon and take great
pride in our and the Organization’s deep and enduring
partnership with the European Union.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome the
participation of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon at this
meeting. We also wish to thank Ms. Federica Mogherini,
High Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, for her briefing.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela attaches
special importance to the role of regional organizations
in promoting international peace and security, including
through the negotiated settlement of conflicts. We
welcome the efforts of the European Union (EU) and
other regional forums in that regard. We are convinced
of the role that regional and subregional organizations
can play in the prevention and resolution of conflicts
and in the peacebuilding process through the recovery,
reconstruction and development of societies emerging
from conflict situations. We believe that close
cooperation should be maintained between the United
Nations and regional organizations, including the
European Union, taking into account Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations. In the area of crisis
management, we believe that the European Union and
its members must act in accord with the principles of
the Charter.

15-06387

09/03/2015

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

We value the role played by the the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo under the auspices of
the Organization.
We welcome the prospects for a political solution
in Ukraine, which have recently moved in a positive
direction with the decision adopted by the leaders of
Ukraine, Russia, France and Germany on 12 February
in Minsk and endorsed by the Council in resolution
2202 (2015). We commend the ongoing work of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
to support the effective implementation of the Minsk
agreements, including the withdrawal of heavy weapons
by those involved. We reiterate that the parties must
strictly observe the Minsk agreement of 12 February
on the protection of civilians and support a process to
address the humanitarian situation.
In the Middle East, the intensification of armed
conflicts and the maintenance of colonial situations
and foreign occupation have had a negative impact
on international peace and security, the facts and
the gravity of which we cannot remain indifferent.
We are convinced that the European Union and the
Security Council are called upon to play an important
role in the promotion of a definitive solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, including putting an end
to the occupation of Palestinian territories and the
establishment of a free, sovereign and independent
Palestinian State within the secure and internationally
recognized pre-1967 borders.
We reiterate our conviction that there can be no
military solution to the current crisis in Libya. We
urge that efforts be redoubled to facilitate dialogue,
reduce tensions and refrain from taking any decision
that may worsen those tensions. To that end, we
welcome the resumption of negotiations in Morocco,
facilitated by Mr. Bernardino León’s efforts, in order
to reach a political solution that leads to the formation
of a Government of national unity. In that regard, we
must continue to encourage the parties to continue the
inclusive dialogue to achieve a strong and lasting peace
that leads to national reconciliation. We also appeal to
external actors with influence on the parties to refrain
from adopting measures contrary to peace, security and
the development of Libya.
We continue to nurture the hope that peace and
political stability in Burundi will be consolidated
and that all the necessary support will be given to the
people and the Government of that country, so that

S/PV.7402

the upcoming elections can be conducted successfully
under the sovereign right of the people of Burundi to
self-determination. We also call for strengthening
international cooperation to assist that country, without
any preconditions, with a view to eradicating poverty,
which is one of the root causes of conflicts affecting the
States of the region.
Peace efforts promoted by the United Nations in the
Central African Republic must be accompanied by the
simultaneous and sustained efforts by the international
community to provide cooperation and economic
assistance aimed at reducing poverty and inequality
in order to achieve a long and enduring peace. The
support of the Organization to the upcoming elections
serves to underscore the multidimensional nature of
peacekeeping operations in the search for lasting peace.
Finally, we hope that those channels of cooperation
between the United Nations and the European Union
will contribute to international peace and security.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): My delegation would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting.
We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his briefing
and for his leadership in consolidating the relationship
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
which he has so well conceptualized in his statement
this morning.
We also want to express our appreciation to
Ms. Federica Mogherini for her inaugural briefing
to the Security Council in her capacity as High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy. We take this opportunity
to pay tribute to her predecessor, Catherine Ashton, for
her contributions to strengthening cooperation between
the United Nations and the European Union (EU), and
especially for her efforts to advance the achievement of
peace and security around the world.
Nigeria acknowledges the pivotal role of the EU as
a key partner of the United Nations and various regional
organizations in the maintenance of international
peace and security. We believe that over time the EU
has demonstrated a high level of commitment to the
promotion of human rights, development cooperation
and humanitarian assistance on a global level. In terms
of the maintenance of peace and security, the European
Union has made substantial contributions in various
arenas across the world. In 2014, the European Union
deployed a peacekeeping mission to the Central African
Republic to support African Union and French forces

15-0638721/26

S/PV.7402

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

already on the ground. Nigeria pays tribute to the men
and women who served in that mission, and commends
them for the strident efforts made in the execution
of their mandate, even in extremely challenging
circumstances. The mission contributed significantly
to the protection of civilians in and around Bangui.
In the case of Mali, in April 2014, the EU
established the European Union Common Security
and Defence Policy Sahel Mali mission, with an initial
mandate of two years. The mission is a key aspect of
the EU’s support to Mali. It involves the training of the
country’s security forces and helping the State to restore
and maintain its authority across the entire Malian
territory. The European Union Capacity Building
Mission complements the EU training mission, which
is involved in the reorganization of the Malian military.
Nigeria commends the EU for its assistance to Mali and
recognizes its significant role in enhancing the capacity
of the Malian military and security forces in meeting
the enormous security challenges of that country.
In today’s world, we all agree that terrorism
constitutes one of the greatest threats to international
peace and security. The Sahel is one of the regions
where terrorism is assuming alarming dimensions.
Through its Sahel strategy, the EU is working with the
States in the region to promote good governance and
social cohesion and to strengthen political stability and
security. The strategy involves enabling sustainable
development, creating prosperity and combating violent
extremism in the Sahel so that the region will cease to
be a safe haven for terrorist groups. Nigeria commends
the EU for the resources it is commiting to fighting
terrorism in the Sahel, which demonstrates a clear
recognition that terrorism in any region of the world
is a threat to all regions, and that fighting terrorism is
indeed the collective responsibility of all nation States.
In the European arena, the European Union
was a major contributor to the implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999), which authorizes international
organizations to establish a security presence in
Kosovo. Today, the EU plays a key role in promoting
the rule of law in Kosovo through the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosova (EULEX), established
in 2008. EULEX has also supported the dialogue aimed
at normalizing relations between Kosovo and Serbia.
Some of the Mission’s notable achievements in that
regard include the implementation of the freedom of
movement agreement between Kosovo and Serbia. That
agreement allows residents of Kosovo to travel freely

22/26

09/03/2015

in Serbia with identity cards and vehicle licence plates
issued in Kosovo. We see that as creating an avenue for
person-to-person contact between Serbs and Kosovars,
which could lead to better understanding between
them. EULEX also facilitated the integration of Kosovo
Serb police officers into the northern command of the
Kosovo police.
The inextricable link between security and
development makes it essential for greater attention
to be paid to the development needs of States. In
many developing countries, resource constraints are
major impediments to development. That is when and
where donor support becomes very vital. In terms of
development cooperation, the EU provides more than
half of global development assistance, making it the
largest donor in the world. The European Development
Fund, through which the EU disburses development
assistance to the African, Caribbean and Pacific Group
of States, has been used to support receiving countries
in a broad range of sectors, including agriculture, the
environment, infrastructure, education and health.
The Fund also supports the promotion of the rule of
law, good governance and democracy. The eleventh
European Development Fund, which covers the period
2014-2020, involves a total of €31.5 billion. That
represents a substantial increase over the €22.6 billion
provided under the tenth Fund, which covered the period
2008-2013. Nigeria appreciates the EU’s unwavering
commitment to the promotion of international
development. Through that, the EU has touched the
lives of millions of people around the world.
We would like to reiterate our strong support
for the engagement between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in consonance
with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
The European Union model is an exemplary one that
demonstrates how cooperation among States can work
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
That model of engagement is even more urgent in our
world today, as unprecedented threats and challenges
have not only transcended national boundaries, but
moved beyond the capacity of any single State to tackle.
All the inputs around the table this morning point to
that one single phenomenon: no one State can handle
the level of threat in the world today. This is a call for
collective action.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank France, Mr. President, for taking the initiative
to hold this meeting on the cooperation between the

15-06387

09/03/2015

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

United Nations and the European Union. We have
listened carefully to the briefings by Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and Ms. Federica Mogherini.
In recent years, in cooperation with the United
Nations and the Security Council, the European Union
(EU) has played an active role in efforts to address
regional hotspot issues such as the nuclear question in
Iran, and conflicts in the Middle East, Mali, the Central
African Republic and Burundi, which China welcomes.
We encourage and support the EU to continue to
play a constructive role in maintaining regional and
international peace and security. We hope that, in
carrying out cooperation with the United Nations and
the Security Council, the EU will above all uphold the
basic principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
such as the sovereign equality of States and the peaceful
settlement of disputes, and commit itself to addressing
hotspot issues through mediation and good offices.
Secondly, it must respect the sovereignty and
specific conditions of countries when it comes to human
rights, engage in dialogue and exchanges on the basis
of mutual respect and equality and play a constructive
role. Thirdly, we hope it would leverage its resource
advantage to provide economic and social assistance
according to the needs of the countries concerned and
on the basis of respect for national ownership, so as
to enhance their self-development capacity in order to
address the root causes of conflicts. This year marks
the seventieth anniversary of the founding of the United
Nations and of the world’s victory in the war against
fascism. In February, at China’s initiative, the Council
held an open debate on maintaining international peace
and security (see S/PV.7389). We hope that that debate
may prompt Member States to learn the lessons of history
and recommit themselves to the purposes and principles
of the Charter of United Nations and, looking forward,
to explore effective ways of maintaining international
peace and security in changing circumstances and
dedicate efforts to building a new type of international
relations, with win-win cooperation at the centre.
In the face of the current proliferation of global
and regional challenges, the security interests of all
countries are closely linked. The United Nations is at the
core of the international collective mechanism, and the
European Union is an important force for maintaining
international peace and stability. Further strengthening
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations such as the European Union is conducive
to advancing multilateralism and consolidating and

S/PV.7402

strengthening the international collective security
mechanism.
Just as pointed out by Chinese President Xi Jinping
in his statement at the College of Europe, in Bruges,
Belgium, on 1 April 2014, whatever the vicissitudes of
the international situation, China always supports the
process of European integration and a united, stable
and prosperous European Union playing a greater
role in international affairs. China will continue to
support the EU in further strengthening cooperation
with the United Nations in maintaining regional peace
and stability and promoting economic development so
as effectively to complement the work of the United
Nations.
China attaches great importance to its relations
with the EU. Chinese President Xi Jinping made a
successful visit to the headquarters of the EU last
year, where he agreed with the leaders of the European
Union to establish partnerships for peace, growth,
reform and civilization, and set down important plans
for the development of China-EU relations. This year
marks the fortieth anniversary of the establishment
of relations between China and the European Union.
China stands ready to continue to strengthen efforts
to implement the common understanding reached
by the leaders of both sides, to promote the strategic
framework for China-EU cooperation towards 2020,
strengthen communication and coordination on major
issues, promote the sustainable, healthy and stable
development of the strategic partnership, and work
togethe to make new contributions to world peace,
stability and prosperity.
Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the French delegation for having organized this
meeting on cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security, with a focus on the
European Union. I would like to convey my gratitude
to Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon and Ms. Federica
Mogherini, High Representative of the European
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, for their
briefings.
The Charter of United Nations confers upon
the Security Council the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security. In
Chapter VIII, the Charter provides for partnerships
with regional and subregional organizations with a
view to maintaining international peace and security. In

15-0638723/26

S/PV.7402

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

that regard, Chad welcomes the progress made through
partnerships between the United Nations and regional
organizations, particularly the European Union. We
believe that the United Nations and the European Union
are complementary and that the cooperation between
them is exemplary.
We have taken note of the various activities
carried out by the European Union around the world,
some of which are referred to in presidential statement
S/PRST/2014/4, of 14 February. Given the multiple
crises currently facing the world, particularly in Africa,
we urge the United Nations, the European Union and
the African Union to strengthen their triangular
cooperation. In Africa, we must tackle together the
new wave of challenges represented by terrorism,
violent extremism and transnational organized crime,
especially in West and Central Africa, the Sahel and
the Maghreb.
We encourage the United Nations, the European
Union and the African Union to consider ways to
strengthen their partnerships for the prevention,
settlement and management of conflicts and for
peacekeeping. We reiterate our call to continue to pursue
together the aim of an Africa free of armed conflict by
2020, in keeping with the solemn declaration adopted
on the occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of founding
of the precursor to the African Union.
We welcome the contributions of the African Union
and its regional economic communities, which initiated
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur, in the Sudan, the African Union Mission in
Somalia, the African-led International Support Mission
in Mali and the African-led International Support
Mission in the Central African Republic (MISCA). We
welcome the important role played by the European
Union, particularly its African Peace Facility, to
support African Union operations.
In the Central African Republic, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), which took
over from MISCA, has achieved some improvement,
despite the continuing presence of armed groups.
We are nonetheless concerned by continuing acts of
violence taking place in Bangui and other provinces,
including murders, arbitrary detention, obstacles to
the provision of humanitarian aid, drug-trafficking,
arms trafficking, the illicit exploitation of the country’s
natural resources, attacks targeting international forces

24/26

09/03/2015

and the kidnapping of humanitarian workers and even
members of the Government.
We welcome the role played by the forces of
Operation Sangaris and the European Union Force,
as well as their contributions to maintaining order
in Bangui and some other provinces, including the
training of the first police and gendarmerie units. The
drawdown of those forces, planned for March 2015, is
nonetheless cause for concern, as it risks compromising
MINUSCA’s aim of deploying troops and police beyond
Bangui to ensure the smooth holding of the elections.
Moreover, we condemn the situation of the civilian
population, which has seen scant improvement, as well
as that of displaced persons, who remain in distress
due to the prevention of the delivery of food aid. We
call for the necessary steps to be taken to ensure that
displaced persons and refugees are able to participate
in the upcoming electoral process.
In Mali, the will of the parties, the support of
the international community and the determination
of the mediation team allowed the parties to reach
an agreement in Algiers on 1 March, following eight
months of work. We commend Algeria and the entire
mediation team for their efforts. We believe that the
agreement needs to be signed by all of the parties
concerned, as it represents a decisive step towards a
solution to emerge from the crisis.
Moreover, Chad firmly condemns the terrorist
attacks committed last weekend, including in Bamako,
and the attacks against the Kidal headquarters of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali. We express our
condolences to the families of the victims and to the
Governments of the countries affected. We believe
that those acts of violence were aimed at undermining
the ultimate signing of the agreement, whose
implementation could make possible the return of peace
and stability. The international community must send a
firm, clear message to warn those who obstruct peace.
Chad acknowledges the active contribution of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali throughout the process
of the Algiers talks and calls on it to be ever more
vigilant in dealing with other possible terrorist attacks
against its facilities and personnel. We ask all countries
and organizations that have influence over the Malian
parties and that have not yet done so to persuade them

15-06387

09/03/2015

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

to join the 1 March agreement as soon as possible so as
to enable it to be signed on 28 March as expected.
In conclusion, we express our gratitude to
the European Union for its contributions to the
maintenance of peace and security around the world,
in particular in Somalia, Mali and the Central African
Republic. We call on the United Nations, the European
Union and the African Union to further strengthen
their trilateral cooperation to respond to all the
challenges facing Africa. In that respect, the situation
in Libya — and the Sahel in general — the terrorist
threat posed by Boko Haram, illegal trafficking and
transnational organized crime should command the full
attention of the international community. To better face
those challenges, particular emphasis must be placed
on the relationship between development and security.
In that respect, the effective implementation of the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel will,
in our humble opinion, contribute to improving, at the
very least, the security situation.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of France.
I warmly welcome Ms. Federica Mogherini,
High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy of the European Union and Vice-President
of the European Commission. It is always a pleasure
to welcome to the Chamber a representative of that
major player in security and international stability, the
European Union. I welcome her presence here for the
first time, as mentioned, since her appointment.
The European Union is a key partner of the Security
Council in dealing with most of the crises it has before
it. Ms. Mogherini has gone into detail on that, and I will
not go over it again.
In our view, the European Union’s work is
complementary to that of the Council. The European
Union has been able, to act decisively in recent years,
in particular in Africa. Last year in the Council, we
welcomed the European Union’s work in training the
Malian security forces, which complemented the work
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali. We then entrusted the
Europeans to do the same in Central African Republic.
That was done through the deployment of the EU-led
force in the Central African Republic (EUFOR-RCA),
beginning on 1 April 2014, which has made significant
contributions to the efforts to provide security and
protection to civilians in Bangui, again in support of

S/PV.7402

the African-led International Support Mission in the
Central African Republic, then the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic.
This week, as the EUFOR-RCA mission comes to
an end, I want to commend the work of the mission and
highlight the continued commitment of the European
Union to Central African Republic, since an assistance
mission to reform the Central African armed forces
will immediately take over. The work in the Central
African Republic shows that the European Union knows
how to engage effectively and quickly, and we thank
the European External Action Service for its work in
mobilizing European partners.
In addition to its deployment on the ground, the
European Union is also a valuable partner of the United
Nations in finding sustainable solutions to the major
crises that concern us. The fight against Boko Haram
will therefore be a priority in the coming months.
On the Iranian nuclear issue, we thank the High
Representative for her exemplary engagement with
the E3+3. The European Union plays a crucial role in
the talks with Iran aimed at reaching a comprehensive
settlement of the crisis. Much remains to be done, but
we are fully committed to reaching a solution.
That is now also the case with the crisis in Ukraine,
which has entered into a new phase with the signing,
on 12 February, of the package of measures for the
implementation of the Minsk agreements. Again, the
European Union is taking part in the efforts to find a
solution to that crisis, with support from the Council
through resolution 2202 (2015). Let us recall that the
European Union has resorted to sanctions, on that issue
as on many others, not to punish but to encourage the
stakeholders to engage in dialogue. The link between
sanctions and the implementation of the entire Minsk
package was recalled last week by European leaders.
The EU is indeed mustering its efforts at the diplomatic,
financial and humanitarian levels for a peaceful
settlement of the crisis in Ukraine.
In the Middle East, the EU will continue to play its
role within the framework of the Quartet and beyond,
as a major player seeking to preserve the two-State
solution in the face of ongoing colonization, and to
contribute to finally achieving a peace agreement. That
is also the case in Libya, which is the most serious crisis
in the region to the south of the EU. The European Union
actively supports the efforts of Special Representative

15-0638725/26

S/PV.7402

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

of the Secretary-General Bernardino León. I know
that Ms. Mogherini is personally involved in that. The
resumption of the Libyan political dialogue should help
achieve a comprehensive solution, and the European
Union should play a key role in supporting that process.
Finally, the European Union, which is a
undertaking without precedent, is working to promote
a new order in its immediate neighbourhood and
beyond by establishing the rule of law, democracy and
human rights as elements for peace and security. Built
on the ideal of bringing peoples together to transcend
nationalism, the European Union has created a unique
model that has significant appeal.
That model continues to work in support of peace
and security, particularly in the Balkans, which were
long battered by war after the dissolution of the former
Yugoslavia. Today more than ever, the European Union is
working for rapprochement between Serbia and Kosovo,
by promoting their bilateral dialogue and offering
them a fair place in a peaceful regional environment
that is focused on its collective development. After the
electoral pause in those countries, we look forward to
the resumption of their dialogue at the highest level on
9 February with the help of the High Representative.
We earnestly hope for the continuation of those efforts.
The process of normalization is also under way for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which the European Union
is supporting on its road to stabilization, in particular
through European Union Force Operation Althea.
Under the leadership of Ms. Mogherini, the European
rapprochement of Bosnia and Herzegovina has gained
new momentum. It is crucial that the country resume
its journey on the path of reform, with a view to also
joining the European Union at the appropriate time.

26/26

09/03/2015

Wherever the European Union is working, it
contributes to the ideals of peace, freedom and human
progress that the United Nations embody. It is thus
an indispensable partner for the United Nations. That
special role was reflected four years ago in the adoption
of General Assembly resolution 65/276, through which
the Assembly recognizes the European Union’s place as
a partner and friend of the United Nations.
I would also like to emphasize today, while
expressing my best wishes for success to Ms. Mogherini
in her work, that the European Union is more than
a regional organization. It is an integration project
without precedent in history and one of the pillars of a
coherent and effective international system.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to Ms. Mogherini.
Ms. Mogherini (spoke in French): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to have
participated in this debate, which was very important
for me personally and for the European Union. I assure
you that I am ready, both personally and on behalf of
the European Union, to work to maintain our friendship
and partnership with the United Nations, and the
Security Council in particular, in the months and years
to come. As you said, the European Union is not only
a regional organization, it is also the most significant
regional integration process in the world.
The President (spoke in French): I warmly thank
Ms. Mogherini.
The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.

15-06387
