THIRTY-SECOND

YEAR
th
MEETING:

NEW

31 MARCH 1977

YORK

CONTENTS
Page
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 999) . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . , . , . . . , . . . . , ,
1
Adoption of the agenda . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . , , , . . . . . . . . . , . , . . . . , ,

1

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 9 March 1977 from the Permanent Representative of Nigeria to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/l 2295) .

1

SlPV.1999

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

1999th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday,
H&dent:

Mr. Andrew YOUNG (United States of America).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Republic, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1999)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 9 March 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Nigeria to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12295)
7% meeting was called to order at 11.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question of South Africa
Letter &ted 9 March 1977 from the Permanent Representative of Nigeria ‘to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/l 2295)

31 March

1977, at 10.30 a.m.

Randolph (Liberia), Mr. B. Rabetajika (Madagascar), Mr. M.
Kane (Mauritania), Mr. T Puntsagnorov (Mongolia), Mr. L.
0. Ha&man {Nigeria ), Mr. M Fall (Senegal), Mrs. S. I’.
Gbujama (Sierra Leone), Mr. A. H. Hussen (Somalr‘a), Mr. 1.
B. Fonseka (Sri Lanka), Mr. A. 1: Runborg
(Sweden),
Mr. M. Allaf (Syrian Arab Republic),
Mr. A. Kodjovi
(Togo), Mr. S. A. Snlim (United Republic of Tanzania),
Mr. J. Petri6 (Yugoslavia), Mr. Umba di Lutete (Zaire) and
Mr. D. W. Kamana (Zambia) took the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT: In addition, I should like to inform
members of the Council that a letter has been received from
the representative of Guyana in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the question on
the Council’s agenda. Accordingly, I propose, in accordance
with the usual practice and with the consent of the Council,
to invite him to participate in the discussion without the
light to vote, under the provisions of Article 31 of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
3. In view of the limited number of places available at the
Council table, I shall invite the representative of Guyana to
take the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber, on the understanding that he will bc invited to
take a place at the Council table whenever he wishes to
address the Council.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. R E. Jackson
(Guyana) took the place reserved for him at the side of the
Buncil chamber.

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
previously taken by the Council [198&h-1991st,
1994th,
1996th and 1998th meetings], I invite the representatives
of Algeria, Bahrain, Botswana, Burundi, Cuba, Egypt,
Ethiopia, the German Democratic Republic, Ghana,
Guinea, Indonesia, Jamaica, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Mauritania, Mongolia, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sweden, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Togo, the United Republic of Tanzania, Yugoslavia, Zaire and Zambia to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber, on the usual
understanding that they will be invited to take a place at
the Council table when they wish to address the Council.

this debate, and particularly the representatives of the third
world, have paid tributes to you, MT. President, which I
would venture to describe as exceptional, in respect of your
assumption of the post of Permanent Representative of the
United States of America to the United Nations. On behalf
of the delegation of Venezuela, I wish to join in those
tributes. I do so not as a mere formality but because we are
convinced that someone who has struggled in the streets
and who has had to fight his way up has the best credentials
to represent his country at the United Nations.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. Rahal (Algeria),
Mr. S. M. Al Saffar (Bahrain), Mr. T. l’lou (Botswana),
Mr. Z. Banyiyezako (Bunmdi), Mr. R. Alar&
(Cuba),
Mr. A. E Abdel Meguid (Egypt), Mr. T Bekele (Ethiopia),
Mr. P. Florin (German Democratic Republic), Mr. T. B.
Sam (Ghana), Mr. M. S. Camara (Guinea), Mr. A. Marpaung
/Indonesia), Mrs. L. Mair (Jamaica), Mr. F. M. Kasina
(Kenya), Mr. C D. Molapo (Lesotho}, Mrs. A. Brooks-

5. The task you have set yourself will not be easy to fulfil,
because the forces of the past have always conspired against
anything that is new and positive. We expect much of you
but it can never be too much if, in the new international
policy of the United States, goodwill prevails, as well as the
spirit of understanding required in our times. This is in line
with what President Carter stated here at the United
Nations.

4. Mr. CONSALVI
(Venezuela) (interpretation
from
Spanish): All the representatives who have participated in

6. As one of the representatives of Latin America, I am
pleased to welcome you and to congratulate you on the
manner in which you have been presiding over the Security
Council.
7. To Ambassador Murray of the United Kingdom I
express the appreciation of the delegation of Venezuela for
the skilful, witty and friendly way in which he conducted
our debates in February.
8. At this stage of the debate, it is hard to say anything
original about the policy of apartheid. Hence, we shall
confine ourselves to stating our agreement with the views
that have been expressed here, particularly by the representatives of Africa. For the peoples of Africa, the struggle
against apartheid is not a political question, it is a question
of human vindication. No one has suffered more during the
past 500 years than the peoples of Africa. During the
sixteenth, seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, some 10
million Africans crossed the Atlantic and established, in the
North, in the Caribbean and in the South-or contributed
to establishing-what
became our countries and our cultures. Hence, when we speak of Africa or the African, we
are speaking not of an alien element but of something that
is part of us, something concrete.
9. It is true that we can add nothing new to what has
already been said about apartheid. But we can reflect about
the amount of time that has been devoted at the United
Nations to condemning one of the most monstrous political
ideolog.ies that have ever existed, one of the political
systems most incompatible with the human condition that
could ever be conceived of. And yet many years have gone
by, creating a feeling of f!ustration and despair in the
international commdnity. As in other epochs in history,
selfishness and the domination of a few powerful elements
have prevailed over reason and justice. Hitler and Mussolini
led the world into an international conflagration. Vorstcr,
who thinks just as Hitler did, can lead us in the same
direction, because now when we speak of apartheid we are
not speaking of apartheid alone. When we use that
word-and it is undoubtedly the word that has been used
most often at the United Nations during the past 30
years-we associate it with questions to which I prefer not
to refer at this time. As a corollary to what I have said, I
would state that the inhibitions, the complications and the
complacency of the past have transformed southern Africa
into a particularly critical region, That is neither the
responsibility nor the fault of the peoples of Africa.

11. At the same time, other news from South Africa warns
..C
w1 that the Pretoria r&me has ready a constitution under
which there will be created in Namibia a State on the model
of South Africa. That would obviously be a new challenge
to the United Nations and to the numberless resolutions on
the subject adopted by the General Assembly and the
Security Council; it would constitute defiance of the
international
community.
The illegal occupation of
Namibia and the exploitation of its natural resources are
part of this unthinkable set of interests that enable the
apartheid rCgime to survive in southern Africa.
12. There is a particularly sensitive aspect of the problem
of South Africa, which has been referred to repeatedly
here. In our view, it is the central issue of this debate. I am
referring to foreign investments in southern Africa. As the
authors of Cl&a2 Reach, Richard J. Barnet and Ronafd E.
Miiller, have said: “Foreign investments and internal reprcssion have risen sharply together in the last fifteen years.“!
13. The Commission on Transnational Corporations, beginning on 25 April here in New York, will consider the
report prepared by the United Nations Centre on Transnational Corporations on the activities of such corporations
in Southern Africa.2 The United Nations should seriously
study this report and disseminate its conclusions, in SO far
as it is possible to disseminate what is detrimental to such
powerful interests. The entire report is disquieting because
we note from it that foreign investments in southern Africa,
besides increasing from day to day in violation of United
Nations resolutions, constitute the most open and effective
material support which the policy of apartheid 1~s enjoyed.
Some aspects are of course more serious than others.
Among the most serious and those which imply most risks,
there is naturally the mining and processing of uranium and
the developinent of nuclear energy, which is being carried
out with the help of the technology furnished by the
transnational corporations.
14. The great philosopher John Locke, “an outstanding
champion of the inalienable rights of man”, as he was called
by the authors Robert W. Fogel and Stanley Engerman in
their book on the economic consequences of slavery in the
United States,3 whose ideas greatly influenced political
thinking in the West, at the time he waswriting his works WBS
a shareholder in the Royal African Company, which, for a
long time, enjoyed a monopoly in the slave trade. This
paradox, or this ambiguity, which may be judged with a
certain leniency in a man of the seventeenth century,
cannot be justified in the twentieth century.

10. From Pretoria, in South Africa, we are receiving the
news that the Vorster rCgime has decided not to promulgate
the law imposing censorship on the white press, and
particularly on international correspondents. With great
optimism, a large European weekly described that law as
“an attack on one of the last few vestiges of freedom”
remaining in South Africa. Undoubtedly, that decision not
to promulgate the law providing for press censorship is a
temporary one; it will remain in effect only so long as the
Security Council debates this question. We are not going to
defend the privileges of the journalists who represent the
minority in South Africa because, of course, thdt does not
constitute the freedom of expression which we support.
But the aims of that law help to define the present purposes
of the rCgime.

15. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Venezuela for his kind words, and look forward to handing
the gavel over to him tomorrow.
16. The next speaker is the representative of Cuba. I invite.
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
17. Mr. ALARCON (Cuba) (interpretation from Spmisk):
Mr. President, I should like first of all to thank you and the
1 New York, Simon and Schuster, 1974 (p. 87).
2 E/C. 10126.
3 Timeon the Cross (Boston, Little, Brown and CO., 1974).

2

members of the Council for having afforded
opportunity to participate in this debate.

me an

resolute SUPPOl? of the Socialist countries, the non-aligned
countries and the progressivecircles of the Westernworld,
as it is called. This combination of forces-the resolute
struggle of the national liberation movements and the
resulting international solidarity-have already proved their
effectiveness. Today it is a matter of determining the
Potential length of the strugglewhich hasno other outcome
but the complete victory of the African peoples.It is a
matter now of deciding how long the imperialist Powers
will continue to give their military, economicand political
support, which is the only assistanceenjoyed by the
Pretoria and Salisbury cliques. In other words, history is
affording an opportunity-perhaps the last opportunity-to
those Western Powers to abandon a policy which renders
them responsiblefor the perpetuation of racist exploitation
and makesthem accomplicesin all the crimesandmisdeeds
againstthe African peoples.

18. It has been said and repeated that the problem of
apartheid is an ignominious heritage of colonial slavery,
that it is the nucleus and root of the conflicts in southern
Africa, that it antedates the United Nations and that it has
been examined by the Organization throughout the whole
of its history.
19. Furthermore,
on more than one occasion, the international colnrnunity
has defined the aggressive nature of
the Pretoria rCghne and singled it out as a constant source
of threats to peace and international security. It would be
as tiresome as it would be unnecessary to recall the past
decisions of the Council and the numerous resolutions
adopted by the General Assembly which have expressed
universal repudiation
of the system of apartheid and
indicated the duty of the Council to act resolutely and
firmly. Suffice it to say that, if those decisions have not
been forgotten and if the sentiments repeatedly manifested
by the Assembly are still respected, the least one could
expect the Council to do here and now would be to impose
energetic and mandatory sanctions on South Africa which
would lead to the total and effective isolation of the
Pretoria rCgime at the political, diplomatic, military, commercial and financial levels and in all other aspects of
international relations.

25. The continued provocations againstAngola, Mozambique, Zambia and other Africa.n countries,the resumption
of unbridled repressionby the racist regimesagainstpeoples
whom they subjugateand the recruittnent and deployment
of mercenariesby the agenciesof imperialismare a threat
to the whole of independent Africa, a threat which mustbe
countered by energetic and effective action, The aggression
against the People’s Republic of Benin last January is a
concrete example which will shortly be consideredby the
Council and which my delegation trusts will be examined
with the senseof urgency and responsibilityrequired by the
seriousness
of the situation.

20. The movement
of the non-aligned countries has
consistently
upheld such a position. At its most recent
summit meeting, held at Colombo last summer, it urged the
Council to adopt the measures which have been called for
for such a long time in respect of South Africa.

26. The struggle against colonialism and racism,which is
now entering into its decisive phase,requiresthe firmest
solidarity among all progressive forces. The struggle is
growing and being consolidated’by its own development
and nourished by the experience acquired in combat. All
the manoeuvresof the imperialists and their acolytes will
collapsein the face of that struggle.Given the reality of the
struggle and the position assumedby each of those
involved, all attempts by those who try to usethe weapons
of anti-communism in a futile attempt to confuse the
peopleswill be doomed to failure. Those who are tempted
to usesuchmethods should rememberthe wordsuttered by
Nelson Mandela before the racist tribunal which condemnedhim in 1962:

21. Anyone who imagines that it is yet possible to follow
any other course of action, or who claimsthat there is still
time for deceptive manoeuvresand for delayingtactics tried
so often before, would demonstrate a total lack of
understanding of the true state of affairs in Africa today,
which indicates, beyond any doubt, that the days of
colonialism and racial oppressionare numbered.
22. This meeting is being held under circumstanceswhich
give the Council’s deliberations a heightened interest and
importance that I need hardly emphasize.The struggleof
peoples subjugated by colonialism and racism has won
decisive victories which have transformed the emancipation
of the still oppressed African mastesinto a task that is
feasible, It is no longer merely a question of a legitimate
aspiration which motivates the freedom fighters to make
innumerable sacrifices along a dangerousand thorny course.
Liberation is today a visible goal whose attainment no one
and nothing can prevent or postpone.

“It is perhapsdifficult for white South Africans, with
an ingrained prejudiceagainstcommunism,to understand
why experienced African politicians so readily accept
communists as their friends. But to us the reason is
obvious. Theoretical differences amongstthose fighting
against oppressionis a luxury we cannot afford at this
stage. What is more, for many decadescommunistswere
the only political group in South Africa who were
prepared to eat with us, talk with us, live with us, and
work with us. They were the only political group which
was prepared to work with the Africans for the attainment of political rights and a stakein society. Becauseof
this, there are many Africans who, today, tend to equate
freedom with communism.“4

23. The emancipation of the former Portuguesecolonies,
the defeat of the racist mercenary aggressionagainstthe
people of Angola, the flourishing struggleof the peoplesof
Zimbabwe, South Africa and Namibia reveal a process
which will inevitably lead in the immediate future to the’
total elimination of the last vestiges of colonialism and
racism on the African continent.

27. I avail myself of this opportunity to renew to the
South African fighters, led by the African National Con-

24. In their relentless struggle for freedom, the Africarl
peoples have always been able to rely on the total and

4 Quoted in English by the speaker.
-.

3

33. In South Africa, during that period, there has been no
progress towards an improvement in Government policy
regarding the apartheid system.

@ess, the complete solidarity of the people and Government of Cuba.
28. I cannot end my statement Without
paying tribute to
Mafien Ngouabi, President of the People’s Republic of the
Congo and General Secretary of the Congolese Workers’
Party, who was assassinated a few days ago. Those who
destroyed his noble and generous life in its prime will fail in
the evil atis that inspired that crime. A brave protagonist
of the fight for African dignity, Marien Ngouabi will
continue to live h the struggles of the revolutionaries of the
continent and his example will serve as a powerful
encouragement in the struggle. He will be present at the
dawn that will soon come to an Africa forever free from
exploitation and injustice.

34. There was a considerable rise in the number of
executions, twice that of the preceding period. Numerous
people died in prison, without any explanation from the
authorities, and most of those prisoners who died were
blacks. It is significant that in a declaration dated 18 Feb.
ruary 1977, the Executive Committee of the World Council
of Churches should’have condemned the torture and killing
of detainees in South African prisons, as well as all
detentions of political prisoners without due process.5
35. There has been a vast movement of collective opposition by the native population to the apartheid policy. It
culminated in the Soweto student demonstration, which
was bloodily suppressed by the Pretoria rigime on the
outskirts
of Johannesburg,
leaving 2,840 dead and
wounded. This can only be compared with the Sharpevillc
massacre, which occurred 16 years earlier. Yet those
martyrs have not died in vain, for the day of the final
elimination of apartheid is fast approaching, thanks to the
heroism and the desire for freedom of the African peoples.

(Panama)
(interpretation
from
29. Mr. ILLUECA
Spanish): Mr, President, the delegation of Panama wishes to
join in the many congratulations that have been addressed
to you on your appointment as Permanent Representative
of the United States of America to the United Nations and
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. We share the faith which many Members of this
Organhation and large segments of the public have in your
great human qualities, which have been demonstrated by a
life devoted to promoting human rights and to enhancing
tie social, moral and cultural values of your country and of
mankind. Yet we are bound to recognize that your
appointment does not in any way mean that the Government of the United States will allow its foreign policy,
which is institutionalized and bipartisan, to be made by the
decision of one man, although we recognize that your
appointment is an indication of goodwill and support for
the ideals of the United Nations. It is also a means to offer,
through you, a direct line of communication between the
aspirations of peoples affected by colonial situations and
the head of the Government of your country in the White
House.

36. The forced displacement of individuals and the increase in the number of displaced families have been
continuing, and will continue, because of the new law, The
Prevention of Illegal Squatting Act, of 30 June 1976.
37. The sinister scope of the apartheid policy as currently
applied can be seen in the fact that there are 100,000
prisoners in South African gaols. The application of the
pass system as a means of imposing the apartheid policy led
to the detention of 269,000 Africans in 1975.
38. The collaboration between the judicial and executive
powers, or, rather, their connivance, in the application of
racist security laws is repugnantly manifest in the many
political trials.

30. The delegation of Panama also wishes in particular to
express its appreciation of the admirable work performed in
the month of February by your eminent predecessor,
Ambassador James Murray of the United Kingdom and for
the singular skill with which he presided over the work of
the Council during that time. Ambassador Murray gave the
Council the benefit of his accurate sense of time and place
and made the Council more agile in its functioning as a
result of his native elegance and talent, thus doing honour
to the lofty responsibilities entrusted to him.

39. The existing disparity between the wages of white and
black workers
continues to increase. A discriminatory
situation like that of South Africa exists also in my
country, in the North American colonial enclave known as
the Panama Canal Zone, where every North American
worker earns a wage three times higher than the average
wage of Panamanian workers. The same labour practices
which are being condemned today by the international
community in southern Africa exist in the Canal Zone,
where we have the so-called “United States rate” and “local
rates” for wages.

31. The studies and research carried out by the subsidiary
organs of the United Nations, and more particularly by the
Ad Hoc Working Group of Experts set up to investigate the
situation of human rights in southern Africa, reveal an
acute crisis in that important part of the worid due to the
cruel racist practices of the minority regimes which, with
blood and fire, oppress by colonial methods the large
indigenous majorities of Azania, Namibia and Zimbabwe.
This situation requires vigorous and firm action by the
Security Council in the discharge of its functions regarding
the maintenance of international peace and security
through the application of Chapter VII of the Charter.

40. The creation of the so-called independent Transkei
illustrates South Africa’s scorn for the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples. Hence, the Ad I-lot Working Group of Experts has
concluded that the “bantustan homelands” policy is a
violation of the right of peoples to their sovereignty and
self-determination.
Indeed, the Ad Not Group is fully
justified in concluding that the Transkei is actually a
non-self-governing
Territory,
a protectorate
of South
Africa, and lacks the main characteristics of a sovereign
State.

32. On the basis of that research and those studies, let us
look at the situation that has prevailed during the last year
in South Africa, Namibia and Southern Rhodesia.

5 SeeE/CN.4/NG0/204.

4

41. As in the case of labour relations, the school system in
South Africa is plagued by racial discrimination in the form
of rigid segregation and low-quality education for Africans.
A similar situation exists in the Panama Canal Z&e, where
there are North American schools and Latin American
schools.

phase of the bantustanization
process, In
Rehoboth Gebiet has been granted “autonomy”
to a law of April 19’76.

addition,
pursuant

50. South Africa not only maintains its illegal occupation
of Namibia, displacing from their traditional homes great
sectors of the population; it has also carried out an alarming
militarization
of the Territory in pursuit of a colonial war
which is being waged according to planned State terrorism
against the Namibians and their heroic liberation movement, the South West Africa People’s Organization
(SWAPO), which without a doubt is the most representative
and responsible political organization that has been created
for the defence of the legitimate, permanent interests of the
people of Namibia, their independence and self-determination.

42. Student movements in South Africa encounter many
obstacles, as in the case of the South African Students’
Organization and the South African Students’ Movement,
whose protests against apartheid have been suppressed by
means of expulsions, house arrests and trials.
43. Apartheid is all the more to be condemned because it

serves to dislocate family life and create humiliating
conditions for children, who are raised in conditions of
segregation.

51. As regards Southern Rhodesia, the delegation of
Panama concurs in the prevailing opinion at the United
Nations that the year 1977 must be a decisive one in the
solution of the dual problems of the decolonization of
Zimbabwe, or its accession to independence as a new
African State, and acceptance of the principle of majority
rule, which must put an end to the abuse of power by the
racist Ian Smith rBgime and to the semi-slavery in which
Africans are kept in their own country.

44. African housing is bad, lacking as it dqes even the
most basic hygienic facilities. For example, at Soweto,
where there are hundreds of thousands of inhabitants, only
three out of every 100 houses have hot running water and
only 1.5out of every 100 houses have electricity.
45. The migrant labour system disrupts family unity and
stability, since the wife is not allowed to be in the city in
which her husband works. Great social upheavals are caused
by the wide disparity between the male and female
population of the urban areas, which in some communities
comes to a ratio of 10 men to one woman, with a
concentration of more children than women in many
communities.

52. The Ad Hoc Working Group of Experts set up to
investigate the situation of human rights in southern Africa,
which deserves our warmest appreciation for its outstanding
work, has pointed out, as can be seen in its report of
31 January 1977,6 that the illegal regime in Southern
Rhodesia continues to be characterized by the extreme
cruelty with which it treats Africans, by harsh racial
discrimination,
by the abject conditions in which the
Africans live, and by its abuses, arbitrary acts and persecutions. The same Group of Experts recommends that the
United Nations, the Organization of African Unity, the
United Kingdom and other Powers, as well as world public
opinion, should exert pressure on the rebel Government,
when the Geneva Conference is resumed, so that tangible
results may be achieved and so that the transition period
may proceed peacefully.

46. With regard to trade unions, there are ho guarantees
for the African population, because the existing legislation
violates trade-union rights. Trade unionists, who are, of
course, Africans, are persecuted, placed on trial and
detained, particularly after strikes.
47. This deplorable situation affects the mental health of
the African population alarmingly, and requires prompt
action by United Nations organs to put an end to apartheid
and the violation of human rights in that part of the world,
since South Africa’s entire policy constitutes criminal
conduct, typifying every crime of l&e-humanitd

53. Panama joins in the tribute paid to African States for
having had recourse to the United Nations for a peaceful
solution to the conflicts in southern Africa: These African
States have called for change in South Africa to be brought
about through negotiations and have asked for the support
of the rest of the world. The attitude of the African States
makes it evident that the process of decolonjzation is no
isolated phenomenon but, on the contrary, should take
place anywhere, because a colonial enclave is as reprehensible in Africa as it is in Asia or in Latin America.

48. In Namibia, the situation is worsening for the African
population of that international Territory still under the
illegal control of South Africa. There, the harmful effects
of apartheid legislation and policy are felt with increasing
cruelty, It is obvious that South Africa, through the use of
devious methods, is trying to settle the future of Namibia in
accordance with the political and economic interests not of
the Namibian people but of South Africa.

54. The similarity between the African colonial problem
and the Panamanian colonial problem leads us to state that
for like situations we must seek like remedies. Panama, like
Namibia, Zimbabwe and Azania, proportionately speaking,
suffers in the heart of its territory the lacerating presence of
an alien colonial enclave where there is racial discrimination
and where. absurdly enough, foreign courts, foreign legis-

49. The conclusion has been reached that the so-called
Windhoek Constitutional
Conference is very far from
satisfying the requirements of Security Council resolution
385 (1976), since it absurdly curtails Namibia’s right to
self-determination and independence. The situation is made
even worse by South Africa’s pursuit of its bantustanization
policy, since, as will be recalled, in proclamations issued in
March 1976, South Africa decreed Eastern Caprivi an
“autonomous zone”, thus ushering in the third and last

6 E/CN.4/1222

5

and Corr. 1.

over Panamanian territory, restore the territorial integrity
of Panama and give Panama control and operation of the
Canal so that the waterway between two oceans may be an
instrument of peace and progress, open and accessible to
the ships of all countries of the world at all times, without
arty discrimination and on conditions of complete equality,
We are certain that major mental reservations will have to
be overcome, as well as the still persistent psychological
effects of anachronisms that prevailed at the beginning of
the century and that still come up in negotiations. But we
hope that all that will be superseded so that, in 1977, the
two parties will intensify their efforts to conclude a treaty
in keeping with the principles of international law relating
to friendship and co-operation among States.

lation and a foreign language are imposed in contravention
of the recognized right of peoples to political and economic
self-determination. Like the African States, Panama is
negotiating with a great Power to recover its full sovereignty which has been violated by the existence of the
colonial enclave but, like the African States, we also seek
the support of the rest of the world which is so well
represented here.
55. The Panamanian Government maintains that where
colonialism exists there is discrimination. It is like the
relationship between a disease and the bacteria that cause
it: where there is tuberculosis there is Koch’s bacillus;
where there is leprosy there is Hansen’s bacillus; where
there is syphilis there are spirochaetes; where there is cancer
there are cancerous cells. That is like colonialism and
discrimination and, therefore, the colonial and discriminatory practices carried out by South Africa in southern
Africa and by the United States in the Panama Canal Zone,
dbeit by other means, deserve to be compared and should
lead us to similar conclusions, because in both places the
same evil and injustices exist.

60. Some encouraging signs have been seen. The visit by
President Carter to the United Nations and his statement ta
the delegations of Member States is, no doubt, a major step
towards the strengthening of the United Nations which, if
its work is to succeed, must have the support of other
leaders of the world. The New York Times, in today’s main
editorial, states: “A new President and a new spirit have
produced a thaw in attitudes toward Viet Nam, Panama,
much of Africa and now Cuba.” The same editorial adds
that there is talk about new steps with China, new Middle
East negotiations, improvement of the institutions of
international collaboration and, above all, control of the
arms race, in respect of which it is necessary, in our
opinion, to arrive at positive agreements with the Soviet
Union.

56. On the one hand, there is colonialism represented by
the North American enclave which maintains a foreign
governmental structure in the heart of our territory,
unilaterally administered in a foreign language; and, on the
other hand, there is racial segregation and apartheid in the
Canal Zone accompanied by all the characteristics and
peculiarities of those practices that are particularly evident
in labour relations, education and housing. For further
details, I refer the members of the Council to the report
submitted by Panama on 3 November 1976 to the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination.7 Part II
of the report is devdted to discrimination in the Canal
Zone.

61. With that background on .the international scene, the
countries of the third world and all those who are devoted
to the principles of the Charter will agree that the colonial
problems of Africa and Latin America and, most particularly, the problems of southern Africa and the Panama
Canal, must be solved in harmony with the spirit of our
times, which requires that, for the peaceful solution of
those situations which threaten international peace and
security, the following factors be taken into account:

57. President Carter’s devotion to respect for human rights
gives particular support to the efforts that you, Mr. President, are making, so that we may adopt by consensuswhat
may prove to be a programme of decolonization for the
oppressed peoples of southern Africa. It is quite obvious to
both the United States and the international community
that the right of peoples to self-determination is a fundamental human right, the exercise of which, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations and pronouncements of the General Assembly and the Security Council, is
the key to the peaceful solution of the major conflicts
which afflict mankind.

-First, the process of decolonization in each of those
areas must be carried out promptly and in accordance with
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, which solemnly proclaims
the necessity of putting a speedy and unconditional end to
colonialism, because it constitutes a denial of fundamental
human rights, is contrary to the Charter and an impediment
to the promotion of world peace and co-operation.

58. We suffer in the same way as the African States
because of the traumatic slowness of the negotiating
process which, in the case of southern Africa, has taken
several decades and, in the case of Panama, has been going
on for I3 long years. Now there is a possibility that, during
the Carter Administration and with the assistanceof all the
regions of the world represented in the Council, the last
VeStigeS of colonialism in Africa and in Latin America will
be eradicated.

-Secondly, each country, in the exercise of its territorial
sovereignty, must be able to recover its natural resources, in
conformity with the principles and norms established in the
following declarations of the General Assembly: the declaration on permanent sovereignty of peoples and nations
over their natural wealth and resources, according to which
that sovereignty is a basic constituent of the right of
peoples to self-determination [resohtion 1803 (XVII)],
and the Declaration on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, which establishes, inter alia,
that the new international economic order should be
founded on full respect for the following principles:

59. My country expects and claims its right to the speedy
conclusion of a new treaty with the United States on the
Panama Canal to put an end to North American jurisdiction

“Full
permanent sovereignty of every State over its
natural resources and all economic activities . . .;

7 CERD/C/S.

6

“The right of all States, territories and peoples under
foreign occupation, alien and colonial domination or
apartheid to restitution and full compensation for the
exploitation and depletion of, and damages to, the
natural resources and all other resources of those States,
territories and peoples” [resolution 3201 (S-VI)].

status, Namibia. The third complaint relates to failure to
comply with the mandatory measures imposed by the
&ga&ation
against an illegal rebel rkgime, that of
Southern Rhodesia.
66. I have said that the most fundamental complaint
relates to apartheid, in other words, to man’s very
understanding of man. My country condemns this system as
being contrary to the basic principles of French and
Western society. Permit me here t? make an analysis of the
different levels of the problem.

62. The delegation of Panama believes that, in parallel
with the negotiations to resolve the questions of South
Africa, Namibia and Zimbabwe, the Security Council
should take all the measures authorized under Chapter VII
of the Charter to make its decisions effective. Accordingly,
my delegation will support decisions taken to that effect in
accordance with the statements made in the Council by the
African and non-aligned States and others. Our position is
based 0~ the political concept expressed by the head of
Government of my country, General Omar Torrijos, at the
Summit Conference of the Non-aligned Countries held at
Colombo in August last year. On that historic occasion,
General Torrijos said the following:

67. Underlying the problem there is our conception of the
natural equality of man, the principle of which is intertwined in our society with the very sources of Christianity.
The intellectual ferment of the eighteenth century had the
effect of secularizing it and of ensuring that it was officially
institutionalized. French and other European philosophers
have laid stress on the spirit of equality, without which, in
the words of the French philosopher, Montesquieu, “there
can be no democratic system”. The reign of reason, as
distinguished from the reign of prejudice, served as a point
of departure for two major declarations of the eighteenth
century, the American and the French, which proclaim in
their very first words that “men are born and remain free
and equal in respect of rights”.

“I wish to say to our brothers of Africa that when the
United Nations orders a mission of war our armed forces
will be present with you to eradicate the power of-that
minority in Rhodesia and South Africa.
“We know what apartheid is, because racial discrimination is precisely what is most shameful in the geographical area which cuts our country in two.”

68. At a second stage, the reign of reason and the principre
of equality were translated into laws “equB1 for all and
applicable to all”. The citizens of our countries became
equal under the law. They are now the authors of laws
which have made it possible for democracy to assert itself
as the most appropriate system for the point we have
reached in history.

63. Southern Africa is on the threshold of profound and
historic changes, which must be carried out with the
vigorous support of the United Nations. No one can deny
that the cause of Africa is also the cause of Latin America,
of Asia and of all countries that are loyal to the
decolonization process. In sum, the cause of Africa is the
cause of the United Nations and it is also the cause of the
non-aligned countries. The Political
Declaration of
Colombo placed on record the following:

69. The twentieth century has seen new egalitarian
advances in the economic and social fields and hence in the
everyday lives of men. We are fighting today against the
most varied forms of enforced inferiority and exploitation.
We consider this point to be as fundamental as the abstract
equality of the eighteenth century. Frame has enshrinedit in
its own Constitution, the preamble to which is worded as
follows:

“The Non-Aligned identify themselves with national
liberation movements in their struggle for independence
from colonial rule, all attempts to destroy unequal
relations and domination of any sort, and will pursue
action towards these ends through every means in
accordance with the UN Charter.“8

“No one may be placed in a situation of economic,
social or political inferiority contrary to his dignity which
makes possible his exploitation by virtue of sex, age,
colour, nationality, religion, opinion, ethnic origin or any
other reason .”

64. Mr.

LEPRETTE
(France) (interpretation
from
In placing, on its agenda the question of South
Africa, which, if one is to judge from what has been said by
so many previous speakers, is also in a broader sense an
examination of the situation in southern Africa, the
Security Council took account of the gravity of the
challenges facing our Organization in that part of the world.

French):

70. Turning now to the subject of our debate against this
background, I should like to make the following point: the
principle of equality is not recognized in southern Africa;
on the contrary, it is actually being flouted. The laws there
are not equal for all; the economic position of the majority
is vastly inferior to that of a minority. We condemn the
apartheid regime because it is anti-democratic, because it
has organized a pseudo-society instead of building a human
society and because it defies the aspirations which mankind
has been cherishing for the last two centuries.

65. The Security Council and the whole world community
have three basic complaints against South Africa. The first
and the most fundamental concerns apartheid. Contempt
for human dignity, which has been elevated to the status of
a system, is an offence to our ideas and the purposes of our
Organization. The second relates to the persistence of the
illegal occupation of a Territory which enjoys international

71. I come right away to the other point of our debate,
that is, the relationship that exists between the crisis
situation resulting from the existence of the apartheid

8 A/31/197, annex I, para. 34.

7

regime and the duties of the international community: it is
very clear that the relationship should be strong and that
we should do something and contemplate some action.
Mr. de Guiringaud, French Minister for Foreign Affairs,
stated in the General Assembly on 29 September 1976:

should be incorporated in the reforms we shall call upon
South Africa to put into effect. I hope the Pretoria
Government will not be mistaken about the significance of
the declaration that has been worked out in the working
groups of the Council. Where the text rejects the basis of
apartheid, the conduct of the South African authorities and
the different aspects of the way of life unjustly imposed
upon the black majority, Pretoria must understand that we
are calling upon it to carry out precise changes, to
undertake a re-examination in depth of its policy. The
present repression is not only humiliating, it is also
dangerous. It is imperative for South Africa to help itself
and to help us to prevent the “fatal escalation” mentioned
by Mr. de Guiringaud. It should as soon possible abolish all
traces of racial separation and co-operate with all those
working to that end in the Churches, in business and in
other organizations. It should recognize that all its inhabitants have a right to citizenship and a political status
which enables them to decide upon their own destiny. It
should renounce the system of bantustans, which my
country and the countries of the European Community
have totally condemned, as they demonstrated in the case
of the Transkei. Above all, the very philosophy which
underlies the present situation in South Africa should be
abandoned and replaced by an egalitarian political and
economic system, which there is no reason to think would
be unacceptable to the privileged few who hold power at
present.

“Peace, the goal which is central to our action, is the
product of an equilibrium which is built on the independence of States and nations. . . but it also needs
broader foundations. Back in 194.5 did we not, after all,
proclaim our ‘faith in fundamental human rights, in the
dignity and worth of the human person . . .‘?
“ . . . we are forced to note that there are , . . situations
in the world today which may at times actually jeopardize peace. Those situations arise from the failure to
recognize [these] fundamental rights . . .
“I am thinking most particularly of southern Africa,
where tension and confrontation are becoming more
acute. This development justifies the part we are taking
and the support we are giving to the efforts to prevent a
fatal escalation. It is all too evident that racial discrimination is the underlying cause of the crisis, though
situations may differ here and there.“9
72. Thus an analysis in depth by my Government of the
situation in southern Africa has compelled an initial
condemnation of apartheid.

77. As I have already said, the situation of the white
South Africans is not of a colonial type: those men and
women are not expatriates. I have not heard our African
colleagues talking of oppressing them in their turn. Quite
the contrary. I was struck by a significant phrase used by
Ambassador Harriman, for example. He said,

73. When the sickness of a society not of a colonial type

relates to its image of man, when it has not conceded that
the spirit of equality is necessary for the operation of
democracy, what would be done to restore it to health?
Should it be consigned to outer darkness; should it be
irrevocably punished and, along with it, most of the people
of southern Africa? We cannot help noting that we are
faced not only with a regime deaf to political reason but
also with a series of social tensions and passions.

“We only call for majority rule based on equal rights for
all the racial groups of South Africa.” [1988th meetiqs
para. 72.1

74. The isolation of societies has never made them more
open. Quite the contrary. History teaches us that it has in
fact led to the hardening of conflicting positions and to the
blocking of any progress. In a previous debate, the French
delegation stressed that to prefer medicine to surgery, to
admit the possibility of a long and necessary negotiation
with the sickness seems to us to be the only possible course
because it is the only one liable to induce change.

Since, for his part, the Commissioner foi External Affairs
of Nigeria said the Africans want to “build, not to destroy”
11989th meeting, para. 301, it is important that, beyond
th.reats and simplistic refusals, in South Africa and elsewhere, thought should be given to the best means of
embarking upon continuous dialogue based upon a new
approach to the difficult problems of the area. I have no
hesitation in agreeing with the ideas put forward to this
end, by my Canadian and German colleagues [1998th
meeting] and I think the time has come to strive to break
the stalemate and obtain from South Africa the first really
significant concessions in the area for which it is responsible.

75. When we attempt to ta&e the deep-seated ills of a
society, the pressures of the world community must be
constant and assume many forms. I have spoken of
patience, not of weakness. Some, of course, will hasten to
say that they have no further use for moral condemnation,
the time for which has passed, or for pressure, the
effectiveness of which they question. There are many who
believe the time has come for obligatory sanctions.

78. I should like to quote another phrase from this
debate: “South Africa”, said a particularly well qualified
African speaker, “will never be prosperous and free until its
people live in fraternity and enjoy equal rights”. TIIC
representative of France could not help being moved on
finding in the same phrase three words of his own national
motto, among them one too often forgotten: fraternity. It
is a profound truth that no society is worthy of the name if
it does not enjoy a minimum of fraternity. It is also at the
human level, at the level of human relationships, that WC

76. Permit me to differ. In our present situation my
delegation believes that the most appropriate course would
be to collect in a solemn document the principles which
9 Official Recordsof the Genera{ Assembly, Thirty-first
PYemry Meetings, 9th meeting, paras. 108-110.

Session,

8

should seek and find remedies for the crisis from which
South Africa is suffering. Our efforts to this end should be
unremitting. Each of our countries-and in tlis regard those
having relations with Pretoria have particular responsibilities, as we recognize-must, through its own initiatives,
make clear its determination to see evolution in a society
which has engendered violence. However that may be,
persuasion and the exercise of firm and gradual pressure
remain means which it would be wrong to abandon. The
solemn declaration we contemplate is evidence of that
policy. In the view of France it is the duty of everyone with
regard to southern Africa to encourage those still too few
white South Africans who are fighting to allow the voice of
justice to be heard; it is also to remain faithful to the
objectives of our Organization, striving remorselessly and
unremittingly
to create the best possible conditions for
peaceful solutions to the situation.

84. More than 30 years ago the alarm was sounded
regarding the racial discrimination
practised in South
Africa. Hundreds of resolutions, recommendations
and
reports on apartheid have been adopted by the international community, in the General Assembly, the Security
Council, and various specialized agencies and committees
and commissions of the United Nations. And, in addition to
those resolutions, recommendations and reports, when one
refers to the awesome number of declarations condemning
apartheid and to the flow of ink and saliva stimulated by
this doctrine and its application, one cannot say that our
Organization has not taken a sufficient interest in the
problem; nor can it be claimed that this problem is not of
concern to the entire human community. The policy of
apartheid has been the subject of unanimous condemnation, because it is outrageous and immoral in its very
conception; abominable, inhuman and inadmissible in its
application. Apartheid is a clear stumbling block to the
advance of universal morality, and it systematically and
comprehensively flouts all the basic principles of the
Charter of the United Nations: the equality of races and
peoples, justice, respect for the human being, the right of
peoples to self-determination.

79, The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Togo. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make a statement.
80. Mr. KODJOVI (Togo) (interpretation fi’om French);
Mr. President, thank you for permitting me to speak in this
august body in a debate the importance of which is obvious
to everyone
and to remind you of my country’s position on
the problems of South Africa and of the premises upon
which that position is based.

85. Since it is unanimously conceded that only the
scrupulous observance of these principles can arm humanity
against the indescribable horrors of the Second World War
and ensure lasting peace in the world, it is not hard to
foresee the catastrophes to which apartheid is irresistibly
and inexorably leading the world. Those horrors of the
Second World War, which caused such upheaval in the
world and so much tragic suffering to mankind, and which
provoked such turbulence in all fields-turbulence
that does
not seem to be abating-were the result, as we know only
too well, of a racist system. The human community still
bears in its flesh and its conscience the consequences of the
horrible events of that war.

81. First I should like to pay a respectful tribute to the
memory of Commandant Marien Ngouabi, the valiant
freedom fighter who fought for human ideals and who was
tragically snatched from the affections of the people of the
Congo and of all peace and progress-loving peoples.
Commandant Ngouabi has left in fighting Africa and
perhaps throughout the world a vacuum it will be difficult
to fill.

86. In South Africa, today, we see unmistakable signs: the
escalation of violence in the area; the vicious. circle of
oppression-protest-repression
in which Vorstcr has irnprisoned Azania; the brutal massacres carried out in cold
blood and which have caused a growing loss of life among
black men, women and even children whose sole crime was
to ask to be treated as human beings; the inhumane
measures taken to confine the blacks of Sduth Africa once
and for all in a political, economic, social and cultural
ghetto; the establishment of bantustans, which are nothing
other than huge concentration camps; the provocations and
attacks carried out against the independent neighbouring
countries. All that constitutes a grave threat to the peace.
The belligerency and aggressiveness of the racist regimes are
well known, as are the calamities to which their feverish
policy leads.

82. I should now like to tell you, Mr. President, how
pleased I am at having an opportunity to associate myself
with previous speakers in conveying to you congratulations
upon your appointment as Permanent Representative of the
United States of America to the United Nations and also
upon the brilliance with which you have conducted the
proceedings of the Security Council this month.
83. Your name has been gloriously linked with that of the
Reverend Martin Luther King, whose memory we venerate,
in the fight for civil rights for black Americans. YOU
understand what a human being is; you know that a man is
a man, whatever the colour of his skin; and you have fought
for the dignity of man. We think that your appointment is a
sign, just as we think that the declarations of intent
concerning human rights we have heard with so much
interest these past few weeks are a sign. Weknow that
everyone is aware that in this matter, while all-out action
has to be taken by everyone, everywhere, on a permanent
basis, there are priorities that require immediate action to
be taken with determination and vigour. One example is
South Africa, where an explosive situation prevails, created
by the indescribable oppression to which the white minority subjects the black majority; where Namibia is
illegally occupied; where detention camps, called bantustans, are established-all this on the basis of apartheid.

87. Why, then, despite the efforts that have been deployed
for the past 30 years to eliminate the apartheid rigime,
despite the unanimous condemnation
of that rigime,
despite its outrageous nature, despitb the obvious danger it
poses to the world, despite the lessons of history-why,
despite all that, is the apartheid r6gime able to maintain
itself and even bdcome stronger, arm itself to the teeth and
take such devilish joy in defying the international community?
9

88. It is hard to understand why the Vorster r6gime has
enjoyed so much scarcely concealed complicity. Is it
because Vorster and his clique. of white torturers claim that
they want to make South Africa the bastion of the free
world? That is a strange way indeed of viewing the free
world, of representing and defending it! The cruel fraud is
too obvious for anyone to be misled. There are no more
effective methods of ensuring that this so-called free world
is detested and to contribute to the ruin of the West than
those used by the Pretoria masters-if it is indeed necessary
to maintain so stubbornly this cleavage between the East
and the West and to continue to bank so much on such a
convenient but dangerous division of the world into two
opposing camps; instead of simply considering, as is
demanded by the exigencies of our time, the human race as
a single family which should develop in harmony and in
which every individual should enjoy guaranteed essential
and inalienable rights. Is this done in order to protect the
economic and financial interests of the business circles that
are constantly stepping up their investments in that area?
There is a saying-perhaps it is somewhat vulgar-that
money has no odour. But it is nevertheless inhuman and
repugnant to sacrifice moral principles and so many
innocent lives on the altar of a few selfish material interests.
Is it to ensure the survival of the whites that certain
economic and military Powers are helping that minority to
continue imposing its barbaric laws on the vast black
majority? No African, since the colonial night, with all its
humiliations,
has ever undertaken to exterminate the
former white colonists. They have remained active partners
in-and sometimes even privileged beneficiaries of-the
development of the young independent nations. Why
should there be any particular fears about this with regard
to South Africa, particularly ‘when we are aware of the
lofty notion held by the black man of brotherhood and
multiracial harmony?
89. Support for the frightful Vorster rigime, with all its
cruelty and treachery towards our community, only cultivates hatred aniong the races, and that is the crux of the
problem. How then can WCexplain that profound scorn for
one of the fundamental principles in the Charter, that is,
brotherhood between races and the peoples of the whole
world, if not by the fact that the South African regime and
its accomplices have, in order to keep their grip on southern
Africa, adopted the motto “Oderint, dum me&ant”-“Who
cares if they hate me as long as they fear me”?
90. That is why we are convinced that the strong who base
their power on bullying the weak can never be strong
enough to remain masters for ever. A people which has
been injured in its dignity will shrink from no sacrifice in
order to free itself from barbarous oppression. The racist
rc5gime of South Africa is therefore doomed to pass away,
and it is because it has become aware of this fact that it is
desperately trying to strengthen itself outside its frontiers,
on the one hand by winning the devotion of the rebel at
bay, Ian Smith, and, on the other, by annexing Namibia.
The fury with which it is trampling under foot the many
resolutions calling on it to liberate Namibia and its perfect
understanding with the Rhodesian rebels, who have also
been spewed out by the international community, can only
be explained as the last convulsive reflexes of the minority
Vorster r6gime.

91. In opening the meeting of the Council of Ministers of
the Organization of African Unity held at LomB from 21 to
28 February Iast, General Gnassingbe Eyadema, President
of the Togolese Republic and President and Founder of the
movement of the Togolese people, speaking of the most
recent developments in Azania, declared that:
“The dominant powers will remain too imbued with
their alleged superiority to capitulate unconditionally.
Therefore, we should not be surprised at the manifestations of pride revealed in the desperate resistance of Ian
Smith or the masquerade of a conference organized by
South Africa to settle the fate of Namibia and excluding
the sole authentic representative of the Namibian people,
SWAPO. We should increase our active vigilance so that
the solutions which sooner or later will have to be
adopted are in keeping with the deep-seated aspirations of
the peoples concerned. Africa will win, and with it
peoples of goodwill and peace. Yes, Africa will prevail
because its cause is just and its struggle legitimate.”
This is not just an ephemeral statement. Far from it, it is an
act of faith on the part of the lucid guide of a profoundly
humanist revolution, the expression of a fierce determination to mobilize all energies to fight unremittingly for
final victory against injustice and oppression in order to
ensure the triumph of the ideals of liberty, equality, dignity
and tranquillity
for all in a world of solidarity and
brotherhood.
92. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Ethiopia. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
93. Mr. BEKELE (Ethiopia): Mr. President, allow me to
express my delegation’s appreciation to you and, through
you, to the members of the Council for acceding to its
request to be allowed to participate in these deliberations.
In the absence of my Ambassador, who is away from New
York, it is a great honour for me personally to be able to
address the Council. My delegation would like to take this
opportunity to express its congratulations to you upon
your appointment as Permanent Representative of your
country to the United Nations and also on your assumption
of this month’s presidency of the Council.
94. The question before the Council has, for a long time
now-3
1 years-been the subject of United Nations debates,
declarations and resolutions, without any fruitful result SO
far. During the last 31 years, phenomenal progress in all
fields of activity has been achieved. A number of new
independent nations have emerged in the world and il
number of difficult questions have been seriously tackled, if
not solved.
95. During these 3 1 years, only one phenomenon has gone
unchanged, unyielding and unmindful of the world, but one
that the world will not forget-South Africa and its
apartheid system. Every time the question OF South Africa
has been debated in the United Nations, we Africans have
been led to believe in form rather than substance, in words
rather than in action. We have often been led to believe that
the course of action which South Africa’s friends espoused
would get better results than our own. South Africa’s

friends have had their way during the last 31 years.
Meanwhile, South Africa has adopted apartheid, that is, institutionalized racism in place of mere discrimination;
South Africa has become an aggressive nation rather than
merely a nuisance neighbour; South Africa has openly
become defiant of the United Nations rather than just being
uncomfortable with the Organization.
96. As delegations come before the Council today to plead
for action, as members of the Council no doubt hold
intensive consultations on an acceptable text for a declaration, South Africa, in its total defiance of the world
community, is taking much more concrete action, While the
Council is concerned with the words it will choose after this
debate, South Africa is taking action. The New York Times
reports today from Johannesburg that, at the time when we
are discussing South Africa, that country is increasing its
defence budget:
“Growing concern over the country’s security was
reflected in a 21.3 percent increase in defense spending
and a 15 percent increase in the outlays for the police.
The increase brought the defense budget to $1.9 billion,
18 percent of the X10.3 billion total.”

apply it in South Africa instead of roaming all over the
world looking for acceptable candidates for their wrath. A
veteran in the struggle ibr human rights is supposed to have
said only recently that human rights had suddenly become
the thing and that her office was being flooded with all
kinds of queries. I may’ also add that, in her opinion, she
did not see that new-found interest as contributing to the
achievement of human rights, but rather to jmpeding it.
The question of human rights is too important, too worthy
a cause to be a fad for the radical chic to play with. There
may be differences as to what exactly constitutes human
rights. In some Fascist countries, people may have indeed
been denied their economic and political rights; in some
other countries, agitators, common criminals and Trojan
horses may have been clamped down upon, and those
people have suddenly become great warriors for human
rights. Be that as it may, in no country of the world other
than in South Africa have people lost their basic human
right, the recognition of themselves as human beings. That
is so basic that any genuine concern for human rights
should have applied its pressure there, in South Africa.
99. While those new champions of human rights do a little
more work where it is needed most, they may also
reconsider whether their so-called security and economic
interests may not be better protected by some means other
than at the expense of the black people of South Africa. Is
South Africa so important to their security and economic
well-being that it must be allowed to deprive‘the black man
of his life, his liberty and his own country? I ask that
question because that seems to my delegation to be the
underlying reason why South Africa’s friends always rush
to protect it from any action the Council may take.

Wii this further defiance of the United Nations perhaps be
an incentive to the members of the Council to take stronger
action? I hope they will be able to do so.
97. It is in this context that the Ethiopian delegation
approaches the examination of the question of South
Africa. On the one hand, we have a situation where South
Africa has gone from bad to worse and, on the other, we
have some members-and important members at thatabetting and encouraging South Africa in the course of
action it has chosen to follow. True, those members have
not written South Africa’s racial legislation, they have not
planned its aggression or that of its proteges against African
States, nor perhaps have they advised it to be defiant of the
United Nations. But have not those same friends boosted its
economy, armed its military to the teeth, resisted its
isolation by the international community in their encouragement of it and cosy relations with it in sports, science,
the arts, communications and diplomacy? Have those
friends of South Africa, as a sign of their aversion to
apnrtlzeid, ever taken even a token action? What we are
always being lectured about is that they are free and
democratic societies. Consequently, their Governments
have no say in how their sportsmen should behave, where
their artists may perform, their businessmen trade or their
nationals travel. They cannot discipline their arms merchants; they too are free people, doing business where they
find it. As for their diplomatic relations with South Africa,
their presence there is needed as a moderating influence.
Their excuses are inexhaustible. Meanwhile South Africa
becomes more defiant. It becomes more deadly. Is this
deception to be continued?

100. The now famous “National Security Study Memorandum 39”, otherwise popularly known as “the ,Kissinger
study of southern Africa”, brings out very clearly that
United States interest in the area is one of security and
economics, and that United States policy, therefore, would
have as its goal the maintenance of those interests. Some
would add a third interest, that of the racial affinity of the
ruling class with the architects of apartheid, but we can
leave that thought aside as being uncharitable to a ruling
class that has finally struck from the books all laws
pertaining to race. But the two other interests, those of
security and economics, must be faced squarely. The study
describes the economic interest as follows:
“US direct investment in southern Africa, mainly in
South Africa, is about $1 billion and yields a highly
profitable return. Trade, again mainly with South Africa,
runs a favorable balance to the US. (Our exports to South
Africa were about $450 million in 1968 against imports
of $250 million.) In addition, the US has indirect
economic interest in the key role which South Africa
plays in the UK balance of payments. UK investment in
South Africa is currently estimated at $3 billion, and the
British have made it clear that they will take no action
which would jeopardize their economic interests. The US
has an important interest in the orderly marketing of
South Africa’s gold production which is important to the
successful operation of the two-tier gold.price system.“1 0

98. The time has come, indeed is long overdue, when
action must be taken to avert disaster in South Africa. The
Security Council must do its duty and put an end to the
wanton murders, imprisonments and aggression by South
Africa and its proteg6, the racist r@gimeof Ian Smith. Those
Governments that have made the application of human
rights their new-found credo can perhaps be persuaded to

10 The Kissinger Study of Southern Africa (Westport, Connecticut, Lnwrence Hikl and Campany, 1%‘6), p. 87.

11

protection entails. South Africa has had all the protection
and support it could use for the past 31 years; now it is
time to give the black man some of that support by
clamping down on the racist regime of Vorster. We have,
during these 31 years, diagnosed the sickness. If anything,
we have diagnosed it too much. No medicine has been
prescribed, let alone surgery attempted. Some may still
think that further diagnosis is necessary. I feel, however,
tlrat it is too late even for surgery. The sickness is of such
magnitude that the only humane thing to do is to kill the
body.

The security interest is outlined thus:
“Southern Africa is geographically important for the
US and its allies, particularly with the closing of the Suez
Canal and the increased Soviet activity in the Indian
Ocean. The US uses overflight and landing facilities for
military aircraft in the Portuguese Territories and South
Africa. There are major ship repair and logistic facilities in
South Africa with a level of technical competence which
cannot be duplicated
elsewhere on the African
continent.“] 0
101. It may be argued that the study is dated, that it was
prepared some seven years ago for consideration by a
different Administration
and portrays the problems as
perceived by that Administration;
that conditions have
changed-the Suez Canal, for one thing, is open; that the
Portuguese colonies are now free, and so forth. It may also
be argued that Memorandum 39, in any case, is only a
study and not approved government policy. That may well
be true, but the point is that, despite the peripheral
changes, the main thesis of Memorandum 39, it seems to
me, still stands. As long as the United States continues to
perceive those two interests as worthy of its protection, we
must not expect any help or understanding from that
quarter in spite of the signals we are receiving.

104. Allow me to conclude by quoting from the message
the Chairman of the Provisional Military Administrative
Council of Ethiopia, Lt. Col. Mengistu I-Iaile Mariam, sent
to the Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid on the occasion of the International Day for the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination:

102. What is true of the United States is of course true of
France, the United Kingdom, West Germany, ,Italy, Israel
and Japan, The role those countries have played and
continue to play in strengthening the hold of apartheid on
the black people of southern Africa has been too extensively documented to need any further elaboration.

105. Ethiopia, as a country struggling against great odds to
establish a just society, sympathizes with and understands
the difficulties and agonies through which the peoples of
Azania, Namibia and Zimbabwe are going. The support
offered them by Socialist Ethiopia, therefore, is strong and
total.

103. The question before the Council, therefore, is
whether South Africa should be further protected at the
expense of the black man, with all the consequences such

The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.

“On behalf of the people and Government of Socialist
Ethiopia, I take this opportunity to appeal to the
international community, in particular to those members
of the Security Council who, through their continued
investments and regular use of the veto power aid aad
abet outlaws of Pretoria, to listen to the voice of the
suffering majority in South Africa and comply with the
decisions of the world body.“* 1

11 See A/AC.1

12

l.S/L.462.

HOW

TO

OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write
to: IJnited
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vents dans les librairies
depositaires
du mondc entier. Informez-vous
aupr&s de votre libraire
a : Nations
Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou Genkve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE

LAS

NACIONES

et les agences
au adressez-vous

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
e&An en venta en librerfas
y casas distribuidoras
en todas partes
de1 mundo.
Consulte
a su librero
o dirfjase
s: Naciones
Unidas,
Section de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S

1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

70001-March

1978-2,200
