RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE SECOND COMMITTEE

CONTENTS
Page

722 (VIII). Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance for the economic
development of under-developed countries (23 October 1953) (item 27). . . .
723 (VIII). Technical assistance in public administration (23 October 1953)
(item 61) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • • . • • • . . . . . • • . . . . . . . . . . . .
724 (VIII). Economic development of under-developed countries (7 December
1953) (item 26) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
725 (VIII). The Korean question: report of the Agent General of the United
Nations Korean Reconstruction Agency (7 December 1953) (item 18 (b))..
726 (VIII). Question of assistance to Libya (8 December 1953) (item 60)....

9
10
10

12
12

debates during the eighth session of the General Assembly;
5. Requests the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to review as soon as
possible the administrative procedures of the Technical Assistance Board and those of the participating
organizations as well as their administrative expenditures so far as those are financed from the Special
Account;
6. Approves the financial arrangements set forth
in the annex hereto as recommended by the Economic
and Social Council in paragraph 5 of section II of
resolution 492 C (XVI);
7. Requests the Negotiating Committee for ExtraBudgetary Funds, appointed pursuant to General Assembly resolution 759 (VIII) of 5 October 1953, to
undertake, in addition to already assigned tasks and
as soon as convenient after the closing of the eighteenth
session of the Economic and Social Council, negotiations with governments regarding their pledges to the
Special Account for the year 1955 towards the goal to
be suggested by the Council at ·the same session ;
8. Notes that the Economic and Social Council
in response to the desire expressed by the Generai
Assembly in resolution 621 (VII) of 21 December
1952, has expressed the view that, for the orderly development of programmes, it would be useful to have
assured financial support for a period longer than a
year, and invites those participating countries which
ma:y he in. a positio_n _to .do so to take steps within
their constitutional hm1tat10ns, to ensure the financial
support of the Expanded Programme. on a long-term
basis.
454th plenary meeting,
23 October 1953.
ANNEX
Financial arrangemenu

722 (VIII). Expanded Programme of Technical
Assistance for the economic development of
under-developed countries
The General Assembly,
Believing that the results so far achieved by the
Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance demonstrate the important contribution which the Programme
has made and is capable of making in the economic
development of under-developed countries,
Desirous that the Expanded Programme shall continue to play an increasingly effective role in the
achievement of higher standards of living for the people of the under-developed areas,
1. Recommends that governments and participating agencies pay due regard to making the aims and
operations of the Expanded Programme of Technical
Assistance more widely known;
2. Urges that, in order to permit the Expanded
Programme to progress, governments contribute for
the year 1954 so as to meet to the maximum extent possible the Programme needs for 1954 and, in any case,
so that the funds available shall be no less than the
amount earmarked by the Technical Assistance Board
for the approved 1953 programme;
3. Emphasizes the pressing need that governments
pay promptly their contributions pledged at conferences,
with special regard to previous financial periods ;
4. Notes with satisfaction the actions taken by the
Economic and Social Council in paragraphs 1, 2 and
3 of section I and in paragraphs 6 and 7 of section II of
resolution 492 C (XVI) of 5 August 1953 designed to
strengthen the organization and administration of the
Expanded Programme, so as to assure the most effective use of the contributions made available, and
invites the Technical Assistance Committee and the
Technical Assistance Board, in working out their recommendations on the administration, the financial procedures and the system of allocation of funds of the
Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance, to take
into consideration the relevant views expressed in the

(Recommended by the Economic and Social Council in
para11raph 5, 11eetion II, of re11olution 492 C (XJ!I))
(a) Seventy-five per cent of total funds available, excluding
carry-over, shall be available for allocation to the participating
organizations after approval of country programmes by the
Technical Assistance Board, in accordance with the percentages

9

10

General Assembly-Eighth Session

set forth in paragraph 8 (c) • of Council resolution 222 A
(IX) as amended and modified pursuant to paragraph 19 of the
report of the Technical Assistance Committee to the thirteenth
session of the Council;
( b) The balance of funds available, including carry-over,
shall be retained in the Special Account (i) to cover the necessary minimum expenses of TAB and the resident representatives ; and (ii) for further allo.:;ation to the participating organizations, as provided in Council resolution 433 (XIV) ;
(c) In establishing the level of the necessary administrative
expense in the whole Programme, the need for economy, in
view of the present level of operational expenditure, shall be
fully taken into account.

of the expenses connected with the services furnished
to it;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to report reguJarly to the Economic and Social Council on activities
carried on under this programme.
454th plenary meeting,
23 October 1953.
724 (VIIl).

Economic development of underdeveloped countries
A

• Formerly paragraph 9 (c).

723 (VDI).

Technical assistance in public
administration

The General Assembly,
Noting that the programme of activities and the
organizational arrangements developed by the Secretary-General in consultation with the Economic and
Social Council in response to General Assembly resolution 246 (III) of 4 December 1948, and placed on
a continuing basis in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 518 (VI) of 12 January 1952, are no longer
adequately covered by the terms of resolution 246

(III),
Noting further that the aforementioned activities
now form an integral part of a wider programme of
assistance to governments in the field of public administration, including aspects other than training,
Recognizing the increasingly important role of governmental administration in programmes for the promotion of economic development and social welfare,
1. Approves a revised United Nations programme
in public administration comprising :
(a) The provision, at the request of governments,
of technical assistance related to public administration,
including training for public service, through :
(i) The advisory services of experts;
(ii) Fellowships and scholarships;
(iii) Training institutes, seminars, conferences,
working groups and other means;
(iv) The provision of technical publications;
(b) The collection, analysis and exchange of technical information in the field of public administration, in .collaboration, where appropriate, with the International Institute of Administrative Sciences and
other appropriate institutions, and assistance to governments to promote, by all suitable means, sound
public administration, in relation to economic and social development ;
2. Authorizes the Secretary-General to continue to
include in the budgetary estimates of the United Nations the funds necessary for carrying out an effective
operational programme based on the provision of the
above services and, in addition, to finance such activities from funds made available from the United Nations Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance,
provided that, in the latter case, such assistance is
related to the economic development of under-developed countries;
3. Reaffirms the principle by which each requesting government shall continue to be expected to assume responsibility, as far as possible, for all or part

The General Assembly,
Having noted Economic and Social Council resolution 482 A (XVI) of 4 August 1953,
Desirous of strengthening the United Nations in its
mission of guarding the peace and security of all peoples and of promoting higher standards of living and
conditions of economic and social progress and deve]opment in under-developed countries,
Looking forward to the time when sufficient progress
in internationally supervised wor]d-wide disarmament
will make it propitious to devote additional resources
to assist development and reconstruction, particularly
in the under-developed countries,
Adopts the following declaration:
"We, the governments of the States Members of
the United Nations, in order to promote higher
standards of living and conditions of economic and
social progress and development, stand ready to ask
our peoples, when sufficient progress has been made
in internationally supervised world-wide disarmament, to devote a portion of the savings achieved
through such disarmament to an international fund,
within the framework of the United Nations, to
assist development and reconstruction in underdeveloped countries."
468th plenary meet;ng,
7 December 1953.

B
The General Assembly,
Having considered the Report on a Special United
Nations Fund for Economic Development 1 prepared
by the Committee of Nine appointed by the SecretaryGeneral, and submitted in pursuance of Economic and
Social Council resolution 416 A (XIV) of 23 June 1952
and General Assembly resolution 622 A (VII) of 21
December 1952,
Mindful of the aim expressed in the preamble of
the Charter "to employ international machinery for the
promotion of the economic and social advancement of
all peoples" and of Articles 55 and 56 of the Charter,
Believing that, especially in the present state of
world tension, the social and economic advancement of
the under-developed 'countries can contribute towards
the achievement of international peace and security,
Confident that an expanded flow of capital to underdeveloped countries would contribute to the solution
of the basic economic problems of our time, both for
under-developed and developed countries,
Considering that the use of international machinery
for financially assisting the acceleration of the eco1 See United Nations

Publication, Sales No.: 1953.11.B.l.
