United Nations

S/PV.6276

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6276th meeting
Tuesday, 23 February 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Araud. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Salam
Mr. Heller
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Shcherbak
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Parham
Ms. DiCarlo

Agenda
The situation in Timor-Leste
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (S/2010/85)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-24861 (E)

*1024861*

S/PV.6276

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Timor-Leste
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (S/2010/85)
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Timor-Leste requesting that His
Excellency Mr. José Luís Guterres, Deputy Prime
Minister of Timor-Leste, be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. I
have also received letters from the representatives of
Australia, Ireland, Malaysia, New Zealand, Portugal
and South Africa, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
those representatives to participate in the consideration
of the item, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Guterres
(Timor-Leste) took a seat at the Council table;
the representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): On behalf of
the members of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. José Luís Guterres, Deputy Prime Minister of the
Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste.
In accordance with the understanding reached
in the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that
the Security Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Ameerah Haq, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste.
It is so decided.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under

2

rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Pedro Serrano, acting head of the delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2010/85, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste.
I now give the floor to Ms. Ameerah Haq.
Ms. Haq: Thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to introduce the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2010/85) on the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), in my first
appearance before the Security Council as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for TimorLeste.
A substantial portion of the report is dedicated to
the findings and recommendations of the technical
assessment mission, which visited Timor-Leste from
10 to 17 January and worked jointly with me and other
members of the UNMIT leadership, as well as the
United Nations country team. The assessment mission
engaged in extensive consultations with the TimorLeste authorities and other stakeholders across the
political spectrum, including the opposition and civil
society.
I am pleased to acknowledge the presence today
of the Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, His
Excellency José Luís Guterres. I would also like to
express my appreciation to President José RamosHorta, President of the National Parliament Fernando
“Lasama” de Araújo, Prime Minister Kay Rala Xanana
Gusmão and the leader of the Frente Revolucionária do
Timor-Leste Independente (FRETILIN) opposition,
Mari Alkatiri, for their warm reception and agreement
to continue regular discussions with me on a weekly
basis. I have also received warm welcomes from the
Council of Ministers and various segments of TimorLeste’s population, including from civil society and
representatives of the church and local communities in
the districts of Dili, Lautem, Baucau and Oecusse,
which I have visited over the past weeks.

10-24861

S/PV.6276

Although I have been Special Representative for
only about six weeks, it is evident that remarkable
progress has been made since the events of 2006,
which led to the establishment of UNMIT. There is a
vibrant civic life, with active commercial areas in Dili
and other urban centres. Crime rates remain low and
have shown a decreasing trend over the past year, with
an average of 87 security incidents reported weekly to
police during the period from 24 September 2009 to
20 January 2010, down from an average of 118 incidents
reported weekly to police in the period from 9 July
2008 to 20 January 2009.
Timor-Leste has reached a new stage, where there
is an intensified focus on measures needed to sustain
stability, deepen democracy and the rule of law, reduce
poverty and strengthen institutions. Timor-Leste, under
the stewardship of its national leaders, is now working
to consolidate the gains of the past and to ensure a
smooth transition to the recovery and development
phase. This will require continued efforts on the part of
the Timorese, as well as the continued support of the
international community. The problems arising from
the 2006 crisis were considerable, but the long-term
challenges ahead may prove to be even more difficult
to address.
It is important to note that many State institutions
have demonstrated increasing capacity, which has been
bolstered by better security and stability, the assistance
of the United Nations and other members of the
international community and, most importantly, the
commitment of the staff of those institutions. These
include, among many others, the Ministry of Social
Solidarity, the electoral management bodies and the
Banking and Payments Authority of Timor-Leste. This
demonstrates that, given such commitment and with
continued stability and targeted and coordinated
international assistance, other institutions can also
overcome the fragilities and challenges mentioned in
the Secretary-General’s report.
Democratic processes are maturing. Needless to
say, political parties have their differences, as they do
in any multiparty democracy. However, events over the
reporting period demonstrate renewed commitment to
expressing these views in a manner that does not
undermine the process of interactive dialogue, which is
essential to proceed with recovery from the 2006 crisis.
Political leaders have shown real willingness to
work across party lines to address issues of national

10-24861

importance. For example, on 1 February, after several
months of stalemate, Parliament was able to select the
Chairman of the Anti-Corruption Commission, who
was sworn in on 22 February. This was possible in
large part because of the leadership of Prime Minister
Gusmão and all political parties represented in
Parliament, who demonstrated their willingness to
move forward on a priority national issue. Now that the
leadership has shown the political commitment
necessary to allow the establishment of the
Anti-Corruption Commission to move forward, it is
essential to focus on the building of that institution, as
well as many others, in order to increase
accountability, transparency and good governance.
Another major governance initiative is the
possible formation of municipalities, and we await
clarification by the Timorese authorities of their plans
for municipal elections. While all political leaders with
whom I have interacted expect that these elections will
be highly contested, it is hoped that they will be
conducted in the same peaceful manner as the village
(suco) elections.
President Ramos-Horta continued his important
efforts to facilitate and encourage mutual engagement
among leaders on issues of national importance. He has
informed me that his joint meetings with the Prime
Minister and the Secretary-General of FRETILIN will
be held regularly. The efforts of the President also
extend down to the community, as he meets regularly
with people at the grass-roots level in Dili and the
districts. The various initiatives that support his “Dili,
City of Peace” campaign are an admirable reflection of
his proactive efforts to establish a stable and peaceful
democracy. It is also encouraging that recent
statements by FRETILIN have committed the party to
ensuring peace and stability.
Long-term security and stability depend on the
development of a national police force that is
professional and impartial and operates with due
respect for the rule of law and human rights. The jointly
owned process of resumption of primary policing
responsibilities by the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste
(PNTL) will require continued concentrated efforts to
ensure that it provides the necessary foundation for
longer-term institution-building efforts. The need for
such a foundation informed the development of the
mutually agreed criteria for resumption.

3

S/PV.6276

I have just received assessment reports on the
districts of Dili and Ermera and the Special Police Unit
from the joint technical team consisting of civilian and
police representatives from the Government and
UNMIT. The team concluded that Dili and the Special
Police Unit do not yet meet the criteria for resumption
and require further measures to strengthen capacities,
while Ermera has met the criteria. As per the usual
practice, action plans for Dili and the Special Police
Unit will be developed and implemented to prepare
them for resumption.
In the meantime, resumption maintains its
momentum. All of the districts have been assessed and
the PNTL has resumed primary policing responsibilities
in four districts and three units, with resumption in two
additional districts, Baucau and Ainaro, scheduled for
March. With this momentum sustained and with both
UNMIT and the Government continuing their
concentrated efforts to meet the mutually agreed
criteria and to ensure the integrity of the certification
process, there is a strong possibility that the resumption
process can be completed by the end of 2010. In this
regard, I would note that the report of the SecretaryGeneral particularly focuses on the need for the
Government to address PNTL logistical challenges.
I am determined to move this resumption process
forward, in close cooperation with the Government of
Timor-Leste, including in the context of the team that
will be planning the downsizing of UNMIT during the
period through 2012. Reconfiguring and reorienting the
UNMIT police component towards post-resumption
challenges will be one of my main priorities. This
includes supporting further skills development for the
PNTL in critical areas such as the appropriate use of
force, community policing and criminal investigations.
PNTL accountability mechanisms must also continue
to be improved to avoid impunity for acts of
misconduct. Appropriate disciplinary and criminal
investigations have been initiated in recent incidents of
alleged abuse by the PNTL in Dili. Encouragingly, the
Timorese leadership and the President of Parliament
have expressed concern and specifically asked for
reinforced UNMIT support to the PNTL Department of
Justice, which is the unit responsible for disciplinary
investigations.
As the resumption process progresses and
UNMIT police increasingly need to focus on the
institutional development of the PNTL, the difficulties
springing from the lack of sufficient numbers of

4

specialized police trainers and advisers are likely to
become even more acute. In this connection, I appeal
to police-contributing countries to consider this
carefully and to make every effort to provide police
officers with the necessary technical skills and
competencies, as well as the training background
required for effective skills transfer. This will be a
major area of focus for UNMIT but will need to be a
collective undertaking for the United Nations and
contributors alike. As recommended by the technical
assessment mission and stressed by the SecretaryGeneral in the report, where specialized personnel
cannot be provided by police-contributing countries or
where continuity in functions is particularly important,
consideration should be given to seeking additional
civilian personnel with required expertise to assist.
Regarding the overall security sector, the clear
definition and delineation of roles and responsibilities
of the PNTL and the Falintil-Forças de Defesa de
Timor-Leste (F-FDTL), and the strengthening of
civilian oversight and management capacities, are
particularly critical outstanding issues. It will thus be
important for the package of national security
legislation under consideration by Parliament and the
related subsidiary legislation to be adopted — as well
as the national security policy under preparation — to
adequately address these issues.
Perhaps the greatest long-term challenges for
Timor-Leste will be socio-economic. I am pleased to
note that the Government demonstrated its renewed
commitment to the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs) and coherent, transparent, coordinated and truly
Timorese-owned planning processes. On 26 January,
the National MDG Steering Committee held its first
meeting, chaired by the Minister of Finance. The Prime
Minister is currently leading preparation of the medium
to long-term National Strategic Development Plan. I
look forward to early consultation by the Government
with relevant stakeholders on the proposed Plan and its
finalization, as it will be critically important for there
to be alignment between the Plan and national budget
allocations, as well as for assistance strategies of
international partners to take it into account.
In my visits outside the capital, local community
members expressed their desire that development efforts
should more effectively reach rural areas. Timorese
leaders themselves have expressed similar concerns, and
it is essential that the Government redouble its efforts
to ensure that development benefits are felt equally in

10-24861

S/PV.6276

rural and urban areas. This will entail appropriate
budgetary allocations to the social services sectors and
the strengthening and decentralization of line ministries.
Also, significant efforts by Government and Parliament
in such areas as gender-responsive budgeting will
require continued and intensified commitment in order
to ensure the empowerment and meaningful
participation of women in all sectors of society.
I also note that more than 60 per cent of the
population is under the age of 25 and that 48 per cent is
below the age of 17. This is a potential asset for the
future of the country. However, with an estimated
15,000 to 20,000 new entrants in the labour market
every year, and with the current unemployment rate of
18.4 per cent among young people nationwide, the lack
of employment opportunities is also a serious challenge
to sustaining economic growth and human
development and, I might caution, will have serious
security consequences if not adequately addressed.
The rule of law with due respect for human rights
requires commitment to accountability and judicial
independence. On 15 February, two additional
defendants charged in relation to violence that occurred
during the 2006 crisis were found guilty of violence
against persons and property and illegal use of firearms,
ammunition and explosives. One was sentenced to
imprisonment for eight years and the other to six years
and six months. This is another step forward in judicial
processes towards fulfilment of the recommendations
of the Independent Special Commission of Inquiry.
In my meetings with Timorese authorities, I
continue to reiterate the United Nations position that
there can be no amnesty or impunity for serious crimes
such as genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity. Although the President acted within his
constitutional prerogatives, I discussed with him
concerns that the pardons issued on 25 December 2009
could exacerbate perceptions of impunity. I would also
like to reiterate that the four F-FDTL members
convicted of manslaughter in the shooting deaths of
eight PNTL officers in 2006, one of whom was
pardoned and three of whom received sentence
reductions, have yet to pay the court-ordered
compensation to the victims’ widows.
I would like to recall that the report of the
Secretary-General and the technical assessment
mission highlighted the broad desire of the Timorese
leaders and other national stakeholders across the

10-24861

board for a continued UNMIT presence, concentrating
on the four mandated priority areas, through the crucial
period up to 2012. Keeping in mind the priorities
identified by the assessment mission for the 2010-2012
period in each of UNMIT’s mandated priority areas,
adjustments and refinements to the United Nations
approach will inevitably need to be made in order to
take into account changing and evolving conditions on
the ground.
In the coming days and weeks, I will work
closely with the Government and other relevant
national stakeholders, the United Nations country team
and international partners to develop proposals for the
reconfiguration of the mission through 2012, subject,
of course, to the Security Council’s agreement that
such a presence is necessary. This will include a
gradual drawdown of UNMIT police, which, as the
report notes, should be approached cautiously and be
subject to an assessment in late 2010.
Before I conclude, let me thank the Deputy
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General, Finn
Reske-Nielsen and Takahisa Kawakami, as well as all
the staff of UNMIT and the United Nations country
team who have been so steadfast in their support of
efforts to assist Timor-Leste. Most importantly, let me
also express my admiration for the determination and
will of the Timorese people who continue to strive for
a peaceful and better future for their country. I look
forward to receiving the guidance of the Security
Council and hope that it will renew its commitment to
the people of Timor-Leste.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Haq
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. José Luís Guterres,
Deputy Prime Minister of the Democratic Republic of
Timor-Leste.
Mr. Guterres (Timor-Leste): I thank you, Sir, for
the opportunity to address this Security Council
meeting on Timor-Leste. For more than decade, the
Security Council created various missions, from the
United Nations Mission in East Timor in 1999 to the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) today. The Council gave each United
Nations mission a different focus, a different
composition and different objectives according to the
realities of the time.

5

S/PV.6276

The report of Secretary-General (S/2010/85)
before us confirms that stability and a peaceful
political environment in Timor-Leste are realities. This
is a demonstration that the Council’s decisions have
been right. In spite of the 2006 crises, in general we
can say that the United Nations intervention in TimorLeste has been very successful.
I should like to take this opportunity to thank
you, Mr. President, the Security Council, the SecretaryGeneral and the international community at large for
the continuing commitment to the success of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste.
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon visited TimorLeste in 2007 and had the compassion to visit the
refugee camps in Dili. Today, those camps are closed
and the internally displaced persons have returned to
their homes and families. By working together with the
United Nations and the international community, we
were able to solve one of the most difficult and most
complex problems in our county. We should like to
take this opportunity also to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his leadership, and his Special
Representatives and Deputy Special Representatives
for their contributions to the success we have achieved.
As a nation and people, we have been blessed by
the kindness of the international community. As citizens
of the world, we value the spirit of humanitarian
solidarity. For that reason, the Government of Prime
Minister Xanana Gusmão has on various occasions
extended its financial support to the peoples of the
region that have suffered natural disasters. After the
earthquake disaster in Haiti, the Council of Ministers
decided to provide to the people and Government of
that country financial aid of $500,000. We could not
remain silent in the face of the suffering of such
magnitude of fellow human beings wherever they are.
Despite the current world economic and financial
crises, our economic growth in terms of non-oil gross
domestic product (GDP) was 12.8 per cent in 2008 and,
by our preliminary estimate, around 12 per cent in
2009. In the meantime, annual average inflation is less
than 2 per cent.
The agriculture sector substantially increased its
productivity by introducing high-yield and hybrid crop
varieties and by improving irrigation systems. The
Ministry of Finance improved the system of public
finance management and budget execution, while at the
same time remaining steadfast on the path of fiscal

6

prudence and discipline. We are committed to
maintaining growth in non-oil GDP for years to come
and to investing in rural areas, human resources and
basic infrastructures in order to reduce poverty and
unemployment.
Reducing unemployment is not an easy task; we
need foreign, national and public investment. To
minimize the high level of unemployment, we have
made an agreement with the Republic of Korea to
export our labour force. Hundreds of Timorese are
already working in that country, and we hope that other
countries may follow the example of Korea.
Prime Minister Xanana Gusmão is finalizing the
strategic plan for Timor-Leste. The plan will play a
major role in the development of our country and in
better preparing our people and nation to face the
challenges of the present and the future. The budget for
2010 is approximately $637 million. The national
priorities for this year are roads, water supply, food
security, human resources training, access to justice,
social services and administrative decentralization,
good governance and public security.
The Government of Timor-Leste aims to make
the management of public finances among the most
accountable and the most transparent in the world. We
will try. A few days ago, executives from a Canadian
management software company, Free Balance, visited
Timor-Leste; they are providing accounting services to
many countries. An agreement was reached by which
they will provide software solutions for public financial
and human resources management. These new solutions
will produce at least two portals for the public via a
web-based interface. One is called a transparency
portal, where the public can access real-time
information on how State funds are being executed,
including such details as amounts allocated, the timing
and location of projects, and under which programme
the project is being implemented. The other is a
procurement portal that gives access to information on
the procurement plans of the Government, providing
the business community with equitable participation
and adequate preparation time to complete applications
and submit them to the process. Once the procurement
process starts, it can be monitored and provide
information to the public on how the procurement
process was implemented, which procurement method
was utilized, the process of evaluation, the names of
companies and bidders, and the allocation to the
successful bidder.

10-24861

S/PV.6276

The citizens and organizations of my country will
be able to follow closely the budget execution and the
procurement process in real time. We are working
towards compliance with 18 requirements under the
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative. Our aim
is to protect and prudently manage the petroleum
sector to benefit the people of Timor-Leste and to
ensure that those resources and revenues are properly
accounted for and that global standards for good
governance, transparency and accountability are met
and implemented. Petroleum funds will continue to be
managed pursuant to current laws, and any changes
will be debated in our national Parliament.
As a recipient country of aid, we have
volunteered, together with six other fragile States, to
become pilot countries to be monitored with respect to
the Principles for Good International Engagement in
Fragile States and Situations. The High-Level Forum
on Aid Effectiveness held in Accra in 2008 endorsed an
Agenda for Action to reform the delivery of aid and
improve the effectiveness of development assistance.
The Accra accords were based on the principles of
2005 Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness.
On 26 February, a global report will be launched
in Washington, D.C., where the Minister of Finance of
Timor-Leste, Emilia Pires, will be one of the panellists.
On 8 April, we will host in Dili the International
Dialogue on Peacebuilding and State-Building, to be
co-chaired by the United Kingdom and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We hope that by sharing
experiences and best practices among post-conflict
countries, we may all be better prepared to navigate
towards the future with more confidence.
The Council of Coordination for the justice sector,
composed of the courts, general prosecutors and the
Ministry of Justice, met on 12 February and agreed on
the Justice Sector Strategic Plan. The recommendations
of the independent comprehensive needs assessment
were incorporated into the Strategic Plan. Major areas
include institutional development, infrastructure and
information technology reform, legal framework,
human resources development, access to justice, and
important measures to strength the rule of law such as
the implementation of the Audit Court, improvement of
the capacity for criminal investigation, creation of the
forensic services, and implementation of a case
management system in all core justice institutions.

10-24861

On 19 February, a bilingual version of the Penal
Code was published in Portuguese and Tetum.
Domestic violence became a public crime. A draft law
on the protection of women and children subjected to
domestic violence was submitted to the National
Parliament and is now under consideration. A land law,
that will also protect the property of women, is under
discussion.
The National Commission for the Rights of the
Child has now been fully implemented. It will have a
positive impact as an oversight and consultative body
to the Government in matters related to the protection
and dissemination of the rights of children. A
traditional or customary justice law is currently been
drafted. It will regulate cases that can be solved by
customary justice and also protect human rights,
especially those of women and children.
The Government has done everything possible to
create better conditions for the justice sector. This year,
a new training course for future judges, prosecutors
and public defenders will begin with the help of
Portugal. The justice sector is in its infancy. Many
achievements have been made, but many challenges
remain on the road ahead. Justice and reconciliation are
part of our system of values. We are strongly against
impunity, and we believe in the rule of law and human
rights. The Government welcomes the support of
UNMIT and the international community in general for
the justice sector.
Yesterday, the Chairman of the Anti-Corruption
Commission was sworn in at our National Parliament.
The ceremony represented a milestone in the fight
against corruption and nepotism. Mr. Adérito de Jesus
has all the professional and personal qualities to be
chosen by an absolute majority of the members of
Parliament to lead that crucial struggle. He will have
all the support that he needs from the Government. The
people of Timor-Leste expect a lot of him, and I wish
him great success.
The stability and peaceful political environment
in Timor-Leste are the result of the collective effort of
Timor-Leste, the United Nations and the international
community. Many citizens of Member countries have
served in Timor-Leste. Today, there are still many
civilian and police officers from within the United
Nations system. There are others from neighbouring
countries, such as New Zealanders and Australians,
who have contributed to peace, came to Timor-Leste at

7

S/PV.6276

the invitation of our country and continue to serve in
the International Stabilisation Force. We hope that, by
2012, they will return to their families after a
successful mission.
Relations with the countries in our region are
excellent. Today, Timor-Leste is an observer member
of the Pacific Islands Forum, and there is a strong
desire in our country that, in a few years from now,
Timor-Leste will become a full member of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations. We have
worked with Indonesia with courage and forward
thinking on common issues of the past, such as human
rights violations, through the Commission of Truth and
Friendship. As a democratic country that is pro-human
rights, we have promised ourselves and our people that
we will not condone impunity or human rights
violations in our own country.
Finally, we concur with the assessment made in
the report that there is a consensus in Timor-Leste that
UNMIT should remain in Timor-Leste up to 2012. We
thank all present for their support.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
give the floor to the members of the Security Council,
advising them to be concise, which will enable us to
hold our discussion quickly.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to congratulate
Ms. Ameerah Haq on her first briefing to the Council
in her new capacity as Special Representative. I would
also like to extend a warm welcome to His Excellency
Mr. José Luís Guterres, Deputy Prime Minister of
Timor-Leste, and to thank him for his statement.
We are very pleased with the positive
developments in Timor-Leste over the course of the
past year. The security situation has remained generally
calm and the success of the suco elections
demonstrated the growing trust of the people in
democratic governance. Progress has also been made in
the area of capacity-building.
The issue of internally displaced persons is one of
those remaining since the 2006 crisis and is being dealt
with, and we are hopeful of an early satisfactory
solution of that pending issue. We applaud the efforts
of the Government and the people of Timor-Leste. We
are also grateful for the indispensable role that the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) and the countries concerned have played in

8

support of Timor-Leste’s efforts to achieve such
progress.
Yet, we should remind ourselves that even a calm
situation may contain a hint of fragility. It is essential
to continue to ensure security, for instance, so as to
conduct municipal elections in a free, fair and safe
manner later this year. In that regard, a key task of
UNMIT is to support the Policia Nacional de TimorLeste (PNTL) in steadily resuming the policing
responsibility. We welcome PNTL assumption of
responsibility in four districts and three units last year.
We hope that steady progress will continue to be made
throughout this year.
However, we should not rush the process by
setting a rigid timeline before the National Police
acquire the necessary capacity. The transfer of policing
responsibility should be based on an assessment of the
capacity of the local police and objective criteria.
Therefore, we support the Secretary-General’s prudent
approach to reconfiguring the UNMIT police
component. The downsizing of the police should take
place on a district-by-district basis and on the basis of
an assessment of the capacity in each district.
The focus of the United Nations police is
naturally shifting to its role in training and mentoring
the PNTL, which is expected to carry the primary
responsibility for public security. Here, I would like to
stress the importance for the Government to lay out
clearly the future vision and orientation of the
PNTL — what kind of national police it would like to
develop, for instance, with emphasis on community
policing.
Timor-Leste is at a critical juncture in its efforts
to consolidate its achievements and to pave the way for
self-sufficiency and sustainable development. As I
have stressed on many occasions, the security and
durable stability of any country, including Timor-Leste,
can be achieved only with the corresponding
socio-economic development. As UNMIT carries out
its mandate, integrated peacebuilding efforts should be
accelerated.
In that regard, I applaud Prime Minister
Gusmão’s leadership in preparing a National Strategic
Development Plan to advance socio-economic
development, given the lack of economic opportunities
for the young population. I believe that vocational
training and job creation should be given the highest
priority in the Timorese Development Strategy.

10-24861

S/PV.6276

I also stress the importance of rural development,
agriculture and infrastructure, such as roads and water
resources, in the 2010 national priorities. All
resources — domestic and external, bilateral and
multilateral, public and private — should be mobilized
to support those priority activities.
The presence of UNMIT is an essential
stabilizing factor for Timor-Leste. The various
contributions of the members of UNMIT are greatly
appreciated. We therefore support the extension of
UNMIT’s mandate for another 12 months, as
recommended by the Secretary-General. We believe
that the Security Council should begin discussing in
due time the future role of the United Nations in the
country. As a lead country in Timor-Leste, we suggest
organizing a Security Council mission some time this
year to make the review process meaningful in defining
the future role of the United Nations as the critical year
of 2012 approaches.
I would like to conclude by reiterating Japan’s
continued commitment to standing by the Timorese
people in their nation-building effort.
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French):
I, too, would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Timor-Leste, Ms. Ameerah
Haq, for her exhaustive presentation of the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2010/85), which has helped
us to better grasp the political and security situation
prevailing in the young State of Timor-Leste. I also
welcome the presence here of His Excellency Mr. José
Luis Guterres, Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste,
and of course I thank him for his statement, which
confirmed, if that were necessary, that the process of
consolidation is being carried out successfully.

Government to persevere in maintaining political
stability.
With respect to security, Gabon welcomes the
results that have been achieved and welcomes the
important role played by UNMIT in the ensuring the
stability of Timor-Leste, in close cooperation with the
international security forces and the Falintil-Forças de
Defesa de Timor-Leste. In that regard, Gabon supports
UNMIT’s initiative to strengthen the capacities of the
Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste to better provide
security for property and people once UNMIT and the
international forces have withdrawn.
With respect to UNMIT’s technical assessment
mission, Gabon welcomes its positive conclusions,
particularly its satisfaction with respect to the
objectives assigned to UNMIT in the four mandated
priority areas: review and reform of the security sector;
strengthening of the rule of law; promotion of a culture
of democratic governance and dialogue; and economic
and social development. However, Gabon believes that
the achievements that we have seen thus far in the area
of security and development must be strongly
supported by the international community so that they
can be maintained.
We support the renewal of UNMIT’s mandate for
12 months, as recommended by the Secretary-General.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): At the outset, I
would like to join my colleagues in welcoming Deputy
Prime Minister Guterres and thanking him for his
contribution to today’s debate. I would also like to
congratulate the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Ameerah Haq, on her
appointment and thank her for her update on the
situation in Timor-Leste.

Recent developments in the situation in TimorLeste, as we have just heard, bring to mind some
observations on the political process, the state of
security and the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT).

Let me also say that Austria fully aligns itself
with the statement to be delivered by the acting head of
the European Union (EU) delegation, on behalf of the
EU, later in this debate.

At the political level, Gabon welcomes the
effective contribution of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste, particularly with respect to the
restoration of the rule of law, the reaffirmation of
political consensus, and Timorese ownership of the
organization and conduct of the various elections.
Gabon calls on the international community to help to
consolidate all of those efforts and encourages the

Austria welcomes the Secretary-General’s latest
report (S/2010/85) on the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), which incorporates
the findings and recommendations of the technical
assessment mission that visited Timor-Leste last
month. The report of the mission is a very useful tool
for reviewing progress made on the medium-term
strategy and on meeting the benchmarks for UNMIT’s
mandated priority areas. We also appreciate the

10-24861

9

S/PV.6276

comprehensive and inclusive approach taken in the
preparation and implementation of the mission.
The Secretary-General’s report reflects the
positive development that Timor-Leste has been able to
make, and we wish to commend the Government and
the people of Timor-Leste on their achievements. We
welcome the successful resumption of primary policing
responsibilities in a number of districts and units, and
are looking forward to the continuation of this process.
It is our understanding that the transfer of policing
responsibilities must be in line with the agreed criteria
and will require the completion of the certification
process. Continued monitoring from a human rights
and gender perspective, as well as effective
accountability mechanisms for the security forces, will
be important. We support adjustments in the number of
UNMIT police personnel, as suggested by the
Secretary-General for 2010, and agree that further
drawdowns would require an additional assessment.
Important progress has also been made
concerning the situation of internally displaced
persons. We now need to make returns and
reintegration sustainable. In this context, we welcome
the use of the Peacebuilding Fund emergency window
to finance infrastructure projects and monitoring
mechanisms.
Timor-Leste continues to face important
challenges in reducing poverty and creating
employment opportunities, in particular for its youth
population. There is an increasing need to move from
conflict prevention to a comprehensive development
agenda, as the representatives of the Timorese
Government have also repeatedly pointed out. The
current preparation of a national development strategy
will allow for more effective international support and
increased national ownership in this area, which should
focus, in particular, on assisting the country’s youth.
We welcome some progress made in
strengthening the rule of law, including in holding
accountable those responsible for criminal acts and
human rights violations during the 2006 crisis, as well
as continued investigations by the UNMIT Serious
Crimes Investigations Team into serious violations
committed in 1999. We remain convinced that delays
in delivering justice can adversely affect public
confidence in the judiciary and, more broadly, in the
Government. We wish to reiterate our support for
Timor-Leste’s endeavours to build strong institutions

10

that can fight impunity for grave violations of human
rights. UNMIT will also need to continue to play an
active role on this issue.
The Government’s response to the independent
needs assessment report on the justice sector is very
encouraging. We hope that the recommendations of the
report will be taken into account in the ongoing
development of the Justice Sector Strategic Plan. In
this context, it is obviously also important to address
the specific rights and needs of women. We are
concerned about the difficulties encountered by victims
of sexual and gender-based violence in obtaining
justice. The provision of training to police and justice
personnel will be an important measure to address
these important challenges. We also believe that the
number of women officers, both in the national and the
UNMIT police, should be increased.
Security sector reform remains one of the major
challenges for long-term peace and stability. We
welcome the Government’s efforts to develop a
national security policy, as well as progress made in
establishing civilian oversight of the security sector.
Further clarification of the respective roles and tasks of
the police and the defence forces is obviously
important. The “Force 2020” strategic plan constitutes
an important step in this regard. We commend the
defence forces on their intention to consider the
development of capacities for disaster relief and for
participation in United Nations peacekeeping. As I said
at the last briefing on this subject, Austria is exploring
ways to assist Timor-Leste in its capacity-building
efforts in these areas.
In conclusion, we believe that there should be a
positive response to the overwhelming desire of
Timorese society for continued United Nations support
until 2012. Austria therefore supports the extension of
UNMIT’s mandate for a further period of 12 months
and the continuation of a strong good offices role for
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
Capacity-building should be at the centre of
international efforts to further increase national
ownership and ensure the long-term stability and
prosperity of the Timorese nation.
Mr. Shcherbak (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Like many of our colleagues, we thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Ameerah Haq, for presenting the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2010/85) on the work of the United

10-24861

S/PV.6276

Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT)
and for her informative briefing on developments in
the country. We congratulate Ms. Haq on her recent
appointment as head of UNMIT and wish her success
and productivity in her work in this post.
We would also like to thank Mr. José Luís
Guterres, Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, for
his thorough remarks. We welcome the report’s
comments on the strengthening of stability in TimorLeste. That country has managed to overcome the
consequences of the crisis of 2006 and achieve
promising improvements in the political situation and
in the area of security. The tented camps have been
closed and internally displaced persons are returning to
a normal life, although some problems in this area still
remain and require a prompt response.
In October 2009, in a peaceful and calm
atmosphere, local elections were held for village —
suco — officials, confirming the national electoral
system’s growing capacity. All political parties are
interested in strengthening national unity and
endeavouring to resolve their differences through
democratic means. We understand, however, that the
progress achieved remains fragile. The institutions of
authority in this young State are not yet consolidated,
and national security organs still need support. Dili is
encountering serious socio-economic problems; the
unemployment
and
poverty
levels
remain,
unfortunately, very high. In such conditions,
strengthening the national security forces is of critical
importance in establishing stability, and is an important
indicator of the State’s self-sufficiency.
We are intently following the pace of the
handover of responsibility for the maintenance of law
and order from UNMIT to the Timorese police, which
has already been done in a few districts. We also
welcome the approach of the Timorese Government to
the process of handing over responsibility for the
maintenance of law and order to the national police as
early as the end of this year. This requires that both
Dili and UNMIT continue to step up their efforts to
strengthen police capacity, training and logistical and
technical support. It is important that the timeline for
the handover be arrived at using criteria developed
jointly with the country’s leadership: this means basing
it on the preparedness of police units, not on artificial
deadlines.

10-24861

We were interested to study the proposals of the
Secretariat’s technical assessment mission regarding
the possible future reconfiguration of UNMIT. Bearing
in mind the fragility of the progress achieved, we
support the Secretary-General’s recommendation on
extending the current mission mandate for 12 months,
with a subsequent gradual drawdown by mid-2011 of
the number of police by 328 officers. We also support
the Secretary-General’s plan for beginning the
drawdown of mission personnel before 2012. We await
further recommendations on the reconfiguration of the
United Nations presence, taking into consideration the
position of Dili and developments in the country.
In conclusion, we would like to express to the
head of UNMIT, Ameerah Haq, and to all the mission
staff, our appreciation for their professionalism and
selfless efforts. Russian police officers are serving in
the police component of UNMIT, and Russia will
continue to support their noble mission.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I too would like
to begin by welcoming the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative, Ameerah Haq, to her first meeting with
the Security Council in that capacity, to thank her for
her briefing today and also to reiterate our continuing
support for the efforts of the United Nations in
assisting the people of Timor-Leste. I would also like
to welcome His Excellency Mr. José Luís Guterres,
Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, to the Council
today, and to thank him for his update, which
illustrated the determination and will of Mr. Guterres
himself, his Government and the people of Timor-Leste
to build an increasingly stable, prosperous and well
governed nation, playing its full role in the region and
more widely.
I fully align myself with the statement that will
be made later in the debate on behalf of the European
Union by the acting head of the European Union
delegation.
We are encouraged by the continuing stable
security situation in Timor-Leste, which has seen no
return to the large-scale unrest experienced in February
2008. Timor-Leste continues to make much progress,
as demonstrated in the successful suco elections held in
October last year, and the effective resumption of
policing responsibilities in four districts by the national
police, the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL).
We look forward to the handover of additional districts
to the PNTL by the end of March. It is important that

11

S/PV.6276

this momentum be maintained throughout 2010 and
2011. The fact that there has been no increase in crime
or disorder following the transfer of responsibility is
very welcome. We fully support the efforts of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) to help strengthen national policing capacity,
and we hope that the mission, with the help of the
international community, as Ameerah Haq said in her
briefing, can focus its efforts more and more precisely
on providing the relevant training and advice.
But we do not underestimate the challenged that
remain, which Ameerah Haq has outlined. We would
echo the Secretary-General’s report (S/2010/85) on the
need for clear delineation of the roles and
responsibilities of the national police and the military.
The ongoing uncertainty in this relationship could be
destabilizing. We welcome efforts by the Timorese
authorities to address this through enhanced
legislation.
As underlined in the Secretary-General’s report,
the four medium-term benchmarks — security and
stability; rule of law, justice and human rights;
democratic
governance
and
dialogue;
and
socio-economic reform — remain critical to addressing
the overall challenges in Timor-Leste. In particular, we
continue to stress the importance of tackling impunity,
on which we welcome the remarks made just now by
the Deputy Prime Minister. It will be vital to continue
efforts to bring to justice perpetrators of war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide. We believe that
UNMIT’s Serious Crimes Investigation Team has an
important role to play in this by concluding its
outstanding investigations. We fully support its efforts
to pursue this valuable work rigorously.
With regard to addressing corruption, the recent
appointment of Adérito de Jesus Soares as TimorLeste’s first Anti-Corruption Commissioner is a
significant step in improving transparency and public
accountability in Timor-Leste. We hope the authorities
will build on that appointment by taking further
practical, concrete steps to tackle corruption.
We support the proposed extension of UNMIT’s
mandate for a further 12 months, but it remains our aim
to see Timor-Leste rely less and less on international
support. The plan for a measured drawdown of
UNMIT’s police component is a step in the right
direction. An early indication from UNMIT on its
longer-term drawdown strategy will be crucial, and we

12

look forward to this in due course. While there is
general agreement that UNMIT will remain until 2012,
preparing the future after 2012 will be key. We
encourage early consideration of what might follow
UNMIT, and of the shift to an increasingly civilianfocused United Nations peacebuilding presence.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (S/2010/85), which provides a
very objective and precise overview of the situation in
Timor-Leste. I would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Ameerah
Haq, for her briefing and for her efforts as head of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) to establish security and stability in that
country and to help its people attain their legitimate
national aspirations. We also welcome to the Security
Council His Excellency Mr. José Luis Guterres, Deputy
Prime Minister of the Democratic Republic of TimorLeste.
Lebanon appreciates the unanimity between
UNMIT and the various political and civil society
sectors in Timor-Leste, and welcomes the conclusions
of the technical assessment team on the security
situation, the rule of law, human rights, justice, the
implementation of democracy in the country, and the
economic and social situation. We also welcome the
improving political and security situation in TimorLeste, despite its continuing fragility, as reflected in
the report. We support the municipal elections to be
held this year in an atmosphere of political consensus,
security and stability. These elections are an important
indicator
of
Timor-Leste’s
progress
in
its
transformation into a democratic country based on the
rule of law.
In my country’s opinion, accountability and
combating impunity are fundamental. In this regard,
we cannot help but stress the confirmation in the
Secretary-General’s report of the need to complete
investigations and the collection of evidence aimed at
prosecuting the perpetrators of serious past crimes. We
view with serious concern the increasing poverty in
many sectors of the population in Timor-Leste,
particularly the sharp rise in youth unemployment. We
believe it is a social time bomb that could lead to
serious security consequences, particularly as many
youth in armed gangs were responsible for the violent
events of the 2006 crisis. Hence, the importance for the
Government to work towards economic and social

10-24861

S/PV.6276

development in the country, especially through new
opportunities for employment and a more just
distribution of national wealth.
Finally, we would stress that the international
community must continue to help Timor-Leste to build
and strengthen its institutions, particularly judicial and
security institutions. We support the recommendation
of the Secretary-General in the report on the extension
of UNMIT’s mandate for a further 12 months, as it
stands, so that it may complete its mandated mission.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): We join previous
speakers in welcoming the Deputy Prime Minister of
Timor-Leste, José Guterres, and we thank him for his
statement. We welcome and congratulate Ms. Haq on
her appointment as the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative to Timor-Leste and Head of the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT),
and we thank her for her insightful briefing. We thank
her predecessor, Mr. Atul Khare, for his commendable
work.
We are encouraged that Timor-Leste continues to
make progress, despite the structural, economic and
administrative challenges. We commend the TimorLeste authorities for continuing to work with all
interested parties to address political issues through
dialogue, which has contributed to stability in the
country.
The
strengthening
of
Timor-Leste’s
institutions, such as Government ministries and
democratic institutions, is a welcome development. We
also welcome the Government’s commitment to
strengthen rule of law and justice institutions through
appropriate legislation.
The efforts of the Government still require
support from the international community, particularly
from the United Nations, especially in the area of
institution-building.
Long-term
support
and
commitment is essential for strengthening key
institutions of governance and economic recovery. We
therefore welcome the increase in the leadership and
ownership of the development process by Timorese
authorities and people.
As institution-building continues, the importance
of clarifying and delineating the roles and
responsibilities of the different institutions, such as the
national police and the defence forces, will need to be
addressed. In that regard the Government’s
commitment to address the matter through the
development of a national security policy is

10-24861

commendable. We also welcome efforts to address the
concern of civilian oversight in the security sector,
such as the establishment of the Parliamentary
Committee for that purpose.
We welcome the progress made in the registration
and certification of national police officers, whose
authorized strength has now almost been reached. That
is not only good for the development of the rule of law
in the country, but is also a significant step in the
facilitation of the quicker resumption of policing
responsibilities from UNMIT police. We are
concerned, however, by the lack of UNMIT technical
police expertise needed at this point to support the
Timorese police. We call on UNMIT to address that
matter as a priority.
Despite that problem, as well as the insufficient
administrative and logistical capacity within the
national police in Timor-Leste, we are encouraged that
crime rates did not increase in districts where the
national police resumed policing responsibilities. We
note the Government’s view on the need to expedite
and conclude the process of resumption of policing
responsibilities by the national police by the end of
2010, and we note UNMIT’s readiness to ensure that
that is achieved.
The resettlement of internally displaced persons
is critical in dealing with a potential recipe for
instability. We therefore welcome the resettlement of
all internally displaced persons and the closure of all
camps. We commend the Government for starting the
implementation of phase II of the National Recovery
Strategy, aimed at providing assistance to resettled
families. While that is a good start, its long-term
sustainability will be realized only if the Government
makes complementary efforts to address other
socio-economic challenges. Issues such as rural
development, education and youth unemployment
require the urgent attention of the Government and its
development partners. I am glad that the Deputy Prime
Minister emphasized that point in his briefing.
In that regard, the prompt implementation of
UNMIT’s
medium-term
strategy
and
related
benchmarks will be crucial in facilitating progress. To
that end we support the Secretary-General’s
recommendation on the extension of UNMIT’s
mandate for a further 12 months.
Finally, we thank the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative, the UNMIT staff and the United

13

S/PV.6276

Nations country team for working hard to support the
efforts of the Government and the people of TimorLeste to stabilize and develop their country.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We too
wish to thank the Deputy Prime Minister of TimorLeste, Mr. José Luis Guterres, for his presence and for
his statement to the Council on the situation in his
country. My delegation is also grateful for the briefing
by the Special Representative for Timor-Leste,
Ms. Ameerah Haq. We want to welcome her warmly to
her new responsibilities in leading the United Nations
efforts in Timor-Leste. We also want to use this
opportunity to acknowledge the work carried out by
Mr. Atul Khare for stability and development to that
country.
We were pleased to observe that, as the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2010/85) says, TimorLeste continues to enjoy an atmosphere of security and
stability. That generates optimism and good prospects
for tackling the challenges that are still to be resolved
in the medium and long term. We welcome the work
done by the technical assessment mission led by
Mr. Ian Martin to consider the role that the United
Nations Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) must play
on the basis of progress achieved in its mandate. We
agree with his conclusion on maintaining UNMIT in
the country until 2012. We hope that, for that date,
progress in peacebuilding and in strengthening the
institutions will allow the Security Council to analyse
the eventual termination of the Mission’s work.
We commend the achievements of Timor-Leste’s
authorities in strengthening electoral institutions. We
also commend the holding of elections, in an overall
peaceful atmosphere, and the maintenance of political
stability in the country. We trust that those efforts will
continue in the run-up to the presidential and
parliamentary elections to be held in 2012.
One of the basic challenges in terms of security is
the current process of transferring command to the
Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL), which will
fully resume the policing work that to date has been
done by UNMIT’s police division. We believe that the
authorities’ cooperation with the Mission should
continue and should be intensified so that the national
police can continue to benefit from its guidance and
efforts to promote institutional development and the
necessary capacity-building, with a view to allowing

14

the PNTL to once again fully take up policing
functions in all districts and units by the end of 2012.
A national police that has sufficient operational
capacity and behaves professionally and impartially
will be the foundation for daily stability throughout the
country. It is equally important that there be a clear
definition and delimitation of responsibilities between
the national police and the Falintil-Forças de Defesa de
Timor-Leste, with a view to strengthening the
effectiveness and professionalism of both bodies.
Moreover, we commend and support all efforts
made by the country’s Government, with the support of
the Mission, in the areas of creating jobs, combating
urban and rural poverty and improving access to basic
social services, which is certainly a basic component in
maintaining the country’s stability and the security of
its population.
With regard to justice and accountability, we
believe that one of the essential elements in promoting
national reconciliation and lasting peace is to address
outstanding cases related to the crimes committed
during the 1999 and 2006 crises, in line with
resolutions 1704 (2006), 1745 (2007) and 1802 (2008).
My delegation agrees with the report of the SecretaryGeneral. We reiterate that, in line with the position of
the United Nations, there should be no amnesty or
impunity when it comes to war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide. In that connection, we were
pleased to note that the Parliament is to take up a draft
law to set up a successor body to the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation and the
Commission for Truth and Friendship. That will
contribute to improving the people’s trust in their
institutions.
Lastly, with regard to protecting human rights, we
welcome the fact that the Government of Timor-Leste
has identified domestic violence as a crime. We hope
that this measure will have a positive impact on
women’s participation in the political, economic and
social spheres. That simple but meaningful step reflects
the vision of the Timorese authorities and their
commitment to a future of gradual and sustainable
development.
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I, too,
would like to welcome Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Haq to the Council and to thank her
for her briefing. The United States congratulates her on
assuming that position and looks forward to working

10-24861

S/PV.6276

with her. I would also like to extend a warm welcome
to His Excellency José Luís Guterres, Deputy Prime
Minister of the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste,
and to thank him very much for his remarks.
We applaud the Government and the people of
Timor-Leste for the progress they have made and for
their deep commitment to establishing a strong and
sustainable democracy. We are encouraged by that
progress, but, as the Secretary-General’s report makes
clear (S/2010/85), Government institutions remain
fragile. The briefings we have heard this morning
provide us with valuable insight into the situation on
the ground. The technical assessment mission
organized by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations
has
provided
us
with
helpful
recommendations on the way forward.
This morning, I would like to address the four
priority areas outlined in the Secretary-General’s
report. First, let me say a few words on security and
stability.
The successful local elections on 9 October were
a positive sign that the security situation remains
stable. The upcoming municipal and national elections
will be a further test of the Government’s political
stability and of the capacity of the Timorese national
police. The continued transfer of primary policing
responsibilities from the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) to the national police
is another positive development. In that regard, we
commend the efforts of Timor-Leste, UNMIT and
dedicated bilateral donors, particularly Australia and
New Zealand. We support the Government’s desire to
accelerate the timeline for the transfer of the remaining
policing districts, but we note the importance of
adequate training and sufficient capacity before
transfers take place. We also reiterate the need to
remain diligent in delineating responsibility between
the police and the military.
The United States supports the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations to gradually decrease
international police personnel and to continue highquality specialized training of the national police,
including through the addition of civilian experts. We
are pleased to continue to facilitate that strengthening
of Timor-Leste’s security sector through our multistakeholder national security workshops hosted by the
Asia-Pacific Center for Security Studies in Honolulu.

10-24861

On the matters of the rule of law, justice and
human rights, we commend the Government of TimorLeste for its achievements in strengthening the
judiciary and in passing key legislation to support the
rule of law, including the adoption of the criminal
code. We are, however, concerned about the need to
address impunity. In that regard, we welcome very
much the comments of the Deputy Prime Minister this
morning. Those individuals who committed offences
during the 2006 crisis should be held accountable in
accordance with the recommendations of the Special
Commission of Inquiry. We also encourage TimorLeste to support the recommendations of the
Commission for Truth and Reconciliation.
With regard to democratic governance, TimorLeste has made advances in establishing the Civil
Service Commission and more effective parliamentary
oversight of Government activities. Timorese officials
have now turned their attention to combating
corruption. The United States is considering ways that
our Millennium Challenge Corporation might assist
Timorese efforts in that area.
Finally, the United States recognizes the clear
link between security and development. In that context,
we remain concerned about the most vulnerable in
Timor-Leste: the poor and the displaced. We support
Timor-Leste’s
continued
efforts
to
address
malnutrition, increase employment and improve access
to education and child protection, especially in rural
areas. For our part, the United States continues to
provide technical support through $24 million in
annual assistance programming. Timor-Leste has
deemed one of our rural development projects — the
Greenhouse Project — as a best practice. We
appreciate that the Government is now making its own
investment to replicate the model throughout the
country.
The people of Timor-Leste have made great
strides towards achieving peace and stability. But they
need and deserve the continued support of the United
Nations and international partners. For that reason, the
United States supports the extension of UNMIT’s
mandate as proposed by the Secretary-General.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): At the outset, I would like
to welcome His Excellency Mr. José Luís Guterres,
Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, and to thank
him for his remarks. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2010/85) and to

15

S/PV.6276

thank his Special Representative, Ms. Ameerah Haq,
for her comprehensive briefing to the Council in her
new capacity. We support her efforts and we support
the key coordinating role of the United Nations in
Timor-Leste.

mission at the beginning of this year will surely guide
future efforts and further progress to enhance security
sector reform, internal security and national defence.
Improvement of the justice sector and its institutions
remains equally important.

Like others, I would like to praise the Timorese
people, Government and political parties, as the
security situation remains relatively calm and stable.
This considerable stabilization has enabled the
Timorese to address key issues such as the further
strengthening of State institutions and democratic
governance and the adoption of important measures to
fight corruption. In this context, the creation of the
Anti-Corruption
Commission
and
the
recent
appointment of its first Commissioner are all welcome
developments in the right direction. We also welcome
the successful holding of the village elections of 9
October 2009 without major incident, proving that the
Timorese people are committed to democracy and that
the political parties are demonstrating respect for
democratic principles and processes.

Despite these considerable achievements, the
main issues that contributed to the 2006 crisis, as
mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report — such as
poverty, unemployment, lack of an effective land and
property regime and a weak judicial system —
continue to pose important challenges and need to be
fully addressed in order to anchor stability in TimorLeste. That is a must for the sustainable development
of the country. In particular, the high rate of
unemployment among youth is not only worrisome for
the economic development of the country, but also
stands as a possible risk to the security situation of
Timor-Leste. Moreover, gender-based violence should
also be addressed comprehensively. In that regard, the
training of the PNTL to resolve community issues is of
utmost importance.

We are glad to see that all of the camps for
internally displaced persons (IDPs) have finally been
closed. We are confident that the Timorese authorities,
with the help of the United Nations Integrated Mission
in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), will also meet the
requirements for the reintegration of IDPs into society.
In the same vein, we hope that UNMIT’s process of
handing over policing responsibilities to the Timorese
national police, the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste
(PNTL), will continue to be as smooth as it has been
until now. In this respect, we are pleased to note that
the resumption of primary policing responsibilities by
the PNTL has not led to an increase in criminal
activity. We take careful note of the wish of the
Timorese authorities to see the process of handing over
policing responsibilities finalized by the end of this
year in all districts and all units. That is an
understandable and legitimate request from a
democratic and sovereign Government.

Given the progress achieved so far, we are
confident that Timor-Leste will eventually overcome
all these challenges. However, that requires continued
national dialogue and unity. Therefore, we join the
Secretary-General in encouraging the Government and
the opposition to continue broad consultation efforts.
We also believe that Timor-Leste requires the
continued support of the international community in its
quest for peace, stability and prosperity. We thus accept
the Secretary-General’s recommendation, based on the
findings of the technical assessment mission, that
UNMIT’s present strength and composition should be
maintained. In this regard, we fully support the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to extend
UNMIT’s mandate for a further period of 12 months,
with the same composition and a gradual decrease of
the police component by mid-2011.

However, we also think that things should not be
rushed and thus continue to support the SecretaryGeneral’s gradual approach in this matter. We welcome
further progress achieved in the registration, screening
and certification programme for the PNTL in
accordance with the Policing Arrangement. It seems
also that quite a few logistical requirements must be
fulfilled in order to complete the handover process. In
this regard, the findings of the technical assessment

16

Let me conclude by wishing continued success to
the Timorese people and Government.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to extend a
warm welcome to Deputy Prime Minister José Luís
Guterres and thank him for his statement. Through
him, I wish to congratulate the Timorese Government
and people on the progress achieved in many different
areas in the past year, including in the economic,
social, political and security domains.

10-24861

S/PV.6276

I also welcome the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Ameerah Haq, and wish her
success in her new functions. I thank the members of
the technical assessment mission to Timor-Leste, in
particular its chief, Mr. Ian Martin, for their diligent
work and valuable recommendations.
The Brazilian Government has done its best to
cooperate with the Timorese people, the people of a
fellow Portuguese-speaking country, and did so even
before the formal creation of the country. A common
language, however, is not the only connection between
our two countries. Even though we are geographically
distant, similarities in history and culture bring us
together as partners and friends. Currently, we have
ongoing cooperation projects with Timor-Leste in
fields such as food security, education, health and
security. We also cooperate on the strengthening of the
judiciary and on legal and diplomatic training.
We are pleased at the positive developments in
Timor-Leste. The successful elections held last October
for chiefs and councils are a sign of growing
democratic maturity. The establishment of the AntiCorruption Commission in parliament and the
appointment of its first Commissioner are also
significant. The closure of all camps for internally
displaced persons is an important development. The
challenge ahead is to continue to implement measures
that enable all those who returned to their original
homes to make a living in a safe environment.
Livelihood and employment opportunities have
also increased in the country, including in rural areas
and for vulnerable groups and youth, as described in
the
Secretary-General’s
report
(S/2010/85).
Improvements are noted in terms of job creation and
the qualification of human resources, as thousands of
teachers have received intensive training and many
hundreds of youngsters have had access to technical
education. Brazil pays particular attention to these
matters and has assisted the Timorese Government in
capacity-building by providing teachers and experts, as
well as infrastructure.
Despite the overall progress, it must be noted that
poverty and unemployment remain a formidable
challenge, as underlined by Ms. Ameerah Haq. The
international community should continue to cooperate
with the efforts of the Timorese authorities to generate
employment and income, as this constitutes an
important path to ensuring stability and growth.

10-24861

We welcome the progress made in the security
situation in Timor-Leste and commend the efforts
undertaken by the Timorese national police to carry out
its duties. We welcome the positive results achieved so
far in the districts and units already handed over to the
Timorese police. We also support the resolve of the
Government and the United Nations to intensify police
training so as to ensure the sustainable resumption of
primary policing responsibilities throughout the
country as soon as possible.
The cautious approach taken by the SecretaryGeneral for a gradual drawdown of United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) police,
conditioned upon progress in the development of the
national police force and measured against the
fulfilment of objective criteria and an assessment of the
evolving situation on the ground, is one that we fully
support.
In our view, it is important to clearly delineate
the roles and responsibilities of the security sector
institutions, in particular between the police and the
military and to establish an appropriate civilian
oversight mechanism. In this regard as well, progress
has been made. The Timorese authorities have taken
significant steps in the development of a legal
framework for the security sector, including a national
security law. We support their efforts and encourage
them to proceed with determination.
Timor-Leste has been able to move forward and
address some of the most pressing issues and
challenges faced by any young country. The
international community has provided assistance and
should continue to offer its support to the Timorese.
Brazil supports the extension of the mandate of
UNMIT in line with the desire of the people and the
Government of Timor-Leste and as proposed by the
Secretary-General. We believe the United Nations
presence remains indispensable to assist the
Government in consolidating the gains of the past and
in ensuring a smooth transition to recovery and
development. Taking into account the planning for
possible future adjustments in the United Nations
presence, Brazil supports the proposal that the Council
include Timor-Leste in the schedule of visits to be
made in the current year.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): We join
other delegations in thanking the Secretary-General for
his most recent report (S/2010/85) on the United

17

S/PV.6276

Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT).
In addition, we extend our thanks to His Excellency
Mr. José Luís Guterres, Deputy Prime Minister of the
Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste, and to
Ms. Ameerah Haq, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Timor-Leste, and express our
appreciation to her for both the current and future
proposals on the mandate of UNMIT. We also extend
our thanks to Mr. Ian Martin, former Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Timor-Leste and head of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste, for
his leadership resulting in the comprehensive findings
and the recommendations of the technical assessment
mission.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has aligned itself with
the statement that will be delivered later on by the
representative of the European Union.
Allow me now to comment on the points we
consider crucial for the joint efforts by the United
Nations and Timor-Leste Government to achieve
sustainable peace, stability and prosperity in the
country.
The positive Timorese political undertakings in
2007 and 2009 should serve as a springboard for the
upcoming municipal and national elections. We share
the view that the national and municipal elections to be
organized in 2010 and 2012 will be of critical
importance. In this context, we commend the domestic
authorities for the successful organization and
completion of the elections in 2009. Furthermore,
President Ramos-Horta’s recent pledge to engage with
national and local leaders on issues of national interest
may be viewed as a constructive prelude to fostering
political dialogue. In this light, the recent activities
such as the “Road to peace and national unity”
dialogues as well as the “Dili, City of Peace” campaign
are noteworthy. Bosnia and Herzegovina believes that
such efforts may serve as encouraging indications of an
additional strengthening of the security and justice
sectors.
Strengthening security sector reform is crucial for
sustainable peace and security in Timor-Leste. A clear
delineation of responsibilities between the Policia
Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) and the FalintilForças Armadas de Defesa de Timor-Leste (F-FDTL)
has to be defined, and a comprehensive reform process
of both should be carefully developed and completed.

18

While we commend the process of resumption by
the PNTL of the primary responsibilities for police
operations in several districts since May 2009, we are
also hopeful that the rest of the country’s districts will
follow through by the end of 2010. The appropriate
completion of the certification process thus remains
essential, as does further capacity-building of the
PNTL at the national and district levels. Bearing these
commitments in mind, we agree that there is a need for
a carefully mapped-out approach to the drawdown of
UNMIT police, taking into account all the lessons
learned from the 2006 and 2008 events. We look
forward to hearing more about the UNMIT team’s
plans, supporting the approach explained in the
comprehensive report of the technical assessment
mission.
We are deeply convinced that only truth and
justice can lead the country towards full reconciliation
and prosperity. We commend the consensus achieved
among all stakeholders to institutionalize the
recommendations of the Commission for Reception,
Truth and Reconciliation and the Commission for Truth
and Friendship regarding investigations of crimes
against humanity and other serious crimes committed
during the crisis. The more successful the fight against
impunity is, the better the prospects for true
reconciliation and national unity will be.
Socio-economic problems must be addressed in
an effective and coordinated manner, with all
stakeholders on board, including the private sector,
civil society and foreign donors. Infrastructure
projects, foreign investment and an improvement in
youth employment will contribute, inter alia, to poverty
reduction and the promotion of sustainable economic
growth.
We are pleased to note the significant
improvements in dealing with internally displaced
persons. Bosnia and Herzegovina is aware of the
challenges that large numbers of internally displaced
persons entail. The reintegration of internally displaced
persons is linked both with achieving and maintaining
lasting peace and with strengthening democratic
institutions and processes.
However, the slow progress on the gender and
human rights fronts is a matter of concern. This is
principally significant in terms of domestic and sexual
violence against women and children. It is crucial that
domestic violence and sexual assault cases be formally

10-24861

S/PV.6276

prosecuted in accordance with the new Criminal Code.
In this vein, we also encourage the continuation of
programmes for the prevention of gender-based
violence, under the auspices of the United Nations
Development Fund for Women and UNMIT.
Finally, Bosnia and Herzegovina commends the
effective
interconnectivity
that
the
technical
assessment mission has undertaken with relevant
United Nations entities regarding its review of progress
and challenges in Timor-Leste. We are of the view that
the technical assessment mission’s current findings and
recommendations are valuable for paving the future
road towards stability and progress in Timor-Leste.
With this in mind, Bosnia and Herzegovina supports
the extension of the UNMIT mandate for another
12 months.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes Mr. José Luís
Guterres, Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, to the
Council and thanks him for his statement. We
congratulate Ms. Ameerah Haq on her assumption of
the post of Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Timor-Leste and thank her for her
comprehensive briefing on the recent situation on the
ground.
We are pleased to see that, over the past few
months, the overall situation in Timor-Leste has
remained stable. The momentum of the political
dialogue among various parties has been maintained
and the principle of seeking to resolve differences
through consultation has been respected. Certain
progress has been achieved in economic and social
reconstruction. The Government attaches importance to
investment in education and health and to the provision
of basic services to the population. This has produced
positive results in the improvement of people’s lives.
With the assistance of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste and the international
community, the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste
(PNTL) has enhanced its law enforcement capacity and
is gradually taking over responsibility for ensuring law
and order.
At the same time, we should recognize that
Timor-Leste still faces formidable challenges in
economic development and the improvement of
people’s livelihoods. Problems such as slow
agricultural development, youth underemployment and
lack of human resources are hampering the recovery

10-24861

and reconstruction process and having a fundamental
effect on the social stability of Timor-Leste. We
support the Timor-Leste Government in its continuing
efforts to increase input into infrastructure
development, education, health and vocational training,
and we call on the international community to provide
more assistance to the Government and the people of
Timor-Leste in the relevant fields.
We note that in his report (S/2010/85) the
Secretary-General has put forward recommendations
on the drawdown of UNMIT police. We are of the view
that UNMIT is fulfilling an important mission in
Timor-Leste and that its police component is playing a
particularly important role in helping maintain social
order and in increasing the law enforcement capacity of
the PNTL. It is our hope that, in its approach to the
drawdown of UNMIT, the Secretariat will keep in mind
the process of peace and reconstruction in Timor-Leste
and will ensure the security and stability of TimorLeste while implementing the drawdown plan.
We
support
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendation to extend the mandate of UNMIT for
a further year, and we hope that Special Representative
Haq and UNMIT will continue to play an active role in
helping the Timor-Leste Government to increase its
administrative capacity and in coordinating the
assistance efforts of the international community.
Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): Nigeria welcomes His
Excellency Mr. José Luís Guterres, Deputy Prime
Minister of the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste,
and we thank him for his contribution to this debate.
We congratulate Ms. Ameerah Haq, the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for TimorLeste, and we commend her for her comprehensive
briefing.
I will limit my remarks to the following points,
which we judge to be very crucial.
First, we welcome the relative stability in TimorLeste. We are encouraged by the growing respect for
constitutional order and the commitment to build
consensus on development issues, both by the
Timorese leadership and by the Frente Revolucionária
do Timor-Leste Independente (FRETILIN) opposition.
These efforts need to be reinforced and the parties
encouraged to continue efforts towards a national
consensus and consultation.

19

S/PV.6276

Secondly, for the evolving peace to be
sustainable, it must be underpinned by viable national
and State institutions and genuine socio-economic
progress. In that regard, Timor-Leste requires the
strengthening of its security and justice sector
institutions and measures to create employment, reduce
food insecurity and reintegrate internally displaced
persons (IDPs). Measures should be taken to address
the challenges facing IDPs, in particular their need for
basic assistance and services, the settlement of land
disputes and reintegration into their original
communities.
The professional development of the national
police, the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL), is
critical to the emergence of a national security force.
As the PNTL increasingly assumes more policing
responsibilities, its capacity needs to be enhanced
through vigorous training, mentoring and institutional
development. An efficient and professional PNTL
would, without doubt, enable the Timor-Leste
Government to fulfil one of the certification
requirements for resuming police responsibilities.
Thirdly, we welcome the efforts to redress past
cases of impunity, as well as the establishment of
accountability mechanisms. These measures will
certainly reinforce the rule of law. However, we note
that without a resilient justice and security sector, the
burgeoning peace and stability in the country could be
threatened.
Fourthly, we support the broad desire of the
Timorese leadership and other national stakeholders, as
confirmed by the technical assessment mission to the
country last month, that the United Nations maintain
the integrated support of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) for the country. We
also support the proposal that a cautious approach be
adopted for the initial drawdown of UNMIT police and
that further drawdowns be subject to an assessment in
late 2010. We look forward to the establishment of the
assessment team and to the key elements of the
drawdown proposal.
To conclude, although Timor-Leste has made
significant progress it still faces many serious
challenges as it seeks to establish a stable democracy
and develop its economy. We believe that UNMIT’s
medium-term strategy and the related benchmarks can
provide a solid foundation for sustainable stability and
prosperity in Timor-Leste. We therefore welcome the

20

recommendation regarding the review of the mandate
of UNMIT and its extension for a further period of
12 months.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.
I welcome the presence of Mr. José Luís
Guterres, Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, and
once again convey to him the support of France. I also
thank Ms. Ameerah Haq, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Timor-Leste, for her briefing.
The representative of the European Union will be
making a statement at this meeting, and we subscribe
to it.
Over the past year, the overall situation in East
Timor has continued to improve. It has been
characterized by political stability, the development of
a constructive dialogue between the Government and
the opposition, institution-building and strong
economic growth. But it will take time to consolidate
this progress. The reassuring presence of the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT)
and the international security forces — whose activities
we welcome — will be a key element of stability into
2012. France supports the renewal of the mission’s
mandate for a further 12 months, as part of a mediumterm consolidation strategy with a view to progressive
Timorese ownership of responsibilities now borne by
UNMIT.
We share the concern of the Government that
responsibility for law and order should rapidly be
transferred to the Timorese police, in line with criteria
jointly formulated by the United Nations and the
authorities. As indicated in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2010/85), this should make possible a
gradual reduction in UNMIT personnel. In his report,
the Secretary-General also stresses the importance of
fighting impunity for past crimes, which is a
prerequisite for sustainable reconciliation. We share the
concerns expressed by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and encourage her to remain
actively engaged in this area, in conformity with the
mandate that the Security Council has given her.
We reaffirm in particular our support for
UNMIT’s action in support of the Prosecutor-General
of East Timor, including through the mission’s Serious
Crimes Investigation Team.

10-24861

S/PV.6276

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Australia.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Australia welcomes the
opportunity to participate once again in the Security
Council’s deliberations on Timor-Leste. I would like to
thank Special Representative Haq and Deputy Prime
Minister Guterres for their presentations. The Deputy
Prime Minister’s presence is especially valued. I would
also like to commend the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for her very strong start in her role,
and to note that her good offices role in particular will
remain very important into the future.
The recent visit of the technical assessment
mission led by former Special Envoy Ian Martin was
particularly welcome and has provided an especially
valuable assessment for the Council.
Australia welcomes the ongoing positive
developments in Timor-Leste, which are detailed in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/85) and to
which the Deputy Prime Minister referred this
morning. But, as we all know of course, there is still a
significant amount of work to be done by the
Government and the people of Timor-Leste, assisted by
their partners, before we can confidently say the
country will be remain stable and secure over the long
term. Australia sees the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) as continuing to
have a decisive role to play in that and remains
committed to strong partnership with the United
Nations mission and of course, as a close neighbour
and friend, with Timor-Leste and its people
themselves.
I want to be brief; these efforts by Australia are
outlined briefly in my statement as distributed. One
area I would like to particularly flag, which needs
serious attention — and quickly — is the critical issue
of youth unemployment. Disaffected young men in
particular remain a potential threat. As the SecretaryGeneral’s report itself notes, finding a place for youth
in the country’s economic life, civic institutions and
democratic processes is absolutely critical to stability.
Much more needs to be done by all of us to help create
job opportunities for youth.
There have of course been a number of
noteworthy developments since the Council last
considered the situation in Timor-Leste. Timor-Leste’s

10-24861

recognition of the problems of corruption and lack of
capacity in the public sector and the introduction of
measures taken to address them are welcome. We note
the recent appointment of an Anti-Corruption
Commissioner, who will head up the new AntiCorruption Commission. We have also been pleased to
support the Government in its efforts to establish a new
Civil Service Commission.
In the security sector, we note in particular the
further progress in the process of resumption of
policing responsibility by the Policia Nacional de
Timor-Leste (PNTL). We acknowledge the very natural
desire by the Timor-Leste Government that this process
be expedited, but we would encourage both the United
Nations and the Government to pursue the process
within the agreed framework requiring benchmarks to
be reached prior to resumption. There is a lot of work
to be done if the resumption process is to be completed
by the end of the year, including by the Government in
ensuing the PNTL has the supporting infrastructure
needed to undertake its work. My own Government, as
a donor, is very prepared to continue working with the
Timor-Leste Government in that process. We also
support the assessment mission’s recommendation that
there be a reconfiguration within UNMIT to enable
deployment of United Nations police with skills
directly relevant to their new role, following
resumption, as mentors and monitors. For our part, our
bilateral Timor-Leste Police Development Program
continues to work with its PNTL counterparts to
strengthen systems and procedures.
Other
major
developments
include
the
commencement of the force-wide promotions process
for PNTL officers, the ongoing consideration by
Parliament of draft laws on the national security
framework, and additional consultations on the draft
national security policy. Work in this latter area is
critical to ensuring that there is a clear understanding
of the respective roles of the security forces and an
established framework for civilian oversight of these
institutions. There have also been several security
incidents involving PNTL officers that have given
some cause for concern, and we encourage the relevant
authorities to deal with those issues appropriately and
swiftly so as to ensure that community goodwill and
trust in the PNTL are strengthened.
The Australian-led International Stabilisation
Force (ISF) has continued its shift in focus from
security support to helping to develop the capacity of

21

S/PV.6276

the Timor-Leste military. The past few months have
seen a reduction in ISF numbers to approximately 540
Australian and New Zealand Defence Force personnel.
That reduction, of course, does not mean any reduction
in our commitment to supporting Timor-Leste and the
United Nations Mission. On the contrary, the ISF
restructure allows for an enhanced capacity-building
effort while maintaining the ability to respond to
security threats and the needs of UNMIT, consistent
with the level of security in Timor-Leste.
In
conclusion,
Australia
supports
the
recommendation of the Secretary-General that the
UNMIT mandate be renewed for another 12 months,
with some modest reductions in staff numbers and
some reconfiguration based on the technical
assessment mission recommendations.
Mr. Ali (Malaysia): I express my congratulations
to you, Mr. President, and the delegation of France on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of February 2010. We have no doubt that,
under your able leadership, the Security Council will
continue to deliberate and take action on the most
pressing questions regarding the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Malaysia has always followed with avid interest
the progress of its newest neighbour, Timor-Leste. Our
involvement with Timor-Leste began on the eve of the
country’s independence itself, and Malaysia is proud of
the progress that young nation has made in a mere
eight years, outstripping many of its peers.
It gives me great personal pleasure to welcome
back to New York an old colleague who has gone on to
greener pastures, His Excellency Mr. José Luis
Guterres, Deputy Prime Minister of the Democratic
Republic of Timor-Leste.
We thank the Secretary-General for his most
recent report, contained in document S/2010/85, on the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT), and Ms. Ameerah Haq, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for her
briefing. In this regard, allow me to congratulate
Ms. Haq on her recent and well-deserved appointment
to the post.
The 9 October 2009 elections at the level of local
authorities were yet another milestone on TimorLeste’s path towards nation-building. Given the
encouraging signs thus far, Malaysia has every

22

confidence that future elections at every level will be
ably handled in a fair and transparent manner by
Timor-Leste.
The encouraging security situation augurs well
for the ongoing work on the resumption of policing
responsibilities by the National Police of Timor-Leste
(PNTL) through a phased approach. As recognized in
the report of the Secretary-General of last year on this
matter (S/2009/504), there is a need to ensure the
PNTL’s ability to meet the criteria mutually agreed by
the Government of Timor-Leste and UNMIT. UNMIT,
in turn, must remain committed to the principle of
national ownership, in particular with regard to the
comprehensive review of the security sector, and an
agreement between the two parties must be finalized if
things are to progress in due course.
Malaysia believes that adherence to the rule of
law is crucial to ensuring the respect of the people for
their own security forces. Accountability for criminal
acts must not only be seen to be paramount, but must
also be so, as it is the cornerstone of trust in the
system. Malaysia takes heart from the continued
commitment of the Government of Timor-Leste to
ensuring the accountability of its security forces
through the mechanisms introduced.
Stability and prosperity are two sides of the same
coin; one cannot be sustained without the other. If
poverty is left unchecked, it will sooner or later erode
the foundations of stability in a country. This is why
Malaysia welcomes the move of the Government of
Timor-Leste to address the high rates of unemployment
and poverty among the Timorese population, in
particular its efforts to finalize the National Strategic
Development Plan.
Malaysia also lauds the closing of all the camps
for internally displaced persons (IDPs), and welcomes
the establishment of the Peacebuilding and Social
Cohesion Department in Timor-Leste. We hope that the
Department will realize its full potential and live up to
the promises inherent in its creation.
While the dispersal and resettlement of IDPs
represent welcome progress, alongside resettlement
there must also be efforts to ensure that former IDPs
have the means to sustain livelihoods in their areas of
origin. We understand that the resettlement of IDPs is
more than just a physical process; it also involves
financial considerations. IDPs resettled in areas where
they used to reside need to come to terms with the loss

10-24861

S/PV.6276

of their former property. Over and above that,
communal life must also be taken into account, since
IDPs are often resettled into communities. Thus, the
acceptance of the local community is imperative.
Malaysia recognizes that the Government of TimorLeste is cognizant of these problems, and hopes that
solutions will soon be found to overcome the matter.
In an effort to assist the people of Timor-Leste in
these economically challenging times, Malaysia would
urge the international community to explore ways to
invest in Timor-Leste with a view to creating
employment opportunities for the people. In this
regard, Malaysia undertakes to encourage its own
businessmen to consider Timor-Leste as a viable
business partner.
As part of its commitment to Timor-Leste,
Malaysia reaffirms its continued support for and
cooperation with the country, both at the multilateral
level, through UNMIT and the United Nations police,
and at the bilateral level, through the Malaysian
Technical Cooperation Programme. As the fourth
largest contributor of police personnel in Timor-Leste,
Malaysia is proud to be part of the nation-building
process of its neighbour.
The Secretary-General finds that the security and
justice institutions in Timor-Leste remain fragile, and
that there is the distinct possibility that they would be
unable to withstand another major crisis of the
magnitude of that of 2006. With this in mind, Malaysia
is of the view that Timor-Leste still requires the robust
presence of UNMIT. Malaysia supports the extension
of the mandate of UNMIT for a further year, to be
reviewed on a yearly basis. UNMIT continues to be
relevant in its work promoting cooperation among all
parties in Timor-Leste to engage in political dialogue
for the rebuilding and development of the country.
For its part, Malaysia will continue with its effort
to provide training to Timorese security personnel. In
addition to training for the Defence Forces of TimorLeste under the Malaysian Defence Cooperation
Programme, Malaysia, together with Australia, is in the
process of organizing a peacekeeping training
workshop for Timorese security personnel to take place
in the later part of this year.
Malaysia reaffirms its commitment to the peace
and stability of the region as a whole, of which TimorLeste is undoubtedly an integral part. We are confident
that the strong political commitment of the people and

10-24861

Government of Timor-Leste, together with the support
of the international community, will only help the
country rebuild and prosper that much more quickly.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): Even now, as the
month is winding down, we are pleased to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Council for the month of February. We have noted with
appreciation your leadership and the role that you
continue to play. I thank you for allowing my
delegation to participate in this debate and to share our
views on the situation in Timor-Leste.
South Africa is particularly pleased at the
participation of His Excellency Deputy Prime Minister
Guterres in this meeting. We join others in welcoming
Ms. Ameerah Haq to the Security Council, and we wish
to offer our cooperation in working closely with her.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report on the
situation in Timor-Leste (S/2010/85), and especially
for his inclusion of the comprehensive report of the
technical assessment mission to Timor-Leste, led by
Mr. Ian Martin.
South Africa remains satisfied with the steady but
certain progress that Timor-Leste is making in
developing and strengthening the democratic
institutions and processes in that country. We salute the
efforts of the Government, the political parties and the
people of Timor-Leste towards enhancing stability and
making peace sustainable.
In that regard, we welcome the successful holding
of village or suco elections as another step forward in
the process of building the Timorese State. The high
voter turnout and the capacity illustrated by the
Timorese authorities to organize and oversee those
elections are indicative of the high level of
commitment of the people of Timor-Leste to restoring
normalcy and building democracy.
South Africa also welcomes the commitments of
President Ramos-Horta, Prime Minister Gusmão and
Mr. Alkatiri, made during their meeting in January
2010, to continuing discussions on issues of national
interest. Continued political dialogue is essential to
stability and strong democratic institutions in any
society. We will continue to support all efforts aimed at
fostering dialogue and reconciliation in Timor-Leste.
My delegation also welcomes the continued
improvement in the security situation in Timor-Leste.
We support the extension of the mandate of the United

23

S/PV.6276

Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste for another
12 months, as well as the gradual process of the
drawdown and reconfiguration of the Mission. We
agree with other speakers that the resumption of
primary policing responsibilities by the National Police
of Timor-Leste (PNTL) is a crucial next step in
strengthening the country’s own security institutions. It
is important for the United Nations and the
international community to continue to support TimorLeste in building a strong, responsible, independent
and stable State.
We have noted the caution expressed by the
Secretary-General and the technical assessment
mission with regard to security sector reform, and
especially with regard to the PNTL. It is important that
the police be projected and accepted in the community
as the primary law-enforcement agency. In that regard,
it is important that the PNTL’s capacity to implement
legislation be addressed through training, capacitybuilding and the provision of logistical support.
South Africa has also noted the progress made
with regard to the justice sector and welcomes the
independent
comprehensive
needs
assessment
undertaken by the Timorese authorities. It is important
that the recommendations of that assessment be
implemented. Capacity is essential to the achievement
of the rule of law in a society, and in that regard we
welcome and support all international efforts, including
those of the United Nations, to build capacity in TimorLeste’s justice sector.
Nonetheless, no progress will be achievable if the
sustainable socio-economic development of the country
is not made a priority both by the Timorese
Government and by the international community. We
have noted with concern the Secretary-General’s
assessment that many factors that fuelled the 2006
crisis are still present in society, making it vulnerable
to instability.
In that regard, South Africa continues to be
concerned over the high rate of poverty and
unemployment, especially youth unemployment. We
reiterate our call on the international community and
multilateral partners to align their programmes and
support with those of the Government, particularly the
National Strategic Development Plan, soon to be
released.
With regard to vulnerable groups, my delegation
is pleased with the progress made with regard to the

24

return to and integration of internally displaced persons
in Timor-Leste and the support provided to that country
through the Peacebuilding Fund with the aim of
ensuring that reintegration is sustainable.
We have noted the slow progress on gender
equality and the implementation of women’s human
rights. In that regard, we encourage the Government of
Timor-Leste to continue all its efforts aimed at
achieving stability. It is our view that no effort aimed
at achieving stability in Timor-Leste can succeed until
women take up their rightful place as agents of change
in society.
Finally, I wish to reiterate South Africa’s
commitment to the people of Timor-Leste. As a
member of the international core group, with our
partners in the international community we will
continue to support the efforts of the Government and
people of Timor-Leste and the United Nations to
consolidate stability in that country.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I, too, thank Deputy
Prime Minister José Luis Guterres and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ameerah Haq
for their statements, as well as the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive and valuable report on TimorLeste (S/2010/85).
That report outlines the progress made across all
areas of the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) over the past year
and the considerable distance travelled by the
Government and people of Timor-Leste since the dark
days of the 2006 crisis. It describes a country no longer
in a state of crisis, and one that enjoys greater levels of
security and stability. It describes the steady progress
in developing the capacity of Timor-Leste’s nascent
political and bureaucratic institutions, as demonstrated
by the smooth conduct of the suco elections in October.
It also describes the steps taken to strengthen the rule
of law and the process by which primary responsibility
for policing has been progressively transferred from
UNMIT to the National Police of Timor-Leste (PNTL)
since May of last year.
In assessing that progress, it is important to
recognize just how far Timor-Leste has come in the
few short years since its independence, but it is equally
important to acknowledge the significant challenges

10-24861

S/PV.6276

that remain to be faced. Elections scheduled for later
this year and for 2012 will test the capacity and the
resilience of Timor-Leste’s electoral and security
institutions and the progress that has been made in
embedding a stable and democratic political culture.
We are also well aware of the profound social and
economic problems still faced by that young country in
terms of lifting its people out of poverty, building an
economy that extends beyond oil, and ensuring that its
young people have the skills, training and opportunities
that they need to take charge of their futures. New
Zealand is currently reshaping its $9-million TimorLeste aid programme to reflect better those key
concerns.
Timor-Leste’s
international
guarantors
of
security, the International Stabilisation Force (ISF) and
UNMIT, no longer face the same challenges they faced
two or three years ago. Nevertheless, their presence as
a deterrent to disorder and as a support for the
Government remains vital to maintaining internal
security and stability — a fact acknowledged by the
Government itself.
As a long-term friend of the people and
Government of Timor-Leste, New Zealand remains
committed to playing its part in that international
presence, as it has in every United Nations mission and
in both international security operations since the 1999
referendum. Today, New Zealand maintains 150
military personnel — an infantry company — within
the ISF and holds the Force Deputy Commander role.
It has a 25-strong police deployment within UNMIT,
with a particular focus on community policing training
for the PNTL. A New Zealand military liaison officer
also serves with UNMIT. Bilaterally, too, we are a
committed partner, providing both our development
assistance programme, which has been particularly
active in the areas of education, justice and police
support, and a five-person military technical assistance
team.
Given those challenges, New Zealand supports
the Secretary-General’s recommendation for an
extension of UNMIT’s existing mandate at currently
authorized levels. However, as the Secretary-General’s
report also makes clear, it is important to ensure that
the size, shape and nature of international assistance
evolve in accordance with Timor-Leste’s changing
needs. We are entering a phase in which the direct
provision of institutional capacity by Timor-Leste’s
international partners must increasingly give way to

10-24861

efforts to support its legitimate and understandable
desire increasingly to run its own affairs.
That transition has been reflected over the past
few months in the gradual downsizing of the ISF, in
consultation with the Timorese Government, as the
situation on the ground has become more stable. The
ISF is also increasingly complementing its core
security role with assistance in building the capacity of
the Timorese armed forces and on related development
assistance.
That transition can also be seen in Timor-Leste’s
evolving needs and expectations with regard to
UNMIT, including its police component. The
Government has expressed its desire to resume primary
responsibility for policing throughout the country as
soon as is feasible and its hope to achieve that goal by
the end of this year. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s commitment to work towards that objective.
We also welcome the careful consideration being given
as to how it can responsibly be achieved in accordance
with the benchmarks for the transfer of policing
authority agreed in the 2008 medium-term strategy.
To meet those objectives, it will be vital to ensure
that UNMIT personnel are equipped with the profile,
skills and experience required for the difficult and
specialized task of institutional capacity-building. We
therefore also welcome the Secretary-General’s
determination to ensure that United Nations police are
suitably skilled and equipped to effectively implement
that aspect of their mandate, including through
recruitment of relevant civilian expertise, as
appropriate.
Equally, we encourage UNMIT and the
Government of Timor-Leste to intensify their efforts to
ensure that sufficient investments are made in the
PNTL to overcome the shortcomings that remain in its
logistical and organizational capacities. Such
investments must be planned and implemented as a
matter of urgency if the handover of policing
responsibilities is to be implemented in a smooth,
responsible and timely manner.
We also share the Secretary-General’s view that,
as UNMIT’s role evolves in this manner, its policing
component will need to be progressively reconfigured
and reduced, while retaining sufficient capacity to
assist in dealing with any major security incidents and
to carry out its mentoring and capacity-building roles
effectively.

25

S/PV.6276

As those changes are implemented, the need for
careful coordination between all of Timor-Leste’s
partners in the security sector assumes even greater
importance. As one of only two countries that belong
to both the ISF and UNMIT, New Zealand is
committed to maintaining the close cooperation and
coordination that exists between those forces as their
respective structures and roles continue to evolve.
New Zealand thanks the Security Council for its
ongoing support for Timor-Leste, assures Ms. Haq and
the UNMIT team of its own support for their efforts
and, above all, reiterates its continuing commitment to
the people and the Government of Timor-Leste.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Pedro Serrano, Acting Head of the
European Union delegation to the United Nations.
Mr. Serrano: Mr. President, I thank you for
giving the floor to the European Union. The candidate
countries Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and Turkey, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia, the European Free Trade
Association country Norway, as well as Armenia, the
Republic of Moldova and Ukraine align themselves
with this statement.
At the outset I join others in greeting the Deputy
Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, Mr. José Luís Guterres,
and the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Ameerah Haq, and thanking them for
their important briefings on the progress and remaining
challenges in Timor-Leste.
The European Union firmly supports the central
and coordinating role of the United Nations in TimorLeste and the overall recommendations of the latest
report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/85), which
have incorporated the findings of the recent technical
assessment mission to the country.
The European Union joins the Secretary-General
and other speakers today in commending the
Government and the people of Timor-Leste for their
efforts to achieve long-term stability and ensure
sustainable development in all spheres of public life.
As the Council is aware, the European Union is a
major contributor of assistance to Timor-Leste, with a
focus on peace and security, rule of law and democratic
governance, as well as long-term economic and social

26

development of the country, including attainment of the
Millennium Development Goals.
The
European
Union
welcomes
recent
improvements in the security situation, which has
remained relatively stable over the last months. Good
progress has been made in addressing the situation of
the internally displaced persons (IDPs). The European
Union has contributed to that progress through its
support to the closure of the Metinaro camp and the
reintegration of IDPs.
Yet we share the Secretary-General’s assessment
that some fragility remains. Therefore, the European
Union encourages the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to continue to provide the good
offices of the United Nations to foster the promotion of
a political culture that favours the bridging of divides,
cooperation and reconciliation.
The European Union also calls on the
Government of Timor-Leste to make further efforts to
develop the national security policy. Reforms in the
security sector, with strong ownership by the Timorese
Government, are key to consolidating peace and
stability in the country. The European Union
commends the recent process on handing over policing
responsibilities that started in May 2009. It urges the
parties to continue to uphold the agreed criteria and to
complete the certification process so as to allow for a
proper handover.
The European Union welcomes positive
developments in democratic governance, the rule of
law and human rights, notably the successful conduct
of “suco” elections on 9 October, and the setting up of
an Anti-Corruption Commission, including the recent
nomination of its Commissioner, as well as efforts to
adopt enhanced measures to address the needs of
women and the high incidence of gender-based
violence.
The European Union also underlines the
importance of a coordinated approach to the justice
sector, taking into account the recommendations of the
independent comprehensive needs assessment — the
Justice Rapoza Report — and through the
implementation of the Timorese Government’s Justice
Sector Strategic Plan.
Accountability for past human rights violations
plays a critical part in building more sustainable peace
and cannot be ignored. The European Union welcomes

10-24861

S/PV.6276

the Parliament’s resolution of 14 December on the
work of the commissions on truth and reconciliation.
The European Union calls for the expeditious
establishment of an institution charged with
implementing measures recommended by those
commissions that would be credible in the eyes of
victims. The European Union already offers support to
the national Parliament of Timor-Leste on this matter.
A critical challenge will be to ensure the
sustainable social and economic development of the
country. The European Union is a committed long-term
partner for Timor-Leste in this endeavour and, for the
period 2007 to 2013, provides assistance amounting to
about €200 million. The European Union welcomes
efforts to develop a revised national development plan
that should enable international partners to align better
with Timor-Leste’s development ambitions. In our
view, priority should be given to long-term rural
development, improving social services, notably health
and education, and reducing unemployment. As
measures in development and security must go hand in
hand, we look forward to an upcoming international
dialogue on peace and State-building in Timor-Leste,
to be conducted under the umbrella of the Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development.
A key issue for Timor-Leste is how to manage the
revenue generated by its substantial extractive
industries in a sustainable manner while also
stimulating non-oil-sector growth. The European
Union supports the improved governance in the
petroleum sector resulting from Timor-Leste’s strong
engagement in the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative.
The European Union, in view of its own positive
experience with regional integration, supports TimorLeste’s aspirations to become a member of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
In conclusion, I would like to reconfirm the
European Union’s commitment to assist Timor-Leste in
achieving further positive results on the path to
stabilization as a basic requirement for sustainable
development. In view of the important contributions
made by the United Nations, the European Union looks
forward to the extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste for a further
12 months, as recommended by the Secretary-General.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ireland.

10-24861

Ms. Anderson (Ireland): I welcome this
opportunity to address the Security Council. I align
myself with the statement just made on behalf of the
European Union.
Ireland enjoys a close relationship with TimorLeste and its people. We were very active supporters of
the quest for self-determination and have remained a
strong backer in the years since independence.
The report of the Secretary-General before us
today (S/2010/85) is convincing in its analysis and
clear in its recommendations. It gives full weight to
what has been achieved without underestimating or
understating the challenges yet to be met.
In speaking today, my main focus is on the
gender dimension, since cooperation in relation to
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) is one of the
key areas of cooperation between Ireland and TimorLeste. I wish to say just a brief word, however, on the
issue of impunity.
Addressing the legacy of conflict is a highly
sensitive and complex process. We know from our own
experience on the island of Ireland just how fraught
that process can be. Timor-Leste has taken important
steps towards tackling its difficult legacy, but
considerable and urgent challenges remain. We note
that civil society organizations have expressed their
strong concerns in this regard. We commend the
Timorese leadership and members of its National
Parliament for their renewed attention to this area. It is
our hope that the current activity, led by Parliament,
will generate a robust and credible institution capable
of further contributing to stability and healing. Ireland
remains willing to provide appropriate assistance to
that process.
As I said, the principal aspect I wish to address is
the gender dimension. We particularly commend the
Secretary-General’s report for the clarity of its gender
focus. As well as the overview of gender issues, there
are highly relevant comments and statistics in each of
the four areas addressed. In the security sector, for
example, the report notes that 19 per cent of the
National Police personnel is female — a higher
proportion than in most countries. The United Nations
police contingent, less than 4 per cent female, comes
nowhere near matching that proportion. As the report
notes, it remains highly desirable to increase the
proportion of women officers in the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) police.

27

S/PV.6276

The section of the report on the rule of law,
justice and human rights catalogues the serious and
widespread violence against women and children and
the gender-specific obstacles that women face in
securing access to justice. In the section dealing with
socio-economic development, the statistical breakdown
by gender is enlightening. For example, access to
microfinance is 70 to 80 per cent female, although
women often receive little community support for their
entrepreneurial activities.
The gender issues identified by the report provide
the context for the cross-learning initiative on Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000) which Ireland has
launched together with Liberia and Timor-Leste. Our
initiative is designed to draw upon the experiences of
those directly affected by conflict in all three locations.
The first substantive meeting was held in Belfast in
2009 and the second in Dili in December 2009, and we
look forward to our final meeting in Liberia in April.
The overarching theme of the Dili meeting was
prevention of violence against women in conflict and
post-conflict settings. The focus was on sharing
experience and identifying specific challenges and
achievements.
The clear commitment of the Timorese people to
the principles of resolution 1325 (2000) is deeply
impressive. The variety of experience brought to the
conference by the Timorese delegation greatly
contributed to its success. Their stories were powerful
reminders of the need to operationalize Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000).
Ireland is committed to further engagement and
cooperation with Timor-Leste in relation to Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), and we will continue
to sponsor a range of gender-specific initiatives. We
hope that today’s debate will help to further underline
the Security Council’s attention to gender issues in
post-conflict settings.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I would like to
thank you, Sir, for convening this meeting and for the
opportunity given to me to participate in it. As others
have, I would like to extend to His Excellency Mr. José
Luís Guterres, Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste,
a warm welcome and to express our gratitude for his
contribution to this debate. Allow me as well to thank
the new Special Representative of the Secretary-

28

General, Ms. Ameerah Haq, for her very useful
briefing.
Portugal naturally concurs with the statement
delivered by the delegation of the European Union, but
I would like to underline some aspects. We praise the
encouraging achievements in Timor-Leste over the past
year. The continuing stable security environment is a
credit to Timor-Leste’s determination to long-term
peace, stability and development. Nevertheless,
important challenges still have to be met that are well
reflected in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2010/85)
and were highlighted in the Special Representative’s
briefing.
National dialogue is central to addressing those
issues, as it is to ensure unity of efforts, if not broad
consensus, in matters of national concern. Portugal is
encouraged by the efforts of the Timorese leadership,
including the leader of the opposition, to engage in
discussions on issues of national interest, and
encourages pursuit of this constructive political
dialogue as an essential tool to meet these challenges.
Along with others, Portugal considers that longterm security and stability will depend on the capacity
of the Timorese security institutions to function in an
effective, responsible and accountable way, with due
respect for the rule of law and benefiting from public
confidence and support. We fully share the views and
recommendations expressed by the technical
assessment mission. Further efforts are needed to
ensure clear articulation of strategies within and across
State institutions. A clear vision of the relationship
between the Defence Forces of Timor-Leste and the
National Police, as well as of their respective roles and
tasks, is crucial. Also, we share the view that additional
steps should be taken to facilitate the closest possible
coordination of the international community’s support,
including that of bilateral partners, in this context.
Portugal encourages the Government of TimorLeste to continue working with the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) on the
resumption of police executive responsibilities. We
note that the enduring challenges facing the police in
Timor-Leste should not be underestimated. The
resumption of responsibilities by the National Police is
only one step, albeit an important one, but it also marks
the beginning of a new phase to which the full
commitment of the Government and the support of the
international community will prove essential.

10-24861

S/PV.6276

Reconfiguring and continuing to reorient the
UNMIT police component to meet, as far as possible,
the post-resumption challenges will not be easy. It will
require high priority to be given — not only by
UNMIT and the Secretariat, but also and most
importantly by police-contributing countries — to
deploying officers with the required profiles and skills
to perform the crucial role of advising, monitoring and
reporting from all districts, while at the same time
remaining available to provide assistance and
operational support.
As one leading cooperation partner in the justice
sector, we also recognize the importance of a
coordinated approach to justice sector reform in order
to increase Timorese ownership and strengthen the
national institutions in this sector, in line with the
recommendations of the independent comprehensive
needs assessment coordinated by Judge Rapoza.
Strong economic and social development is also
essential to consolidating peace and stability. Thus,
another critical challenge in the near future will be to
build a sustainable economy that is nurtured by a
culture of democratic and transparent governance that
creates jobs and helps to fulfil the basic social
functions of the State. We commend the measures
taken by the Timorese Government in this respect, and
we appeal to the international community to increase
its economic cooperation with Timor-Leste, including
investment.
We are keenly aware that a number of
fundamental issues will require sustained, long-term
attention well beyond the date of 2012. The people of
Timor-Leste have repeatedly shown their resolve to
build a peaceful, democratic and stable society.
However the consolidation of those goals requires
continued support from the international community. It
is important that the people of Timor-Leste rest assured
that they do not and will not stand alone in pursuing
these endeavours. UNMIT continues to play a critical
role in assisting Timor-Leste, and we fully support a
decision of the Council to extend its mandate for an
additional period of 12 months.
Portugal remains fully engaged in supporting
Timor-Leste in its efforts to consolidate democracy and
development, as a member of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries and of the European
Union, and as a major bilateral partner in a wide
spectrum of areas, including governance and public

10-24861

administration, justice, education and security sector
reform, and by contributing over 200 police officers
and military liaison officers to UNMIT, and fully
supporting all areas under the responsibility of the
Mission.
Let me conclude by saying that we are convinced
that Timor-Leste will succeed in its endeavours. But
for that to happen, the international community must
provide the necessary political support and appropriate
resources. To that end, we encourage and support
Ameerah Haq and the entire team of the United
Nations Integrated Mission in carrying out their
invaluable work. We wish to thank the Security
Council for its constant support of Timor-Leste.
The President (spoke in French): Does
Mr. Gutteres wish to say a few words at the end of the
debate? No? Ms. Haq? I give you the floor.
Ms. Haq: I would just like to take this opportunity
to thank all the speakers here for their supportive and
encouraging statements about the good work done by
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT). I also take this opportunity to thank Deputy
Prime Minister José Luís Guterres for his kind remarks.
I want to express my appreciation to everyone who has
clearly supported an extension of the mandate of
UNMIT for a period of 12 months, and those who have
expressed agreement with the Secretary-General’s views
that any major restructuring of UNMIT at this stage
would be premature and that the United Nations should
maintain the integrated support provided through the
Mission in all the major areas of its mandate.
Many speakers have highlighted that the four
objectives of UNMIT’s medium-term strategy and their
related benchmarks remain critical to addressing the
challenges that gave rise to the mandate and to
providing a solid foundation for achieving sustainable
stability.
A number of speakers raised concerns about the
resumption of responsibilities by the Policia Nacional de
Timor-Leste (PNTL). I would just like to say that the
Mission’s leadership has openly and constructively
raised issues with the authorities of Timor-Leste and will
continue to do so. We are confident that we will
continue to address them together. In that context, while
we know that we all aim towards the goal of completing
resumption by the end of 2010, I want to reassure the
Council that that is not a deadline but a goal.

29

S/PV.6276

Also in that context, the support expressed by
everyone with regard to the institutional development
of the PNTL — including ensuring that we get the
required technical expertise for a sufficient number of
trainers — is something that we will take on board
very seriously. Issues were also raised concerning the
delineation of the roles and responsibilities of the
PNTL and the Falintil-Forças de Defesa de TimorLeste.
Many speakers also raised issues about impunity
and accountability for past crimes. We heard very
clearly from the Deputy Prime Minister about the
Government’s position on that.
Lastly, many speakers highlighted the need to
ensure that socio-economic development and policies
provide for the employment of the growing number of
young people in the population.

30

I would like to assure all members of the Council
that we will continue our good offices with the
Government and with all other relevant stakeholders.
We will also continue to coordinate with international
partners as we pursue the Mission’s mandate to address
the priority areas.
I would once again like to thank all the members
of the Council and all the speakers for their support
and guidance this morning.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Haq for her statement.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

10-24861
