S/2020/1075

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 November 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 30 October 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 2548 (2020), related
to the agenda item entitled “The situation concerning Western Sahara” and adopted
on 30 October 2020. Resolution 2548 (2020) was adopted in accordance with the
voting procedure set out in the letter by the President of the Security Council dated
27 March 2020 (S/2020/253), a procedure agreed in the light of the extraordinary
circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic.
Pursuant to that procedure, I enclose herewith copies of the related documents:
My letter dated 29 October 2020, addressed to the Permanent Representatives
of Security Council members (see annex 1), putting to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/2020/1039 (see enclosure to annex 1);
Letters received in reply from Security Council members indicating their
national position on the draft resolution (see annexes 2 to 16);
Statements subsequently submitted by Security Council members providing
explanations of vote (see annexes 17 to 25).
This letter and its annexes will be issued as a document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Vassily Nebenzia
President of the Security Council

20-14610 (E) 031120 011220

*2014610*

S/2020/1075

Annex 1
Letter dated 29 October 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
In accordance with the procedure agreed upon by the members of the Security
Council in the light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus
disease pandemic, as set out in the letter dated 27 March 2020 from the President of
the Security Council addressed to all members of the Council (S/2020/253), I would
like to draw your attention to the following.
The members of the Council have discussed a draft resolution, submitted by
the United States of America, in connection with the agenda item entitled “The
situation concerning Western Sahara”. That draft resolution, contained in document
S/2020/1039 and enclosed herein, has been put into blue.
In my capacity as President of the Security Council, I hereby put the
abovementioned draft resolution to a vote. The non-extendable 24-hour voting
period for this draft resolution will begin at 12 p.m. on Thursday, 29 October
2020. The non-extendable 24-hour voting period will expire at 12 p.m. on Friday,
30 October 2020.
Please submit your vote (in favour, against, or abstain) on the draft
resolution, as well as your possible explanation of vote, by sending a letter signed
by the Permanent Representative or Chargé d’affaires a.i. within the non-extendable
24-hour voting period set out above to the Director of the Security Council Affairs
Division of the Secretariat (egian@un.org).
It is my intention to circulate a letter recording the outcome of the vote within
three hours of the conclusion of the 24-hour voting period. I also intend to convene
a video-teleconference of the Security Council to announce the outcome of the
vote shortly after the conclusion of the voting period, on the afternoon of Friday,
30 October 2020.
(Signed) Vassily Nebenzia
President of the Security Council

2/33

20-14610

S/2020/1075

Enclosure

S/2020/1039

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional
23 October 2020
Original : English

United States of America: draft resolution
The Security Council,
Recalling and reaffirming all its previous resolutions on Western Sahara,
Reaffirming its strong support for the efforts of the Secretary-General and his
incoming Personal Envoy to implement resolutions 1754 (2007), 1783 (2007), 1813
(2008), 1871 (2009), 1920 (2010), 1979 (2011), 2044 (2012), 2099 (2013), 2152 (2014),
2218 (2015), 2285 (2016), 2351 (2017), 2414 (2018), 2440 (2018), 2468 (2019), and
2494 (2019),
Paying tribute to Horst Köhler, former Personal Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Western Sahara, and commending his efforts in holding the roundtable
process, which created new momentum in the political process,
Looking forward to the appointment of a new Personal Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Western Sahara at the earliest opportunity,
Welcoming the new momentum created by the first roundtable meeting on
5−6 December 2018 and the second roundtable meeting on 21–22 March 2019, and
commitment by Morocco, the Frente Polisario, Algeria, and Mauritania to engage
in the UN political process on Western Sahara in a serious and respectful manner in
order to identify elements of convergence,
Encouraging the resumption of consultations between the incoming Personal
Envoy and Morocco, the Frente Polisario, Algeria and Mauritania in this regard to
build on the progress achieved,
Reaffirming its commitment to assist the parties to achieve a just, lasting, and
mutually acceptable political solution, based on compromise, which will provide for
the self-determination of the people of Western Sahara in the context of arrangements
consistent with the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations, and
noting the role and responsibilities of the parties in this respect,
Reiterating its call upon Morocco, the Frente Polisario, Algeria and Mauritania
to cooperate more fully with each other, including through building additional
trust, and with the United Nations, as well as to strengthen their involvement in the
political process and to achieve progress towards a political solution,
Recognizing that achieving a political solution to this long-standing dispute
and enhanced cooperation between the Member States of the Maghreb Arab Union

20-146103/33

S/2020/1075

would contribute to stability and security, in turn leading to jobs, growth and
opportunities for all the peoples in the Sahel region,
Welcoming the efforts of the Secretary-General to keep all peacekeeping
operations, including the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara (MINURSO), under close review and reiterating the need for the Council to
pursue a rigorous, strategic approach to peacekeeping deployments, and effective
management of resources,
Recalling resolution 2378 (2017) and its request of the Secretary-General to
ensure that data related to the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations, including
peacekeeping performance data, is used to improve analytics and the evaluation
of mission operations, based on clear and well identified benchmarks, and further
recalling resolution 2436 (2018) and its request of the Secretary-General to
ensure that decisions to recognize and incentivize outstanding performance and
decisions regarding deployment, remediation, training, withholding of financial
reimbursement, and repatriation of uniformed or dismissal of civilian personnel, are
predicated on objective performance data,
Recalling resolution 2242 (2015) and 2538 (2020) and its aspiration to
increase the number of women in military and police contingents of United Nations
peacekeeping operations,
Recognizing the important role played by MINURSO on the ground and
the need for it to fully implement its mandate, including its role in supporting the
incoming Personal Envoy to achieve a mutually acceptable political solution,
Expressing concern about the violations of existing agreements, reiterating the
importance of full adherence to these commitments in order to sustain momentum in
the Western Sahara political process, and taking note of the commitments provided
by the Frente Polisario to the former Personal Envoy, and in this regard welcoming
the Secretary-General’s assessment on 23 September 2020 that the situation in
Western Sahara has remained relatively calm with the ceasefire continuing to hold
and respect by the parties for MINURSO’s mandate,
Taking note of the Moroccan proposal presented on 11 April 2007 to the
Secretary-General and welcoming serious and credible Moroccan efforts to move the
process forward towards resolution; also taking note of the Polisario Front proposal
presented 10 April 2007 to the Secretary-General,
Encouraging in this context, the parties to demonstrate further political will
towards a solution including by expanding upon their discussion of each other’s
proposals and recommitting to UN efforts in a spirit of realism and compromise,
and further encouraging the neighbouring countries to make contributions to the
political process,
Encouraging the parties to cooperate further with the United Nations Office of
the High Commissioner for Refugees in identifying and implementing confidencebuilding measures that can serve to foster the trust necessary for a successful
political process,
Stressing the importance of improving the human rights situation in Western
Sahara and the Tindouf camps, and encouraging the parties to work with the
international community to develop and implement independent and credible
measures to ensure full respect for human rights, bearing in mind their relevant
obligations under international law,

4/33

20-14610

S/2020/1075

Encouraging the parties to sustain in their respective efforts to enhance the
promotion and protection of human rights in Western Sahara and the Tindouf refugee
camps, including the freedoms of expression and association,
Welcoming in this regard, steps and initiatives taken by Morocco, and the role
played by the National Council on Human Rights Commissions operating in Dakhla
and Laayoune, and Morocco’s interaction with Special Procedures of the United
Nations Human Rights Council,
Strongly encouraging enhancing cooperation with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), including through
facilitating visits to the region,
Noting with deep concern the continued hardships faced by Sahrawi refugees
and their dependency on external humanitarian assistance, and further noting with
deep concern insufficient funding for those living in Tindouf refugee camps and the
risks associated with the reduction of food assistance,
Reiterating its request for consideration of a refugee registration in the Tindouf
refugee camps and emphasizing efforts be made in this regard,
Recalling United Nations Security Council resolutions 1325 and 2250 and
related resolutions; stressing the importance of a commitment by the parties to
continue the process of negotiations through the United Nations-sponsored talks and
encouraging the full, effective and meaningful participation of women and active
and meaningful participation of youth in these talks,
Recognizing that the status quo is not acceptable, and noting further that
progress in negotiations is essential in order to improve the quality of life of the
people of Western Sahara in all its aspects,
Affirming its full support for Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Western Sahara and Head of MINURSO Colin Stewart,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General of 23 September 2020
(S/2020/938),
1. Decides to extend the mandate of MINURSO until 31 October 2021;
2. Emphasizes the need to achieve a realistic, practicable and enduring
political solution to the question of Western Sahara based on compromise and the
importance of aligning the strategic focus of MINURSO and orienting resources of
the United Nations to this end;
3. Expresses its full support for the ongoing efforts of the Secretary-General
and his incoming Personal Envoy to sustain the renewed negotiations process in order
to achieve a solution to the Western Sahara question, notes the intention of the former
Personal Envoy to invite Morocco, the Frente Polisario, Algeria, and Mauritania to
meet again in the same format, and welcomes the commitment of Morocco, the Frente
Polisario, Algeria, and Mauritania to remain engaged throughout the duration of this
process, in a spirit of realism and compromise, to ensure a successful outcome;
4. Calls upon the parties to resume negotiations under the auspices of the
Secretary-General without preconditions and in good faith, taking into account the
efforts made since 2006 and subsequent developments with a view to achieving a
just, lasting, and mutually acceptable political solution, which will provide for the
self determination of the people of Western Sahara in the context of arrangements
consistent with the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations, and
noting the role and responsibilities of the parties in this respect;
5. Invites Member States to lend appropriate assistance to these talks;
20-146105/33

S/2020/1075

6. Reaffirms the need for full respect of the military agreements reached
with MINURSO with regard to the ceasefire and calls on the parties to adhere fully
to those agreements, implement their commitments to the former Personal Envoy,
and refrain from any actions that could undermine UN-facilitated negotiations or
further destabilize the situation in the Western Sahara;
7. Reiterates its call upon all parties to cooperate fully with MINURSO,
including its free interaction with all interlocutors, and to take the necessary steps
to ensure the security of as well as unhindered movement and immediate access
for the United Nations and associated personnel in carrying out their mandate, in
conformity with existing agreements;
8. Emphasizes the importance of a renewed commitment by the parties to
advancing the political process in preparation for further negotiations, recalls its
endorsement of the recommendation in the report of 14 April 2008 (S/2008/251) that
realism and a spirit of compromise by the parties are essential to achieve progress in
negotiations, and encourages the neighbouring countries to make important, active
contributions to this process;
9. Calls upon the parties to demonstrate political will and work in an
atmosphere propitious for dialogue in order to advance negotiations, thus ensuring
implementation of resolutions 1754 (2007), 1783 (2007), 1813 (2008), 1871 (2009),
1920 (2010), 1979 (2011), 2044 (2012), 2099 (2013), 2152 (2014), 2218 (2015), 2285
(2016), 2351 (2017), 2414 (2018), 2440 (2018), 2468 (2019), and 2494 (2019) and the
success of negotiations;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to brief the Security Council on a regular
basis, and at any time he deems appropriate during the mandate period, to include
within six months of this mandate’s renewal and again prior to its expiration, on the
status and progress of these negotiations under his auspices, on the implementation
of this resolution, challenges to MINURSO’s operations and steps taken to address
them, expresses its intention to meet to receive and discuss his briefings and in this
regard, further requests the Secretary-General to provide a report on the situation in
Western Sahara well before the end of the mandate period;
11. Welcomes the initiatives undertaken by the Secretary-General to
standardize a culture of performance in UN peacekeeping, and reaffirms its
support for the development of a comprehensive and integrated performance policy
framework that identifies clear standards of performance for evaluating all United
Nations civilian and uniformed personnel working in and supporting peacekeeping
operations that facilitates effective and full implementation of mandates, and
includes comprehensive and objective methodologies based on clear and well-defined
benchmarks to ensure accountability for underperformance and incentives and
recognition for outstanding performance, and calls on him to apply this framework
to MINURSO as described in resolution 2436 (2018), requests the Secretary-General
to seek to increase the number of women in MINURSO, as well as to ensure the full,
effective, and meaningful participation of women in all aspects of operations;
12. Urges the parties and neighbouring states to engage productively with
MINURSO as it further considers how new technologies can be used to reduce risk,
improve force protection, and better implement its mandate;
13. Encourages the parties to cooperate with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees to identify and implement confidence-building
measures, including to engage women and youth, and encourages neighbouring
states to support these efforts;

6/33

20-14610

S/2020/1075

14. Urges Member States to provide new and additional voluntary contributions
to fund food programmes to ensure that the humanitarian needs of refugees are
adequately addressed and avoid reductions in food rations;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take necessary measures
to ensure full compliance of all personnel in MINURSO with the United Nations
zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse and to keep the Council
fully informed through his reports to the Council about the Mission’s progress
in this regard, and urges troop-contributing and police-contributing countries to
continue taking appropriate preventative action including vetting of all personnel,
predeployment and in-mission awareness training, and to ensure full accountability
in cases of such conduct involving their personnel through timely investigation of
allegations by troop-contributing and police-contributing countries and MINURSO,
as appropriate;
16. Decides to remain seized of the matter.

20-146107/33

S/2020/1075

Annex 2
Letter dated 29 October 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of Belgium to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I refer to the President of the Security Council’s letter of 29 October 2020
relating to the draft resolution on the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara (S/2020/1039).
In accordance with the procedure set forth for the adoption of resolutions under
the current extraordinary circumstance caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
I am pleased to indicate that Belgium votes in favour of this draft resolution. Belgium
will also submit an explanation of vote.
(Signed) Philippe Kridelka
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Belgium to the United Nations

8/33

20-14610

S/2020/1075

Annex 3
Letter dated 29 October 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of China to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I would like to thank you, Sir, and your team for the strong support in
facilitating the voting procedure.
Please be kindly informed that China votes in favour of draft resolution
S/2020/1039, submitted by the United States of America for mandate renewal of
the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara, and attaches
herewith its explanation of vote.
(Signed) Zhang Jun
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of China to the United Nations

20-146109/33

S/2020/1075

Annex 4
Letter dated 29 October 2020 from the Special Envoy to the
Security Council of the Dominican Republic addressed to the
President of the Security Council
I refer to your letter dated 29 October 2020, regarding the Security Council
draft resolution contained in document S/2020/1039, submitted under agenda item
entitled “The situation concerning Western Sahara”.
Upon instructions from my Government, the delegation of the Dominican
Republic votes in favour of the abovementioned draft resolution.
(Signed) José Singer Weisinger
Ambassador
Special Envoy to the Security Council of the Dominican Republic

10/33

20-14610

S/2020/1075

Annex 5
Letter dated 29 October 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of Estonia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I have the honour to inform, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
United Nations Charter, that my delegation votes in favour of the draft resolution
submitted by the United States of America, in connection with the agenda item “The
situation concerning Western Sahara”, contained in document S/2020/1039.
Please find attached an explanation of vote in this connection.
(Signed) Sven Jürgenson
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Estonia to the United Nations

20-1461011/33

S/2020/1075

Annex 6
Letter dated 29 October 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of France to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
[Original: French]
I refer to the letter dated 29 October 2020, calling on the members of the
Council to vote on the draft resolution submitted by the United States under the
agenda item “The situation concerning Western Sahara”, put in blue under the
symbol S/2020/1039. France votes in favour.
(Signed) Nicolas de Riviere
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of France to the United Nations

12/33

20-14610

S/2020/1075

Annex 7
Letter dated 30 October 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of Germany to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
It is my honour to write to you, Sir, in response to the letter of the President
of the Security Council dated 29 October 2020 initiating a written voting procedure,
in line with the agreement reached between the members of the Security Council.
The vote of the Federal Republic of Germany on the draft resolution submitted
by the United States of America in connection with the agenda item “The situation
concerning Western Sahara”, as contained in document S/2020/1039, is as follows:
The Federal Republic of Germany votes in favour of the above
mentioned resolution.
(Signed) Christophe Heusgen
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Germany to the United Nations

20-1461013/33

S/2020/1075

Annex 8
Letter dated 29 October 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of Indonesia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I am writing in reference to the letter by the Permanent Representative of
Russian Federation to the United Nations, in his capacity as the President of the
Security Council, dated 29 October 2020, regarding the draft resolution on the
extension of the mandate of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara (S/2020/1039).
I hereby indicate that Indonesia votes in favour of the abovementioned
draft resolution.
(Signed) Dian Triansyah Djani
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the United Nations

14/33

20-14610

S/2020/1075

Annex 9
Letter dated 30 October 2020 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of
the Niger to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I am writing in response to the letter of the President of the Security Council
dated 29 October 2020, calling on the members of the Council to express their votes
on the draft resolution (S/2020/1039), submitted by the United States of America,
under the agenda item “The situation concerning Western Sahara”.
In accordance with the agreed temporary procedures for the adoption of
resolutions during the coronavirus disease pandemic restrictions, I have the honour
to indicate that the Republic of the Niger decides to vote in favour of the said
draft resolution.
(Signed) Niandou Aougi
Minister Counsellor
Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Niger to the United Nations

20-1461015/33

S/2020/1075

Annex 10
Letter dated 29 October 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of the Russian Federation to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the letter of the President of the Security Council
of 29 October 2020 on the beginning of the voting procedure for the draft resolution
in connection with the agenda item “The situation concerning Western Sahara”
(S/2020/1039).
In accordance with the procedure for the adoption of resolutions of the
Security Council being in place during the duration of the restrictions on movement
in New York due to the coronavirus disease pandemic outlined in the letter by the
President of the Security Council of 27 March 2020 (S/2020/253), I have the honour
to inform you that the Russian Federation abstains in the voting on draft resolution
S/2020/1039. Please find attached an explanation of vote in this regard.
(Signed) Vassily Nebenzia
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to the United Nations

16/33

20-14610

S/2020/1075

Annex 11
Letter dated 29 October 2020 from the Permanent Representative of
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the draft resolution (S/2020/1039) submitted by
the United States of America, in connection with the agenda item “The situation
concerning Western Sahara”.
In this respect, I wish to inform that Saint Vincent and the Grenadines votes
in favour of the abovementioned draft resolution.
(Signed) Inga Rhonda King
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
to the United Nations

20-1461017/33

S/2020/1075

Annex 12
Letter dated 29 October from the Permanent Representative of
South Africa to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council
I refer to your letter dated 29 October 2020, regarding the Security Council
draft resolution, submitted by the United States of America in connection with the
agenda item “The situation concerning Western Sahara”, contained in document
S/2020/1039.
The delegation of the Republic of South Africa abstains in the voting on
the abovementioned draft resolution. An explanation of vote on this resolution is
also attached.
(Signed) Jerry Matthews Matjila
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of South Africa to the United Nations

18/33

20-14610

S/2020/1075

Annex 13
Letter dated 29 October from the Permanent Representative of
Tunisia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
With reference to the letter dated 29 October 2020 emanating from the
Permanent Representative of Russia, in his capacity as President of the Security
Council, regarding the draft resolution submitted by the United States of America
in connection with the agenda item “The situation concerning Western Sahara”, as
contained in document S/2020/1039, I would like to inform you that Tunisia votes in
favour of that draft resolution.
(Signed) Tarek Ladeb
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations

20-1461019/33

S/2020/1075

Annex 14
Letter dated 29 October 2020 from the Acting Deputy Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council
With reference to the letter from the President of the Security Council
on 29 October 2020, the United Kingdom votes in favour of the draft resolution
(S/2020/1039) in connection with the agenda item “The situation concerning
Western Sahara”.
(Signed) James Roscoe
Ambassador
Acting Deputy Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations

20/33

20-14610

S/2020/1075

Annex 15
Letter dated 29 October 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of the United States of America addressed to the President of the
Security Council
On the draft resolution submitted by the United States of America in connection
with the agenda item “The situation concerning Western Sahara” (S/2020/1039), the
United States of America votes in favour.
(Signed) Kelly Craft
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of the United States of America
to the United Nations

20-1461021/33

S/2020/1075

Annex 16
Letter dated 30 October 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of Viet Nam to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
In reference to the letter of the President of the Security Council of 29 October
2020 relating to the draft resolution under the agenda item entitled “the situation
concerning Western Sahara”, as contained in document S/2020/1039, I would like to
hereby inform you that Viet Nam votes in favour of the said draft resolution.
(Signed) Dang Dinh Quy
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the United Nations

22/33

20-14610

S/2020/1075

Annex 17
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Belgium to the
United Nations, Philippe Kridelka
[Original: French]
Belgium voted in favour of resolution 2548 (2020), which renews the mandate
of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO)
for 12 months.
Belgium thanks the delegation of the United States of America for its
transparent work.
Belgium welcomes the work of MINURSO. We have confidence in its neutral
reporting role and the stabilizing nature of its presence, which helps ease tensions.
We call on the parties to cooperate unreservedly with the Mission.
Belgium reiterates its appreciation of the commitment of, and especially for
the results achieved by, the former Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Horst Köhler. We hope a capable successor will be appointed as soon as possible to
resume the process of dialogue based on the work of President Köhler.
Finally, Belgium is concerned at the increase in ceasefire violations and calls
for the greatest of restraint. Belgium stresses that the only solution to the question of
Western Sahara is an inclusive political one.

20-1461023/33

S/2020/1075

Annex 18
Statement by the Permanent Mission of China to the United Nations
Despite the challenges posed by the coronavirus disease pandemic, the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) has performed
its mandates actively, making important contributions to the political settlement of
the issue of Western Sahara and the maintenance of regional stability. China supports
the extension of the mandate of MINURSO and its continued constructive role in the
political process to solve the Western Sahara issue.
We hope that the Security Council will have more thorough consultations
on draft resolutions on mandate renewal for MINURSO in the future to make the
text more balanced, achieve consensus through consultation and send a positive
signal. I believe this will be conducive to the political process for Western Sahara. In
addition, the personal envoy of the Secretary-General should be appointed as soon
as possible to facilitate the resumption of the Geneva round table process and create
favourable conditions for advancing the political settlement.
China will continue to uphold an objective and just position and encourage the
two parties to seek a just, lasting and mutually acceptable political solution through
dialogue and negotiation on the basis of relevant Security Council resolutions.

24/33

20-14610

S/2020/1075

Annex 19
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Estonia

to

the

Estonia welcomes the adoption of resolution 2548 (2020), renewing the
mandate of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO) for another year.
We would like to take this opportunity to reiterate Estonia’s full support to
MINURSO and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
Estonia supports the efforts of the Secretary-General to find a just, lasting and
mutually acceptable political solution to the Western Sahara conflict, based on the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
It is important not to lose the political momentum that was achieved in the
round table meetings in 2018 and 2019. In this connection, we hope that a new
personal envoy of the Secretary-General will be appointed as soon as possible and
that further talks between the parties can be pursued in a spirit of compromise.
Moreover, in the light of the latest report by the Secretary-General (S/2020/938),
it is important to stress and call for the parties to continue their cooperation with
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Stewart and MINURSO.

20-1461025/33

S/2020/1075

Annex 20
Statement by the Permanent Mission of France to the United Nations
[Original: French]
France welcomes the adoption of resolution 2548 (2020), renewing the mandate
of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum on Western Sahara (MINURSO)
for one year.
France welcomes the efforts of the United States of America to take into
account the unanimous request by the members of the Security Council with regard
to the swift appointment of a personal envoy of the Secretary-General and the
need for the parties to fully cooperate with MINURSO, especially with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.
The swift appointment of a new personal envoy of the Secretary-General for
Western Sahara is indeed necessary to revive the momentum begun by President
Köhler with the Geneva round tables. We have full confidence in the efforts of the
Secretary-General in this regard.
At the same time, we reiterate our full support for MINURSO, which plays
an essential role in assuring respect for the ceasefire and constitutes a key factor
in ensuring stability of the region. It also helps create conducive conditions for the
resumption on the political process.
France recalls its concern at the rise in violations recorded in the most
recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/938). We call on the parties to fully
implement the ceasefire agreement.
France is also concerned at the ongoing blockade in the Guerguerat buffer
zone, which risks creating tensions that could undermining the political process.
We express out full support for the statement by the spokesperson of the SecretaryGeneral calling for the parties to show restraint in order to avoid any escalation,
especially in Guerguerate. We also support his call against impeding commercial
or civilian traffic, or altering the status quo of the buffer zone. France supports the
efforts of MINURSO in this regard.
In conclusion, we recall, more broadly, France’s full support for the efforts of the
Secretary-General towards a just, lasting and mutually acceptable political solution
in Western Sahara, in accordance with relevant Security Council resolutions. In this
context, France views the Moroccan self-government plan of 2007 as a credible and
serious basis for discussions towards a resumption in dialogue.

26/33

20-14610

S/2020/1075

Annex 21
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the
United Nations, Dian Triansyah Djani
I would like to begin my statement by reiterating my delegation’s full support
for the good offices of the Secretary-General.
Indonesia underscores the pivotal role being played by the United Nations
Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) in maintaining a
conducive environment for the peace process. We would like to urge all parties to
continue to engage constructively with MINURSO in pursuing peace and security.
For that reason, Indonesia welcomes the renewal of the MINURSO mandate, and
voted in favour of resolution 2548 (2020). We believe that the resolution reflects a
delicate balance, considering the sensitivity of the issue, the absence of a personal
envoy and lack of an active political process.
Indonesia therefore urges the Secretary-General to appoint, without further
delay, a new personal envoy who can continue and expand the good work of the
previous envoy, Mr. Horst Köhler. Any further delay would become a significant
impediment to the political process for finding a solution acceptable to all parties.
We thank the United States of America as penholder for its approach in
preparing the text. We also commend the constructive engagement of all parties
in the political process, and call on them to remain committed and to extend their
fullest support and cooperation to the personal envoy to achieve progress towards a
political solution.

20-1461027/33

S/2020/1075

Annex 22
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation to
the United Nations
The Russian Federation abstained in the voting on resolution 2548 (2020),
on the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum
in Western Sahara (MINURSO), put forward by the United States of America.
We did so due to the fact that the process of elaborating and endorsing that
document was neither transparent nor consultative. None of our principled and
well-substantiated considerations, including those of a compromise nature, that we
repeatedly brought to the attention of the United States was taken into account. A
whole range of practical proposals articulated by other Security Council members
was also left unanswered. As a result, the text remains unbalanced. All this adds to
doubts regarding arrangements on informal penholdership of country files at the
Security Council.
In recent years, resolutions on the renewal of MINURSO mandate received
amendments that, in our view, affect the Security Council’s unbiased and impartial
approach to the issue of Western Sahara. Substitution of fundamental principles
of the Western Saharan settlement by general remarks about the need to stick to
realistic approaches and seek compromise produces ambiguity, undermines trust in
our work and obscures prospects for resuming the political process. The attempt to
boost the peace process by using language that blurs previously agreed parameters
of the Western Saharan settlement would rather produce the opposite result. We had
not agreed to this amendment before, and we were not able to support it today.
Once again, we would like to reiterate our consistent position with regard
to a settlement in Western Sahara. We stand for a well-balanced and unbiased
approach, support direct negotiations between Morocco and the Frente Popular para
la Liberación de Saguía el-Hamra y Río de Oro (Frente POLISARIO).
In our capacity as a permanent member of the Security Council and a
member of the Group of Friends of Western Sahara, we maintain active contacts
with all interested stakeholders — we work with Moroccans, Polisarians,
Algerians and Mauritanians. We call on all the parties concerned to refrain from
taking any unilateral steps that could undermine efforts to relaunch substantive
political dialogue.
We are convinced that only a political solution based on relevant Security
Council resolutions can overcome disputes and ensure a just and sustainable Western
Sahara settlement. The final formula must be based on compromise and mutual
agreement by Moroccans and Polisarians alike, and envisage the self-determination
of the people of Western Sahara in the framework of procedures and in line with the
goals and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. This concept is central to
the Western Saharan settlement, and it must not be replaced by other formulas.
Like other members of the Security Council, we look forward to the appointment
of a new personal envoy of the Secretary-General, and to progress in resuming the
negotiation process between sides towards a Western Saharan settlement, with the
participation of neighbouring States. However, we have to warn all that the document
adopted today may, contrary to the expectations of its authors, have a negative effect
on the efforts of the future personal envoy.
Russia will remain an unbiased actor for a Western Sahara settlement,
maintaining contacts with all regional sides. We reiterate our support for MINURSO,
which plays a pre-eminent stabilizing role in creating a favourable environment on
the ground for resuming dialogue between Morocco and the Frente Polisario, and in
promoting the peace process.
28/33

20-14610

S/2020/1075

Annex 23
Statement by the Permanent Mission of South Africa to the
United Nations
At the outset, South Africa wishes to reiterate its support for efforts to achieve
a just, lasting and mutually acceptable political solution, which will provide for the
self-determination of the people of Western Sahara.
In this regard, South Africa fully supports the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO), whose primary mandate, as established
in resolution 690 (1991) and all subsequent resolutions, is the holding of a free and
fair referendum on self-determination for the people of Western Sahara.
Our conviction remains that a resolution of the Western Sahara matter lies
in upholding international legality and that the parties should conduct themselves
within the confines of adopted Security Council resolutions and international
norms. The Council should never permit international legality to be overturned by
political reality; doing so would undermine the very foundation of the rules-based
international system that the United Nations is built upon.
In this regard, South Africa firmly believes that the Council has a vital role
to play in resolving the issue of Western Sahara. However, we believe it has fallen
short of its responsibility. During our 2019-2020 term on the Council, South Africa
has abstained twice on the MINURSO mandate renewal due to the substance and
working methods of the Western Sahara file.
It has been disconcerting to us that the Security Council working methods
on the Western Sahara file have been uniquely biased and non-transparent. This is
a disturbing trend, given that it is the duty of the Security Council to objectively
assist the parties to move towards a mutually acceptable, negotiated settlement, and
to treat the interests and concerns of both parties in a balanced and equal manner.
In terms of the working methods on this file in the Security Council, South
Africa has consistently raised its concerns that the “negotiating process” of the draft
resolution through the Group of Friends remains an obstacle to making progress on
the Western Sahara file and undermines the working methods of the Council. A draft
text is presented to Council members, who have to accept it as a fait accompli despite
the fact that the majority of us has been elected to serve on the Security Council and
have the responsibility to engage on every matter on the Council’s agenda.
South Africa would also like to place on record that this is the only mandate
that is negotiated in this manner and is not considerate of the views of Member
States, particularly of African Member States, which are excluded from the Group
of Friends. In this regard, unlike other Council outcomes, there was once again no
real attempt to reach a compromise on the contentious paragraphs so that we could
be assured of a balanced text reflective of the views of all Council members. Let us
be clear: there was no attempt to reach consensus.
Regarding the substance of resolution 2548 (2020), South Africa would like to
raise several points. As it stands, the text does not reflect the current realities on the
ground, which were clearly outlined by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral in his briefing to the Council on developments pertaining to the human
rights, humanitarian, security and political situation in Western Sahara.
In terms of the appointment of a personal envoy, South Africa fully supports
the efforts of the Secretary-General to find a suitable candidate. However, the current
text does not adequately reflect the urgency that the United Nations find a personal
envoy to resume the stalled United Nations-led political process.
20-1461029/33

S/2020/1075

Given the growing sentiments and calls by one of the parties, the Frente
Popular para la Liberación de Saguía el-Hamra y Río de Oro to disengage from
the United Nations process due to perceptions that the United Nations is not doing
enough, South Africa advocated for a more balanced text, which would have sent a
positive signal to the parties that one party was not favoured over another.
It is in this context, in the absence of a personal envoy and with a stalled
political process, that we supported a return to a six-month mandate. The intention
was to send a strong signal to the parties that the Security Council remained seized
of this matter, following the developments on the ground. Additionally, we would
have hoped that this would prompt the parties to cooperate with MINURSO and each
other, while taking steps to build much-needed mutual trust.
The notable decline in compliance with the terms of military agreement
No. 1, as described in the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/938), is a
direct result of the stalled political process and the frustration among the parties.
The situation in Guerguerat is a case in point. We therefore urge both the Kingdom
of Morocco and the Frente POLISARIO to strictly abide by the terms of the ceasefire
agreements, particularly military agreement No. 1, to avoid acts that could lead to a
rise in tension and possible hostilities in the territory.
South Africa has repeatedly called for the clarification of the terms “realistic/
realism”, and this issue has not been satisfactorily addressed. In our view these
terms remain ambiguous, and that does not contribute to a neutral political process.
The word “realism” in the draft resolution would be interpreted as implying that the
Council favours political reality over international legality. This interpretation could
set a precedent that would set aside international law in favour of the principle that
“might is right”.
South Africa maintains that realism in the context of resolution 2548 (2020)
is related to the negotiations and not to any outcome. We note and recall that
the use of the terms “compromise” and “realistic/realism” are derived from the
recommendation set forth in the Secretary-General’s April 2008 report (S/2008/251),
which calls on both parties, Frente POLISARIO and Morocco, to show realism and
a spirit of compromise as these are essential to maintaining the momentum of the
process of negotiations.
However, we would also like to put it on record that the context under which
we voted in favour of these terms in 2008 during our first term on the Security
Council was underpinned by South Africa’s approach to having a constructive
text that would bring the sides together. Today, these terms have been taken out of
context, and we cannot support the distortion in their application that we have seen
in recent years.
In its fourteenth preambular paragraph, resolution 2548 (2020) continues to
welcome Morocco’s “serious and credible Moroccan efforts to move the process
forward towards resolution”. The context and relevance of retaining this phrase has
changed. Unfortunately, this phrase has led to destructive ambiguity and resulted in
some regrettably interpreting the Council’s intention as favouring one proposal over
the other.
My delegation reiterates its understanding that, based on South Africa’s having
been a member of the Security Council that was part of the negotiations on the text
of resolution 1754 (2007), the text of that resolution in which the Council “tak[es]
note” of both proposals and where it calls on the parties to enter into negotiations
based on both proposals is clear. Any attempt to place one proposal over the other
would undermine the negotiations process and be counter-productive to the spirit of
future negotiations based on the two proposals. Further to this point, this part of the
30/33

20-14610

S/2020/1075

text of resolution 2548 (2020) blatantly ignores the efforts of the Frente POLISARIO
and fails to present the facts by omitting an accurate chronological description
of the parties’ efforts; this language can easily be interpreted as showing biased
towards one party over another. Additionally, it is unclear as to why the facts should
be presented in this manner. The Council and the incoming Personal Envoy of the
Secretary-General should remain objective without pre-empting any final status of
the negotiations.
Of grave concern to South Africa is the fact that not all resolutions of the
Security Council pertaining to Western Sahara are being acknowledged. It would
appear that only resolutions from 2007 onwards are acknowledged, which sets a
negative precedent as it sends a message that any resolution before 2007 is irrelevant
when, in fact, we are bound by all Council outcomes on this matter.
On human rights, we note that, in the seventeenth preambular paragraph of
resolution 2548 (2020), the text indicates the Council stresses
“the importance of improving the human rights situation in Western Sahara and
the Tindouf camps, and encourag[es] the parties to work with the international
community to develop and implement independent and credible measures to
ensure full respect for human rights, bearing in mind their relevant obligations
under international law”.
However, there is still no explicit reference or responsibility given to MINURSO
to, in its work, monitor the human rights situation on the ground. A human rights
monitoring mandate for United Nations missions has become almost standard. It is
therefore of concern that this mechanism has once again been rejected in Western
Sahara. That having been said, resolution 2548 (2020) does call on the parties, Frente
POLISARIO and Morocco, to continue with the negotiations, which we acknowledge.
South Africa once again proposes that the Security Council visit the occupied
territory, as it did in 1995, to assess the situation on the ground in an effort to break
the current political impasse among the parties. Keeping in mind the limitations
imposed by the pandemic, the Security Council should consider a virtual visit,
and, should the pandemic subside and safety regulations related to travel permit,
we should look into the possibility of physically visiting Western Sahara in future.
Notwithstanding the many other African issues on the Council’s agenda, Western
Sahara requires the Council’s attention and should not be treated any different from
them. In this regard, we propose that, just as the Security Council engages with
the African Union on other issues on the Council’s agenda, there be more formal
coordination with the African Union on Western Sahara.
It is for the reasons I have just outlined that South Africa abstained in
the voting on the resolution. Going forward, we appeal to the Council to review
its working methods and conduct its business in a transparent and impartial
manner, as the way it approached this issue undermines the Council’s ability to
meaningfully effect change on the ground and move towards the resolution of this
long-standing matter.
In conclusion, South Africa appeals to the Secretary-General to urgently
appoint a Personal Envoy to advance a political process that has been stagnant for
far too long. To the parties to the conflict, namely, the Kingdom of Morocco and the
Frente POLISARIO, we urge that they engage in a direct and substantive dialogue
that can pave the way towards a just, lasting and mutually acceptable political
resolution of this matter.

20-1461031/33

S/2020/1075

Annex 24
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Kelly Craft
The United States commends the Security Council for affirming its support
for the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO)
with today’s mandate renewal. While we share fellow Council members’ frustration
with the lack of progress on the political front, we would like to highlight the
importance of the daily work of the peacekeepers. In renewing MINURSO’s mandate,
the Council is recognizing the success of this mission in de-escalating tensions
and maintaining overall calm, conducting dangerous mine-clearance operations,
supporting humanitarian efforts and preventing the spread of coronavirus disease.
The Council will not overlook its responsibility for ensuring progress towards
a just, lasting and mutually acceptable political solution. We remain concerned with
the prolonged absence of a Personal Envoy. It has been almost a year and a half since
former Personal Envoy Köhler’s departure, and the vacancy has contributed to the
lack of progress towards a political solution. We urge the Secretary-General to fill
this position soon.
We view Morocco’s autonomy plan as serious, credible and realistic, and
it represents one potential approach to satisfying the aspirations of the people in
Western Sahara to run their own affairs with peace and dignity. We call on the parties
to demonstrate their commitment to a realistic, practicable and enduring political
solution based on compromise by resuming negotiations without preconditions and
in good faith. Entrenched positions must not stand in the way of progress.
In the meantime, we expect that all parties will respect their obligations
under the ceasefire, cooperate fully with MINURSO and refrain from any actions
that could destabilize the situation or threaten the United Nations process. We
call for all parties to exercise restraint, particularly in the light of recent events in
Guerguerat — which pose a threat to peace and stability in the region — and the
general increase in violations highlighted in the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2020/938). Moreover, unilateral changes to the status quo on the ground
will not help us get to a lasting and peaceful solution.
The mandate renewal embodied in resolution 2548 (2020) affirms our
confidence not only in the peacekeepers, but also in the Mission’s current
leadership. We strongly urge the parties to meet with Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Colin Stewart and cooperate with him, his staff and the entire
MINURSO team.

32/33

20-14610

S/2020/1075

Annex 25
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dinh Quy Dang
Western Sahara is currently facing a complicated and fragile situation in
combination with a lot of challenges. The presence of the United Nations Mission
for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) would continue to help address
these issues on the ground, prevent an escalation of tension and facilitate talks
among relevant parties. We therefore voted in favour of resolution 2548 (2020), on
the renewal of MINURSO’s mandate.
We would like to highlight the following points.
First, it is necessary for MINURSO to improve its effectiveness and efficiency
to cope with demanding requirements and challenges, especially the coronavirus
disease pandemic. We stress the importance of upholding and implementing the
Security Council’s mandate in earnest and of considering the legitimate views of
concerned parties with a balanced and impartial approach.
Secondly, we would like to reaffirm our principled position on the situation
concerning Western Sahara. Viet Nam supports solving the Western Sahara issue
through peace talks among directly concerned parties based on international law
and relevant long-standing United Nations resolutions. We also emphasize the need
to find a just, lasting and mutually acceptable solution that ensures the right to selfdetermination of the people of Western Sahara, in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, in favour of peace, cooperation and
development in the region.
Thirdly, MINURSO should continue to play a crucial role as an essential
instrument in the maintenance of peace and security in Western Sahara. We reiterate
our support for the efforts of the United Nations and MINURSO in promoting the
political process in Western Sahara and maintaining stability in the region. We
emphasize the primary role that the United Nations plays in resolving the issue
through mediation, conflict prevention and implementation of confidence-building
measures. Moreover, we join other members in reiterating the Council’s call upon
all parties to cooperate fully with MINURSO and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.
Last but not least, in order to facilitate that role and accelerate talks among
the relevant parties, it is also important that the views and legitimate concerns
of Security Council members be taken into account when the Council discusses
the situation concerning Western Sahara, including the renewal of the mandate
of MINURSO.

20-1461033/33
