S/PV.7822

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7822nd meeting

Wednesday, 30 November 2016, 11.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Seck . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Senegal)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Bessho
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-40719 (E)
*1640719*

S/PV.7822

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 11.30 a.m.

stage, I am of course available for questions on a few
points, because the real floor belongs to those who are
handling and want to handle the humanitarian aspect.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria; Mr. Stephen O’Brien, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator; and Mr. Geert Cappelaere, UNICEF
Regional Director for the Middle East and North Africa.
Mr. De Mistura is joining today’s meeting via
video teleconference from Geneva; Mr. O’Brien is
joining today’s meeting via video teleconference from
London; and Mr. Cappelaere is joining today’s meeting
via videoteleconference from Amman.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. De Mistura.
Mr. De Mistura (spoke in French): I thank you
very much, Mr. President, for this opportunity.
(spoke in English)
As members are aware, I will be briefing the
Council in a few days, on 8 December. On that
occasion, I will be able to elaborate more on the overall
political process in Syria, which needs to maintain its
momentum because, as we have always said, we cannot
simply let the facts on the ground take place; we also
need to constantly maintain a political momentum.
Today, however, let us focus on the immediate crisis
in Aleppo. As the Council is aware and as has already
been indicated, my colleague from the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Stephen O’Brien, and my colleague
UNICEF Regional Director Geert Cappelaere will
elaborate further on the humanitarian tragedy and the
United Nations response, particularly and specifically
with respect to Aleppo. So, on my side, at least at this
2/26

30/11/2016

Over the past two weeks, both ground and air
assaults on eastern Aleppo and also, frankly, attacks
on western Aleppo have intensified, culminating in
the capture last weekend by Government forces of
several districts in the northern part of eastern Aleppo,
thereby de facto splitting the largest opposition-held
urban stronghold into two sides. It is estimated that
almost 40 per cent of the area previously held by armed
opposition groups is now in the hands of Government
forces.
Over the past few days, thousands of civilians
have fled from eastern Aleppo neighbourhoods to
other parts of the city, and initial reports indicated
that up to 16,000 people are being displaced; in fact,
the figure is growing by the hour, as the Council will
be hearing from Stephen O’Brien. It is likely that
thousands more will flee should the fighting continue
to spread and further intensify over the coming days.
I have therefore strongly suggested — and I have been
informed that that has now been agreed upon by the
Government — that Ali Al-Za’tari, our Humanitarian
Coordinator and Resident Coordinator in Damascus,
together with as many members as possible of the
United Nations international country team, should go
to Aleppo as soon as possible in order to rejoin our
many colleagues who are nationals and have already
started to work from within the country team in order
to assist the Syrian civilian population in Aleppo, both
eastern and western.
Violence in Aleppo is not one-sided, let us be frank.
Even if attacks on western Aleppo are not on the same
scale, we have recently seen attacks from eastern Aleppo
on residential quarters there, including the shelling of a
school on 20 November in which reportedly 10 children
died and many more were injured. Yesterday Stephen
O’Brien — we were together in Brussels — reported
that up to 25,000 people had been displaced in western
Aleppo over the past few weeks. The Council will
hear further updates again; as can be seen, the figure
is increasing.
Even as we focus on Aleppo today, we should
remember that the war continues in Idlib, Hama,
Al-Waer, Homs, north of Latakia, western Ghouta,
north-western Damascus and eastern Ghouta. Each
of those areas deserves a separate description, but the
16-40719

30/11/2016

The situation in the Middle East

underlying theme remains the same: the continued
dominance of a military over a political strategy, and
the brutal price paid by civilians in that process.
Tens of thousands still remain in opposition­
controlled areas in Aleppo, and they are living under
constant threat resulting from the ongoing fighting.
Others are at risk while attempting to flee the fighting,
adding to the dangers associated with attempting to flee
across an active front line. We have received reliable
reports indicating that, in many cases, opposition
groups have been actually preventing civilians from
leaving areas under their control. We are also concerned
that, upon reaching Government-controlled areas or
those controlled by the Syrian defence forces, civilians
perceived to have lived in opposition-controlled areas
or to have connections with armed opposition groups
may have been detained. Tens of thousands of civilians
on all sides are therefore in need of aid.
The United Nations should be able to access those
in need, wherever they are, by all means or routes
possible, and without preconditions. In short, aid needs
to be delivered to those inside and outside Aleppo, and
those who have left must be protected from retribution.
Our line will unavoidably be — as it has always been
the case in the past in other difficult situations — that
the United Nations and its partners should be allowed
and should be ready to reach all sides of eastern Aleppo
with urgent humanitarian aid. That is the principle.
If, subsequently, implementing that measure is not
immediately possible in a comprehensive and effective
manner, the United Nations should nevertheless not
hesitate to try to help all those whom it can reach today,
in view of the current circumstances. The priority
is reaching people, those we have been concerned
and worried about and who have been isolated from
humanitarian aid since June.
When I met Foreign Minister Al-Moualem in
Damascus on 20 November, I addressed the issue of
aerial attacks on hospitals in eastern Aleppo, which
the Secretary-General himself condemned on the same
day. I publicly suggested that a verification mission be
sent to eastern and western Aleppo to assess damage on
the hospitals, which is also a suggestion that, I think,
our Humanitarian Coordinator in Damascus has been
making. I reiterate that call in the Council today.
You will recall, Mr. President, that last month,
since there were no other plans going forward that
could stop the violence from continuing, I proposed a

S/PV.7822

political initiative for Aleppo, not really a humanitarian
one, but a comprehensive one that is separate from
humanitarian proposals. It requires an end to the
violence, the departure of Al-Nusra Front fighters
from eastern Aleppo and the preservation of the local
administration — not a separation, not an autonomy,
not a new type of administration, but the preservation
of the local administration. That would be guaranteed
by those with the power to give such a guarantee. That
proposal, in one form or another, has actually been
discussed now for at least six weeks in Lausanne in
follow-up meetings of some of the participants of the
original Lausanne meeting and in other discussions.
I myself have continued to push those ideas,
including most recently during my visit to Damascus
and through contacts with the opposition and armed
opposition groups. That proposal is still on the table,
and is particularly applicable to that part of eastern
Aleppo that is still under the control of the armed
opposition with a clear presence of Al-Nusra in it.
While the situation on the ground is fast evolving,
that proposal has become less obviously applicable
immediately, but a part of it, the departure of Al-Nusra,
the actual stopping of the bombing, the humanitarian
access and the preservation — I repeat — of the local
administration is still on the table.
I am convinced that helping to ensure the departure
of those fighters whom the Council considers to
be terrorists, the Al-Nusra, and who to this day
remain in parts of eastern Aleppo still controlled by
the opposition, should be and could be an outcome
around which everyone in Syria and the international
community could still agree. I therefore urge concerned
stakeholders not to lose their focus on that practical
initiative, which is still valid, particularly at this very
delicate moment when the forecast could be that the
fighting in eastern Aleppo may continue for weeks
with a lot of collateral, tragic effects. That may also
spare innocent civilian lives and ensure the separation
of terrorist elements from other armed groups.
As I said, I will be brief, and as I said, there is
plenty of evidence that the military logic is currently
prevailing on both sides. The Council, on behalf
of the international community, should call on all
belligerents and their sponsors to ensure full respect
for international humanitarian law and the protection
of civilians in Aleppo. But make no mistake about the
fact that none of the military developments that we are
witnessing point to what one could call a stable ongoing,

16-407193/26

S/PV.7822

The situation in the Middle East

permanent military solution. Indeed, any sustainable
solution to the Syrian tragedy, when it comes, will have
to include a formula for the stability of the country
in order to ensure the non-recurrence of the terrorist
threat and the return to what could be a stable Syria. It
is my strong conviction that such a formula cannot be
brought about without a negotiated political settlement
to the crisis, one that involves a mechanism for sharing
power and implementing the agenda set forth in Council
resolution 2254 (2015). I look forward, therefore, to
briefing Council members in person next week, on
8 December, in order to speak in further detail of the
options that may and should exist in order to continue
pushing towards the attainment of a political process.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. De
Mistura for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. O’Brien.
Mr. O’Brien: I am joining the Security Council from
the offices of the International Maritime Organization
in London, and I would like to thank Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura for his briefing, whose contents
coincide with those contained in our presentation to the
European Parliament yesterday.
For over five years now, the United Nations and the
entire humanitarian community have raised the alarm
about the devastating impact of the conflict in Syria
on millions of ordinary men, women and children.
We have pleaded that the Security Council and the
international community come together to ensure that
both civilians and civilian infrastructure are protected
in accordance with basic humanitarian and international
obligations, that access be granted to provide lifesaving
humanitarian assistance and that all efforts be made to
reach a political solution to the conflict. Our calls, and
the requests, even the demands, of the Council have
largely gone ignored.
The parties to the conflict in Syria have shown,
time and again, that they are willing to take any action
or do any deed to secure military advantage, even if
it means killing, maiming or besieging civilians into
submission in the process. There are no limits or red
lines left to cross. The rules of war — sacrosanct notions
born out of generations of costly and painful lessons
and established more than 150 years ago, in 1864 to be
precise, in the First Geneva Convention — have been
systematically disregarded in Syria.
4/26

30/11/2016

Nowhere has the cruelty of this war been more
grimly witnessed than in Aleppo. Aleppo, one of the
world’s oldest continually inhabited cities and Syria’s
manufacturing capital, has been recklessly destroyed
over the course of the past five years. We have all seen
the harrowing images of bombs and mortars raining
down in recent days, weeks and months on civilian
areas, residential houses, schools, medical facilities,
water and electric stations, and public markets. There
are constant, tormenting images of people murdered,
bloody, and exhausted. There is constant bombing and
shelling in plain sight, occurring night and day — day
in and day out. The noose of the siege has tightened,
and those civilians trapped are in desperate conditions.
Those attacks have not been limited to eastern Aleppo
but have also killed and injured civilians in western
Aleppo and damaged civilian infrastructure. As the
Council has heard me say before, Aleppo has become
the apex of what has become a catalogue of horrors in
Syria. Its people have been living in a long terrifying
nightmare-reality that no human being should have
to endure.
The intensity of attacks on eastern Aleppo
neighbourhoods over the past few days has forced
thousands of civilians to flee to other parts of the
city. In the past four days, numerous civilians have
reportedly been killed. Just today, we received a report
that scores of people were killed in a single air strike
this morning. It is estimated that up to 25,000 people
have been displaced from their homes in eastern
Aleppo since Saturday. That is the estimate that
Staffan de Mistura has just given, and I do not have
any further information other than that which were able
to get at approximately the same time yesterday. We
will keep the Council updated. That number includes
approximately 13,500 people 60 to 70 per cent of whom
are women and children in a collective centre and cotton
factory in Jibreen, a Government-held area to the east
of eastern Aleppo city; 500 with family members in
western Aleppo; 8,500 in collective shelters in Sheikh
Maqsoud, a Kurdish enclave north of eastern Aleppo
city; as well as tens of thousands displaced within
eastern Aleppo itself.
As the fighting continues unabated, the situation
is fluid and those statistics are indeed changing by
the hour and the day. It is likely that thousands more
will flee should fighting further spread and intensify
over the coming days. The Syrian Arab Red Crescent
(SARC) and local humanitarian partners supported
16-40719

30/11/2016

The situation in the Middle East

by the United Nations are responding to the needs
of internally displaced families in Jibreen, Sheikh
Maqsoud and elsewhere. That includes preparing
hot meals and bread to families, ensuring medical
assistance to the sick and injured, providing potable
water and distributing sanitation and hygiene kits, and
other basic relief items such as blankets and mattresses.
The United Nations has prepositioned stocks to
support the response including non-food items for
45,000 people; water, sanitation, hygiene and nutrition
supplies for 80,000 people; and food for 150,000 people.
Those stocks can be replenished within 48 hours
from the United Nations hub in Homs and elsewhere
as necessary. It is therefore absolutely vital that the
Government of Syria enable us to deploy in safety and
without undue restrictions all essential international
and national staff to Aleppo to increase our capacity to
respond effectively to those growing needs and address
protection concerns for civilians.
We must recognize that, even though some people
have been able to flee the fighting, many have gone
from one terrifying situation to what they consider to
be another. Aside from the dangers associated with
attempting to flee across active front lines, we have
received reports that non-State armed groups are
preventing civilians from leaving areas under their
control. There are also deep protection concerns that
upon reaching Government-controlled areas, civilians
perceived to have links or connections with non-State
armed groups, including humanitarian workers,
potentially face arbitrary arrests, detention or worse.
Trapped in Aleppo are also dozens of humanitarian
staff who have heroically assisted civilians and are now
also losing their lives. According to the World Health
Organization, three members of the health staff were
killed adding to the many other Syrian doctors, health
workers and civilians.

S/PV.7822

combat must be respected and protected at all times.
Any evacuation of civilians must be safe, voluntary,
and to a place of their choosing. Parties must allow
humanitarian organizations safe and unimpeded access
to bring life-saving help to those displaced and identify
and respond to protection threats. And finally, it is
imperative that all those displaced are allowed to return
voluntarily and in safety and dignity to their homes as
soon as the situation allows.
I am extremely concerned about the fate of the
remaining civilians in the besieged areas of eastern
Aleppo city. These people have been besieged for
nearly 150 days now and most, simply, do not have the
means to survive for much longer. Intensified fighting
and aerial bombardment continues to occur resulting in
civilian casualties and injuries. As of today, as a result
of the bombardment and shelling, all hospitals have
been directly hit several times, and there is no properly
functioning hospital in eastern Aleppo city except for
one trauma unit. All other primary medical facilities
are operating at minimum capacity and do not have
trauma-treatment capabilities, leaving most wounded
civilians unable to get the most basic treatment. With
few, if any, ambulances available, we are receiving
reports of wounded civilians being rushed to medical
facilities on vegetable carriages. Access to clean water
is scarce. People have resorted to scavenging as United
Nations humanitarian food stocks have been exhausted
while prices of scarce basic food and fuel supplies
have dramatically risen to levels that most remaining
civilians are unable to afford. People are trapped and
terrified. They are running out of time.

As we have seen before, across Syria and
throughout the conflict, men, women and children
have been routinely arrested at Government-controlled
checkpoints before being transferred to one of dozens of
official or secret Government-run detention facilities.
They are often held incommunicado and indefinitely
while facing the risk of being subjected to torture and illtreatment, extrajudicial killings or being disappeared.

Just as we are ready to respond to all those displaced,
the United Nations and its partners also remain ready to
provide immediate assistance and medical evacuations
for civilians inside besieged parts of eastern Aleppo in
line with the United Nations humanitarian four-point
plan that we have been seeking to implement since early
November. Furthermore, truckloads of humanitarian
supplies stand ready to deliver humanitarian assistance
to eastern Aleppo from Turkey and western Aleppo.
For the sake of humanity, we call on and plead with the
parties and those with influence to do everything in
their power to protect civilians and enable access to the
besieged part of eastern Aleppo before it becomes one
giant graveyard.

I call on all parties to the conflict to adhere to and
respect international humanitarian law. I remind all
parties to the conflict that civilians and those hors de

Indiscriminate shelling also hits civilian-populated
areas of western Aleppo, killing and injuring civilians.
Civilian infrastructure, including schools and medical

16-407195/26

S/PV.7822

The situation in the Middle East

facilities, has also been destroyed, as I reported to
the Council last week (see S/PV.7817). Since July,
approximately 70,000 people have been displaced
within western Aleppo as a result of fighting and
indiscriminate shelling. Overall, the United Nations
estimates that up to 400,000 internally displaced
persons (IDPs) now live in western Aleppo. The United
Nations, SARC and partners continue to respond to the
needs of pre-existing IDPs in western Aleppo, as well
as the wave of new displacement from eastern Aleppo
in recent days.
While the world is watching events in Aleppo,
another 700,000 people are in other besieged areas across
the country, mostly in rural Damascus surrounded by
Government forces. As winter approaches, they are
trapped and petrified, and as they watch the chilling
events in Aleppo unfold, they are asking: Will I be next?
It may be too late for many of the people of eastern
Aleppo, but surely the Council can come together, stop
the brutality and also prevent that a similar fate does
not befall other Syrians. What they and we need to see
above all is three things: first, real respect and protection
of civilians and civilian infrastructure; secondly, safe,
rapid and unimpeded humanitarian access; and thirdly,
an end to brutal sieges for once and for all.
These are neither new nor complicated demands,
but common threads of humankind that we all have a
responsibility to rally around. And those parties that
cannot or will not live up to their basic obligations
should know that they will one day be held accountable
for their actions. I should add that in all my points of
advocacy for the suffering people caught up in this
crisis, the overwhelming question that comes to me
from politicians, the affected people and journalists
is: “Why on Earth can the Security Council not come
together and unite to put a stop to this suffering?”
The people of Syria have suffered far too much and
for far too long. United Nations humanitarian agencies,
SARC and our non-governmental organization partners
are doing everything they can to meet those needs. But,
as we have repeatedly said, the solution to this crisis
does not rest with us. More than anything, I urge all
Council members for a political solution so that we can
give some semblance of hope to the many millions of
Syrian families who will in fact fail to be able to go to
sleep tonight, but they will be hungry and they will be
sick and they will be fearing for their lives.
6/26

30/11/2016

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. O’Brien for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Cappelaere.
Mr. Cappelaere: I am grateful for the opportunity
to address the Security Council today on the plight of
children in Syria. To say that their situation is tragic
would be an understatement. Indeed, it is difficult to
imagine what words could still adequately convey the
unspeakable horrors endured by Syria’s children every
day. Tens of thousands of children have already been
killed. Millions have been uprooted from their homes,
some more than once. Too many have been deprived of
basic medical care and safe drinking water. Too many
have witnessed the deaths of their loved ones and the
destruction of the places they once thought are safe:
their homes, their schools, their playgrounds and their
hospitals. Simply put, Syria’s children are trapped in a
living nightmare. We must ask ourselves: What is left
of childhood for the boys and girls of Syria?
We have just heard from my colleague, Mr. Stephen
O’Brien, about how devastating the past few days have
been for the people of Aleppo. As we consider the
events unfolding there, I would like us all to pause for
a moment and imagine life through the eyes of a child
who is trapped in that tragic situation. As a boy or girl
in Aleppo today, where do you find comfort and hope
amid the bombs? Determined to learn, you attend school
whenever your parents allow you to leave the house, but
you do not know any more if you will ever come back.
It is hard for you as a child to focus because it is cold
and you do not sleep well, haunted by nightmares and
hunger. Children are wondering why this is happening.
Children are wondering why no one is doing more to
make this stop.
Amir, a five-year-old boy, is one of those children.
Our team met him in Aleppo very recently. He and
his sister were playing outside when their house was
shelled. His sister was injured in the face and eye, while
Amir sustained severe burns all over his body. He had
to undergo two painful surgeries to replace the burned
skin in one of the very few remaining health facilities
in Aleppo. Harsh as it may sound, Amir was lucky. Too
many children today are not as lucky.
In western Aleppo, we met a father living with the
trauma and deep regret of simply letting his eight and
ten-year-old daughters go to school. They left their
makeshift home one morning with their schoolbags on
their back. Only their lifeless bodies returned after a
16-40719

30/11/2016

The situation in the Middle East

shell slammed into their classroom. UNICEF colleagues
could barely look into the eyes of the father suffering
so much pain.
As the Council heard last week, the health system
in eastern Aleppo is crumbling. Doctors on the
ground told UNICEF that children with poor chances
of survival are often simply left to die due to limited
capacity and supplies.
The violence must stop. Nothing justifies the
indiscriminate slaughter of civilians, especially
children. Parties to the conflict must protect civilians,
not least children, and allow immediate access for
humanitarian agencies to provide life-saving assistance.
UNICEF, together with its partners, have been standing
and continue to stand ready to respond immediately as
soon as a humanitarian pause is agreed.
Beyond the grim situation in Aleppo, we estimate
that some 6 million children inside Syria are in need
of humanitarian assistance. Over 2 million of these
children are living in hard-to-reach areas, which
humanitarian agencies cannot access on a regular basis.
Nearly half a million children live under siege, cut off
from humanitarian aid and basic services for months at
a time. Some of these children have been living under
siege for two years. UNICEF and partners strive on
a daily basis to deliver timely and quality assistance
to the most vulnerable children throughout Syria.
Allow me to take this opportunity to pay tribute to all
humanitarians working courageously on the front lines
for Syrian children.
When we have access, we can achieve a great deal.
During the month of October alone, UNICEF and its
partners reached 2.9 million Syrians with urgently
needed assistance, including nearly 350,000 in besieged
and hard-to-reach areas. Since January, over 3 million
children under five have been vaccinated through
polio campaigns. Back-to-learning supplies have
reached nearly 3 million children. Urgent maintenance
to water and sanitation systems have allowed millions
to access safe water. And essential nutrition supplies
have reached nearly 300,000 children in besieged and
hard-to-reach areas through inter-agency convoys.
Working together with our partners, we can and have
made life just a little more bearable for Syrian children.
Sadly, however, we often fail — not due to a lack of
commitment or a lack of readiness. As those children
wait for us, they wonder why.

S/PV.7822

Schools have come under relentless attack all over
the country. This year has been particularly devastating
for education. Since the beginning of 2016, the United
Nations has documented 84 attacks on schools across
Syria, with at least 69 children losing their lives and
many more injured. Across the country, more than
7,000 schools can no longer be used because they are
either destroyed, damaged, are sheltering displaced
families or are being used for military purposes. Today,
1.7 million children in Syria are out of school.
In the worst areas, safe water is either scarce or
too costly. In collective shelters or households hosting
displaced families, toilets have to be shared by dozens
of people and sanitary conditions are extremely poor.
Only one-third of Syria’s sewage is now being treated.
The violence has destroyed water infrastructure and,
in some cases, parties to the conflict have deliberately
cut off water supplies as a war tactic. Earlier this year,
UNICEF reported that water in Aleppo was shut off for
48 days.
Since the beginning of the conflict, families all
over Syria have been reporting grave violations against
their children — committed by all parties. The Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict has briefed the Council on a
regular basis regarding those violations. The United
Nations verified 1,500 grave violations in 2015 alone,
including killing, maiming, the recruitment and use of
children by parties to the conflict, abduction, attacks
on schools and hospitals and the denial of humanitarian
access. Harrowing as these numbers are, they represent
only verified cases. Imagine how many more remain
unreported or unconfirmed.
As the violence continues to intensify in Aleppo,
children will continue to pay a heavy price. These
children ask why their loved ones have died. Mothers
and fathers in Aleppo feel helpless as they struggle to
feed their children while the prices of food and other
commodities have almost doubled, putting children at
serious risk of malnutrition. Violence, displacement
and roadblocks mean that many children can no longer
access life-saving health care. Every checkpoint
crossed presents a set of dangers for children: the risk
of being exploited, the risk of being recruited or the risk
of simply getting caught in the crossfire.
We have all seen the images — brave men and
women pulling babies’ bodies out from under the rubble;
babies taken out of incubators because of attacks on

16-407197/26

S/PV.7822

The situation in the Middle East

hospitals; little boys and girls, many injured, pleading
for help or dead. Yesterday, many of us saw the girl in
the pink coat, standing shocked, terrified and confused
amidst the shelling — searching for her father, whom
she lost in the chaos of havoc and violence. Children
ask us why; we ask why.
This devastating downward spiral must end. Today,
every Syrian child under the age of five has known
nothing but a lifetime shaped by war. Until recently, over
90 per cent of them attended school, nearly all children
were regularly vaccinated and malnutrition was almost
non-existent. Syria was among the first Arab countries
to ratify the Convention on the Rights of the Child. The
protection of children should be, at all times, a primary
consideration for all of us. We have failed them over
the past six years and we continue to fail the children
in Syria. Our failure is not only jeopardizing children’s
lives, but the future of the country, the region and the
whole world.
UNICEF and its partners will continue to do
everything we can to provide assistance to children and
their families in Syria, wherever they may reside. In that
connection, I take this opportunity to thank the United
Nations Special Envoy for Syria, Staffan de Mistura,
and Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Stephen O’Brien,
for their tireless support and determination to help us
reach those children in need.
Let us be clear — as long as the violence
continues, children in Syria will continue to suffer.
UNICEF renews its call on all parties to lift the sieges
across Syria, and to allow and facilitate immediate,
unconditional and sustained humanitarian access to
all areas of the country. We call upon the parties to
uphold their obligations to protect children. These are
their children and their future. They are in their hands.
Until the guns are silenced and remain silent, children
in Syria will continue to ask us why.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Cappelaere for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): What will it
take? Syria is in the midst of a horrific conflict and
the worst is probably yet to come. The United Kingdom
and France have called this emergency session because
eastern Aleppo and other besieged areas are today
8/26

30/11/2016

facing new depths of crisis, as the three briefers have so
clearly described. History may show that it is, perhaps,
the most horrific conflict of our lifetimes.
We have faced horror before. We and those who
have sat in these very chairs before us have collectively
adopted 2,321 resolutions — 2,321 decrees from
the world’s highest authority on international peace
and security. We have sent peacekeepers to war zones.
We have stemmed conflict. We have defied great
odds, bridged divides and have answered the call of
humankind for seven consecutive decades. And yet
on Syria, sitting here in the Chamber today, after over
five years of fighting and the deaths of close to half of
a million people, after the displacement of 11 million
people from their homes, with 1 million more under
siege, the Security Council has completely failed to act.
Stephen O’Brien asks why; the answer is simple. Time
and again, Russia has vetoed to prevent the Security
Council from finding the unity necessary for ending
the war. Therefore again I ask, what will it take?
I have met members of Syrian civil society. I have
met impartial aid groups, such as the International
Committee of the Red Cross and Médecins Sans
Frontières. I have met doctors who have treated the
wounded in makeshift hospitals in Aleppo, and they tell
me what is expected: the bombs are directly responsible
for the greatest number of deaths. To stop the deaths,
stop the bombing. But those numbers are simply the
deaths that we can count today. As difficult as it is to
imagine, there is even more horror looming under the
surface — horror that could be on an even larger scale;
an agonizingly slow and painful death.
That is what the United Nations is talking about
when it briefs us on the status of besieged areas in
Syria. Sieges are now a routine item of discussion when
the Council discusses Syria. We cannot begin to think
that sieges are now common, that they are somehow a
simple matter of fact. They maybe a regular part of the
conflict in Syria but they are anything but regular. What
they are a deliberate act of starvation and withholding
of medical care. The Syrian regime and Russia have
been executing a plan that has now laid 1 million people
under siege. And “executing” is an all-too-appropriate
word because without a change in policy and a change
of heart, that is exactly what it is — the slow, painful,
bitter execution of 1 million Syrians cut off from aid
convoys and the world.
16-40719

30/11/2016

The situation in the Middle East

The United Nations has an aid plan. It is not
an opposition plan. It is not designed to aid one side
over the other. Its sole purpose is to save lives and
alleviate suffering. As Stephen said, the aid convoys
are ready to roll, but they must have permission from
the regime — permission that has been systematically
denied. This is the United Nations — the impartial
body the world looks to in the bleakest of situations.
Russia is a leading member of the United Nations and
crucial to the eventual solution of the Syria conflict.
Why, then, can Russia and the Syrian regime not sign
up to the United Nations aid plan?
First they said it was because of terrorism. Then
we reminded them that 100,000 children could not
be terrorists. Then they said that it was because of
the opposition. The opposition has now agreed to the
United Nations plan for eastern Aleppo. What is today’s
excuse? What is the excuse for employing the medieval
tactic of siege? What is the excuse for the continued
bombardment — dropping bombs at a disturbing rate
over the homes of children and families? What is the
excuse for the continued endorsement of war crimes?
The ancient city of Aleppo as we know it is on the verge
of being wiped from the face of the Earth. Today we
speak of reaching those who remain, tomorrow there
may not be an Aleppo to reach. If that comes to pass,
the excuses of the Syrian regime and of Russia will
have played a substantial role. Let me be absolutely
clear about what needs to happen in Aleppo.
First, there needs to be an immediate ceasefire in
order to give civilians respite from the bombs and to
allow humanitarian access. Secondly, like the armed
opposition groups have done, Russia and the regime
must agree to cooperate on the United Nations fourpoint humanitarian plan. Thirdly, those civilians who
want to leave the city must be allowed to do so safely
to areas of their choosing, with protection assured by
impartial monitoring. We are receiving reports today
of the Syrian regime bombing Syrian families who are
fleeing Aleppo on foot with their belongings. I call
on Russia and the regime to commit to the Council
today that no civilians will be attacked as they leave
Aleppo. The deliberate targeting of civilians in such
circumstances would be a war crime and we will hold
those responsible to account.
Words cannot describe what is currently happening
in Aleppo. We have heard talk of a circle of hell, a kill
zone, a giant graveyard. Within that kill zone — that
circle of hell — are 100,000 children. We have all been

S/PV.7822

discussing it long enough. We have seen the headlines,
the images and the videos. Think back to the last face of
a Syrian civilian you saw. The gruesome fact is that too
many of them are destined to become a statistic — and
maybe they already are — another number in the
death toll, another figure in a United Nations situation
report of people starving in Aleppo, another statistic
in a headline that reads “Seven children dead in school
bombing”. We made a habit of allowing those statistics
to be created, and we must break that habit.
Egypt, New Zealand and Spain have drafted a very
reasonable draft resolution calling for 10-day ceasefire
to stop the bombing and let aid in. There should be a
vote on that draft resolution as soon as possible. If not
today, then I call on the Council to meet again before
the end of this week to review the situation in Aleppo
and for us to move swiftly to adopt that draft resolution
to deliver a ceasefire and the full implementation of the
United Nations humanitarian plan.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Senegalese presidency for having convened today’s
emergency Security Council meeting on the situation in
Aleppo at the request of France and the United Kingdom.
I would also like to thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura;
the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Relief Coordinator, Mr. Stephen O’Brien; and
UNICEF’s Geert Cappelaere for their briefings.
On 15 November, the Al-Assad regime and its
supporters launched another ground offensive on
Aleppo, which intensified on 26 November. That major
ground and air offensive led to the taking of half of the
area under the control of the opposition. The toll stands
at at least 225 civilian deaths, including 27 children.
More than 20,000 people were displaced because of the
fighting and more than 200,000 remain under siege.
As has been said, the humanitarian situation is simply
tragic. The areas that remain under opposition control no
longer have operational health infrastructure. Hospitals
in eastern Aleppo have been repeatedly bombed without
respite. United Nations emergency food reserves have
been exhausted for more than 10 days now and access
to drinking water is insufficient to meet the needs of
the entire population. The ancient city of Aleppo, in
which many of the greatest civilizations flourished, is
collapsing before our very eyes.
Each of us is aware of the extreme cynicism and
brutality that characterizes the Syrian regime’s current

16-407199/26

S/PV.7822

The situation in the Middle East

offensive in Aleppo, which is a strategy of total warfare.
The regime does not hide its objectives. But even war has
rules, established, inter alia, by the Geneva Conventions,
which apply everywhere and at all times. Those rules
embody respect for international humanitarian law,
and in particular the protection of civilian populations,
by banning belligerents from deliberately targeting
areas in which humanitarian workers and civilians are
present, carrying out indiscriminate attacks against
them, hampering humanitarian assistance and medical
evacuations and using famine as a weapon of war. Those
basic legal and moral principles have been persistently
flouted by the regime and its backers, who have shown
themselves prepared to do anything to regain control
of the city and break the insurgents’ resistance. The
civilian population of eastern Aleppo is not even a
factor in this implacable, unrelenting equation. Eastern
Aleppo is a victim twice over, of constant shelling and
a siege that is medieval in its ferocity. In their targeting
of civilians, including hospitals and medical personnel,
they both constitute war crimes.
During the past week France has continued to
hammer home the same message, demanding that the
regime and its backers end the offensive and all their
indiscriminate attacks and finally allow humanitarian
aid access to the people of eastern Aleppo as soon
as possible. The priority is providing assistance and
protection to the civilian population, whether they wish
to leave or stay. Those who want to leave should be able
to do so and should be able to choose which direction
they wish to take. At the moment they are rightly
terrified by the strikes that are killing those who try to
flee, the massacres of those who enter areas controlled
by the regime and the camps they have been dumped in.
Today we have seen that the Council has once again
been unable to agree on a path for saving the people of
eastern Aleppo. Every initiative in the Council aimed
at saving them — the draft resolution proposed by
France and Spain, that of New Zealand and, finally,
the humanitarian penholders’ initiative — has come
up against the same rejection, by Russia. That is why
France is once again asking those Council members
who are involved in the conflict and have influence
on the regime — Russia in particular — to bring all
their efforts to bear to interrupt the current spiral,
whose legacy will be a devastated country condemned
to decades of instability, violence and terrorism. We
should emphasize that the current policy of total war is
also a strategic error.
10/26

30/11/2016

Let us not deceive ourselves, the painful tragedy
of Aleppo does not represent the road that should
be taken if Syria is to ultimately be stabilized in a
viable, reconstituted form. No, the tragedy of Aleppo
represents yet another stage in Syria’s descent into the
abyss, at the bottom of which lie its children, blown to
bits by bombs or disfigured by hunger, and with the
potential for a never-ending conflict of which terrorists
will of course be the greatest beneficiaries. The tragedy
of Aleppo automatically fuels radicalization and, as a
consequence, terrorism. It simply presents the terrorists
with a gift of blood and bullets. Sadly, the comparison
between eastern Aleppo today and Guernica during the
Spanish Civil War is an apt one. Aleppo is at once a vast
humanitarian tragedy — the epicentre of the worst such
tragedy since the twenty-first century began — a black
hole that swallows and destroys every value that the
United Nations upholds, and, ultimately, a harbinger of
terrible tragedies to come.
For France, which like others has been a victim
of terrorism and is still exposed to its threat, Aleppo
lies at the core of a challenge that goes to the heart not
just of our values but also of our interests, including
our security interests. The humanitarian tragedy and
the terrorist threat in Aleppo — the horror and the
terror — are two sides of the same coin. On behalf of
France, I would therefore like to emphasize once again
how utterly urgent it is that we end the bombing and
the war, protect the civilians and work together to find
ways to reach a political settlement, because that is the
only possible way out of this conflict. It is in that spirit
that on 10 December Mr. Jean-Marc Ayrault, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of France, will hold a ministerial
meeting in Paris for those who reject the current
strategy of total war and wish to relaunch efforts
towards a negotiated solution as soon as possible.
That is the call I am making today on behalf of
France. It is a call to action and to urge us to unite around
our shared goals, shouldering our responsibilities
together. On top of everything else, the credibility of
the Security Council is at stake and deeply engaged in
the tragedy that is Syria.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Humanitarian agencies cannot get into Aleppo. They
are encountering enormous difficulties in getting into
many parts of Syria and, quite simply, cannot do their
work. That is the clear conclusion that I have drawn
today from the briefings by Special Envoy Staffan de
Mistura, Under-Secretary-General Stephen O’Brien
16-40719

30/11/2016

The situation in the Middle East

and Mr. Geert Cappelaere. That is why I would also
like to thank the United Kingdom and France for
calling for today’s urgent meeting. Unfortunately, what
we have to note in the meeting is a double failure for
the Security Council — first, because it has not been
able to bring peace and security to Syria, and, secondly,
because it has shown itself to be incapable of enforcing
international humanitarian law.
The figures are enlightening. The food ran out on
14 November, and we now have 100,000 children in a
situation that is beyond desperate. And, simply, that is
Syria’s future, because it will have to be rebuilt, and it
is those children of today who will represent the Syria
of tomorrow. All of us, especially the members of the
Council, know that Spain, along with New Zealand and
Egypt, has been working on the humanitarian issue
in Syria, a job for which we take full responsibility
and that we are trying to carry out in complete
transparency. What we are working on is a plan for
achieving a rapprochement of Council members’
positions on the issue. It is not a review, it is an exercise
in rapprochement. We hope that it will still be possible
to reach an agreement.
I would like to conclude by recalling something
that might seem obvious but that I believe is
fundamental — the total validity of the basic elements
of resolution 2254 (2015) and resolution 2268 (2016),
on Syria. Once again, these are still valid: access for
humanitarian aid, the cessation of hostilities, the
separation of opposition groups from terrorists and
a renewal of the political dialogue. They are the only
viable alternatives for ending the war in Syria.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): We
are meeting today to listen once again to an account
detailing the suffering of our brother people of Syria
under the blows of protracted proxy conflict, against a
backdrop of successive failures — not just a failure to
reach a final settlement of the crisis, but a failure even to
mitigate it. Despite the deep political divisions between
the parties with influence in the conflict — which have
had an impact on the Security Council performance on
the issue, rendering it incapable of producing a result in
three previous attempts that sought only to salvage what
was salvageable — we have a duty to our brothers and
sisters in Syria. Egypt has therefore been working with
our fellow penholders, Spain and New Zealand, to reach
a minimum consensus on measures that can be taken on
the Syria dossier, particularly regarding Aleppo, with
a view to alleviating humanitarian suffering. In that

S/PV.7822

regard, we have developed a comprehensive approach
in the form of a draft resolution that covers most of the
urgent issues as much as possible.
The draft resolution includes principal points, the
most important of which is halting attacks by all parties
in Aleppo for at least 10 successive days in order to
allow immediate and urgent humanitarian access to the
inhabitants of the city through full coordination with
the United Nations and its partners. It also includes
elements related to the necessity of implementing the
cessation of hostilities across Syria in accordance
with resolution 2268 (2016). It also includes support
for instruments to help monitor that implementation.
The draft resolution clearly calls for cooperation and
coordination to annihilate the pockets of terrorism in
Syria and the terrorist groups that control major parts
of the Syrian territory. It also clearly calls upon all
parties to heed the will of the international community
by putting an end to all cooperation and association
with all terrorist groups, particularly Jabhat Al-Nusra
Front and Jabhat Fatah Al-Sham. That would be at the
political or operational level. The draft resolution also
reaffirms the pivotal role of the International Syria
Support Group (ISSG) and its two co-Chairs so that
the ISSG could work to implement the elements I just
mentioned. It calls for the start of serious negotiations
between the Syrian parties on a transitional period in
accordance with the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex) and resolution 2254 (2016) as soon as possible.
We, along with our partner penholders, took the utmost
care in making the drafting of the draft resolution clear
and unambiguous. It includes a reporting mechanism
of the Secretary-General on its implementation. It is
time for all parties to shoulder their responsibility with
respect to the Syrian people.
Despite the clear linkage between the events in
Syria, the concept of Arab national security and the
national security of Egypt, and in the light of the
historic relations that link the Egyptian and Syrian
peoples — Egypt and Syria actually used to be one
State — Egypt has kept a clean record with respect
to its position on the Syrian crisis over the past years.
Since the beginning of the crisis, we have neither
supported any specific party to the conflict nor engaged
in any attempts to exploit the Syrian tragedy. That is
in spite of certain political interests. I would like to
reaffirm that Egypt will continue down that path. We
will not contribute — whether through words, action
or inaction — to the destruction of a brotherly Arab

16-4071911/26

S/PV.7822

The situation in the Middle East

country, regardless of any justification or reason. We
will continue to implement a policy towards Syria
that does not take anything into consideration apart
from Syrian interests and their hopes of a democratic,
unified, sovereign and safe State that is free of terrorism
and extremism. We will not submit to compromise
or political interests. Those are actually the reasons
for the daily unprecedented tragedies that have led
to the displacement and loss of lives of millions of
innocent Syrians.
In conclusion, I would like to call upon
everyone — members of the Council, members of
the ISSG and other relevant parties that may hold
influence — to set their own interests and political
grievances aside. We should all genuinely work to
resolve this crisis, which has had disastrous effects at
the humanitarian, political and security levels.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes today’s briefing on the events unfolding in
eastern Aleppo. We thank the briefers and commend
them and the brave people that have been working with
them in such difficult circumstances.
Over the past five years, New Zealand has been
highly critical of the Security Council’s failure to live
up to its responsibilities with regard to the ongoing
conflict in Syria. We have not been alone in doing so.
For much of that time, the Council has remained largely
silent as the country has unravelled and the fighting
has become more cruel and more brutal. Often, we have
been prevented from acting or even speaking due to
the inability or unwillingness of some of the Council’s
most powerful members to move beyond their own
politics and vested interests. That has prevented the
Council from putting in place measures that would
have saved lives. The people of Syria have paid, and
continue to pay, a terrible price for that inaction, and so
do their neighbours.
New Zealand has been working with Spain and
Egypt to find a way through that impasse. We have
sought to cut through the politics and the polemics
and focus on agreeing on action that can make a
practical difference on the ground. We have tried to
work constructively with all key players to that end.
The draft resolution that we put forth yesterday is a
manifestation of those efforts. Our objectives in putting
forth the draft resolution are the same that have guided
our engagement on this issue since joining the Council,
and the same that led my Prime Minister to convene a
12/26

30/11/2016

high-level meeting on the issue during our September
presidency: to reduce the violence, restore the ceasefire,
enable humanitarian assistance to reach those most in
need and create space for the resumption of political
talks on an end to the conflict.
A key focus has necessarily been on seeking
to address the grave situation unfolding in Aleppo.
Over the past few months, we have seen the presence
of a few hundred Al-Nusra Front terrorists in eastern
Aleppo used to justify an all-out attack on more than
250,000 civilians. Every hospital in opposition-held
areas has been destroyed. No humanitarian assistance
has been allowed in since July, despite several pauses
in the airstrikes. We have seen indiscriminate attacks
on eastern Aleppo that have killed and injured many in
western Aleppo. In the past few weeks, it has become
clear that the Syrian Government has eschewed efforts
to establish a ceasefire and resume political talks in
favour of pursuing a military outcome. The result is
another humanitarian catastrophe. We urgently need to
halt the hostilities in Aleppo in order to get humanitarian
assistance to those who so desperately need it. We call
on all parties to work in coordination with the United
Nations to ensure humanitarian assistance is delivered
to those who remain in eastern Aleppo.
We are disappointed that the parties have not yet
been able to agree on terms to implement the United
Nations four-point plan. We also need urgent action to
protect those fleeing eastern Aleppo and assurances
regarding the fate of those taken into custody by the
Syrian Government. The draft resolution that New
Zealand, Egypt and Spain submitted to Council
members yesterday seeks to start a process to put the
protection of civilians at our highest priority. The text
represents the minimum that is required for a credible
response from the Council, and we urge all Council
members to support it. However, it will mean little
unless we see urgent changes in the behaviour of the
parties themselves, including some at this table.
Some may argue that our text addresses yesterday’s
issues and is no longer relevant to the situation on the
ground, especially in Aleppo. An immediate ceasefire
in Aleppo would undoubtedly address the most
pressing humanitarian needs to get desperately needed
humanitarian and medical assistance to traumatized
civilians and to allow those civilians who want to get
out to get out safely to a destination of their choice.
16-40719

30/11/2016

The situation in the Middle East

Some may argue that the implementation of our
resolution would give aid to the terrorists. We cannot
exclude the possibility that terrorist groups may try
to use a ceasefire to their advantage, but despite the
rhetoric of terrorism that is regularly heaped on this
conflict, the conflict between the Syrian Government
and its people is not fundamentally about terrorism.
Terrorism is an incident of the conflict, not its cause
or rationale. In sacrificing the lives of hundreds of
civilians and putting hundreds of thousands into misery
and suffering cannot be justified by waving the banner
of counter-terrorism.
Like Staffan de Mistura, we do not accept that the
military advances into Aleppo will lead to the objective
towards which the Council has allegedly been working
for so many years — a political settlement leading to
a stable and unified Syria, living at peace with itself
and its neighbours. While our immediate focus must
be on saving lives, we urge all parties to the conflict to
recommit themselves to a political solution and a return
to talks and a pathway towards sustainable peace and
national reconciliation.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy De Mistura, Under-Secretary-General
O’Brien and Mr. Cappelaere for their appropriately
grim briefings.
Like my British colleague, I would like to respond
to the question that Under-Secretary-General O’Brien
said is posed to him wherever he goes, whether in
Syria or in the region, or when meeting with citizens
or politicians. Why cannot the Security Council come
together to find a solution? I have to say that we grapple
with a lot of really difficult questions. That is not one of
them. It is a very straightforward and very unfortunate
fact that the Security Council does not come together
to answer the cries of the civilians we have heard about
again today because Russia, a permanent member, does
not want to. That is it. It is very straightforward.
The words we are hearing out of eastern Aleppo
now are as dark as any we have heard in our lifetimes.
A “death trip” — that is what civilians are calling
their journey to flee eastern Aleppo, according to a
teacher who as of yesterday had decided to stay there.
According to the Red Cross, 20,000 people have fled
eastern Aleppo just since Saturday — 20,000 people in
four days on a death trip. One fleeing woman was seen
pushing a wheelchair with her dead mother in it. She

S/PV.7822

told a reporter, “My mother died of hunger”, and said
that they had almost nothing to eat for five months.
In another part of the city, amateur footage showed
stray body parts scattered among debris where an air
strike had reportedly just killed at least 20 people.
Survivors wept over the remains. Planes — Syrian
Government planes — take brief breaks from bombing
runs to blanket eastern Aleppo with leaflets. We have
talked about leaflets here before, but one of the leaflets
dropped a few days ago reportedly read:
“Do not be stupid. Think about yourselves and
your families. Victory is coming for the Syrian
Arab Army. Think quickly because time is passing
and it is not on your side.”
We all know that time is not on the side of the
civilians trapped in eastern Aleppo. The longer the
bombing raids go on and the greater their intensity, the
higher the odds that they or someone they love will be
maimed or killed. But leaving carries extraordinary
risks, such as being detained or disappeared by regime
soldiers or killed on the death trip itself, where snipers
are having a field day, it seems.
I would ask Council members and all citizens
of the world to just force themselves to take a break
from their day and watch the images from eastern
Aleppo — parents cradling their children in agony;
civilians on foot mowed down while carrying their
suitcases, which lie beside their lifeless bodies. We will
likely hear from the representatives of Syria and the
Russian Federation today that these images are made
up; they are propaganda. That is an argument we have
been hearing in the past few meetings.
Now I have to acknowledge that both the Syrian
Government and the Russian Government have
significant expertise in making things up. They are great
authorities in general on propaganda, but we have to
recognize that they have an interest in trying to create a
post-truth world where all facts are contested and there
is no truth but just one person’s claim or one country’s
claim or one party’s claim against another. Syria and
Russia, as they lie and kill civilians in Syria, count on
there being no referee who will adjudicate truths, on
the one hand, from lies, falsehoods and fictions, on the
other. That is their gamble.
But we have referees. The United Nations briefers
we have just heard from are our referees. They have
no interest in doing anything other than calling it as

16-4071913/26

S/PV.7822

The situation in the Middle East

it is. They are independent; they are humanitarians.
The carnage is a fact. It is a truth and it is now. The
14,000 terrified civilians, some completely hysterical,
who have been driven into Government-held territory
under gunfire and air strike attacks are also our
referees. Endless numbers of authenticated photos and
videos of human-caused slaughter are our referees.
There is no denying the truth and the facts, not even
in the upside-down land which the perpetrators of this
slaughter inhabit.
For months since the siege of eastern Aleppo began,
we have met in the Council to demand the basics. We
have called for the Al-Assad regime and Russia to
allow unfettered humanitarian access to the Syrians in
the city and to stop systematically bombing the city’s
hospitals, schools and markets and the bases of the first
responders. Those are appeals that the Security Council
should not even have to request — should not ever have
to request. The Council should not have to demand
compliance with international humanitarian laws or
with our prior resolutions, yet here we are urging two
States Members of the United Nations, one of which
holds a permanent seat on the Council, to abide by
those basic standards and to stop ripping up the rule
books, which will have effects way beyond Syria for
our children and grandchildren.
When it seemed impossible to imagine a more
horrific situation, in fact the crisis got worse. The
past five days have witnessed one of the most extreme
bombardments of civilian areas in the entire life of the
conflict, ravaging what was left of the once majestic
eastern part of Aleppo. The objective is simple — to
take eastern Aleppo by force with no regard for the
consequences it may have for innocent civilians. We are
all in the broken-record club. We are all broken records
on the Council — including those who are actively
involved in carrying out the siege of Aleppo — in
saying that there is no military solution to this brutal
conflict and that the only way out is a political solution.
But that is pablum. The regime and Russia believe
the opposite. They are pursuing their approach; they
are strategic. They are following a blueprint. They
believe in a military solution. The choice they are
giving civilians is explicit. It is the same choice they
included in a previous leaflet: leave or be annihilated.
For those who choose to leave, the regime and
its Russian allies have promised residents of eastern
Aleppo passage through so-called safe routes. I am
14/26

30/11/2016

sure we will hear more about these routes today. And
if Syrian and Russia propaganda is any predictor, we
may hear how civilians upon escaping are embracing
regime forces as liberators. Do they really expect us
to believe that civilians who have been starved — who
have not received a morsel of food since July — have
been barrel-bombed, mortared, pick-off by snipers
and threatened with annihilation are likely to meet the
people responsible for those horrors as their saviours?
Is that how it works? Is that how any of us would feel
or act?
The reason people are fleeing by the thousands is
not because they trust a regime that has killed hundreds
of thousands of its own people and systematically
tortured tens of thousands more Syrians in its gulags,
tagging the bodies of those it kills with serial numbers.
No, it is because they know that there is a good chance
they will be pulverized if they stay where they are.
As we all know, and as others have argued
persuasively here today, Egypt, Spain and New Zealand
have presented a draft resolution that would require
an immediate halt to military action in Aleppo for a
minimum of 10 days. If implemented, this halt would
give the civilians of eastern Aleppo a brief break from
the relentless bombardment. It would allow some aid
to reach people who are surviving by digging through
trash for scraps and by eating weeds. It would allow for
an orderly departure facilitated by the United Nations.
It would also get at least some medicine to doctors who
have been compelled to operate on patients without
anaesthetic, sometimes in the middle of the street
alongside their bombed-out hospitals and clinics. This
draft resolution should be brought to a vote without
delay, and it should be adopted with the Council’s
unanimous support. This is a no-brainer. Anyone who
says otherwise does not have the survival of Syrian
civilians at heart.
But let us also be real. While any pause in the
butchery that we are witnessing in eastern Aleppo
would be welcome — and we are in favour of it — a
brief pause to get a bit of food and medicine in before
the savage bombing resumes is not a solution. It is
barely even a Band-Aid. It is a sign in some ways of
just how low our bar has become.
Russia may again use its veto to prevent the Security
Council from offering help to the desperate civilians
in eastern Aleppo, as it did in October. If it does so,
placing its military aims over the survival of Syrian
16-40719

30/11/2016

The situation in the Middle East

men, women and children, Member States must swiftly
consider the other tools we can employ at the United
Nations, including through the General Assembly, to
apply more effective pressure.
Let me conclude. Umm Leen is the mother of seven
kids in eastern Aleppo. She has already lost one child
during the war — her 12-year-old boy — who was
killed when his heart was pierced by shrapnel. In the
midst of the siege now, she worries that she will lose
more. Her daughter is beset with an awful cough, but
there is nowhere to take her since the children’s hospital
was bombed. But her sickest is her youngest child, a
baby she had during the siege, who is now just three
months old. The baby has been dogged by serious health
problems since he was born prematurely. He is grossly
underweight and routinely has difficulty breathing.
Without access to baby formula, Umm Leen has taken
to feeding him ground-up rice. When parents in Aleppo
have a new baby, Umm Leen said,
“some believe they are making up for the children
they have lost. But for me in these conditions I
think it is a huge mistake. After I gave birth to him,
I felt so sad. Did I give birth to him to see a life
like this?”
This is what it is to be a parent in eastern Aleppo,
where mother and fathers live in perpetual fear that
their children will be taken from them, whether by the
flash of a barrel bomb or the slow, gnawing attrition
of illness — man-made illness — and starvation. The
Security Council must not stand by as more and more
children like Umm Leen’s hang in the balance. A pause
is the absolute least we can do, but we can and must
do better than a pause. We must continue to work to
end this conflict — and end it not by the devastating
military means that the Al-Assad regime and Russia are
intent on pursuing, which will only prolong and deepen
the suffering we are now witnessing.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
have recently been witnessing a steady escalation of the
situation in some parts of Syria, including Aleppo, with
the humanitarian situation there steadily worsening,
triggering the international community’s widespread
concern. China feels for the people who are suffering
in Syria and condemns any attack targeting civilians
and civilian facilities.
To ease the tension in Aleppo and other areas, the
international community should advance its efforts
along four tracks in a balanced way. The four tracks are

S/PV.7822

ceasefire, political negotiation, humanitarian assistance
and the joint fight against terrorism.
The international community should urge all
parties in Syria to end hostilities without delay and
work unremittingly to reach an agreement on the
relevant issues through peace talks. The international
community should continue to step up humanitarian
relief to Aleppo. China welcomes the concrete
initiatives taken by Russia and the Syrian Government
to increase assistance to civilians and hopes that United
Nations aid agencies will strengthen coordination with
Russia and the Syrian Government to jointly ease
the humanitarian situation in Syria, pursuant to the
United Nations principles governing humanitarian
assistance. Terrorist groups continue to launch attacks
in Aleppo and other areas, causing civilian casualties
and blocking humanitarian efforts, which calls for
greater coordination by the international community to
resolutely combat by uniform standards all the terrorist
groups designated by the Security Council.
How things transpire and evolve in Aleppo, as a
subset of the Syrian issue, is part and parcel of the grand
scheme of things pertaining to the question of Syria.
A comprehensive solution to de-escalate the situation
in Aleppo lies in an effort to remain seized of the big
picture in Syria, to hold fast to the prospect of a political
settlement as the overarching direction, to maintain
the role of the United Nations as the primary player
exercising good offices and to continue supporting the
work of Special Envoy De Mistura towards the early
resumption of the Geneva talks.
Any action taken by the Council on the question
of Syria must be truly conducive to de-escalation, to
pushing all parties in Syria to an immediate cessation
of hostilities in support of, and in cooperation with,
United Nations humanitarian efforts, and to facilitating
a Syrian-owned and Syrian-led political process under
the good offices of the United Nations, so that a solution
that is acceptable to all parties may be reached. The
parties should demonstrate their goodwill, meet one
another half way, build mutual trust and jointly strive
towards achieving a comprehensive, fair and proper
solution to the question of Syria.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Rightly or wrongly, humanitarian issues have
recently increasingly become a subject for the Security
Council’s attention. We think that it is now high time
to hold a substantive discussion on the Middle East and

16-4071915/26

S/PV.7822

The situation in the Middle East

North Africa and organize a thematic debate on the topic
of the catastrophic consequences of the destruction of
the statehood of countries of the region as a result of
foreign interference.
The number of victims are in the millions.
However, we have heard nothing relevant from those
who are guilty for those tragedies. Indeed, the war
was launched by the invasion of Iraq spearheaded by
the United States and the United Kingdom, and it has
effectively been continuing for 13 years. The collapse
of a prosperous Libya led to the destabilization of vast
swaths of North Africa. Syria was turned into a conflict
zone of rivalry for regional leadership, with there being
no qualms about using the potential of openly terrorist
organizations. Moreover, the humanitarian tragedy
that we have heard about today is not considered to be
sufficient justification for abandoning that bankrupt
policy. Some have sought to hide their failed geopolitical
adventures through cynical sanctimony, and even lies,
which is something that we often run up against when
discussing the subject of Syria in the Security Council;
today’s meeting has been no exception.
The humanitarian situation in Syria cannot be
discussed separately from the other challenges set out
in Security Council decisions and by the International
Syria Support Group, namely, combating terrorism and
seeking political settlement and the establishment of a
regime for the cessation of hostilities. In that regard, we
see a clear contradiction. It seems that Mr. De Mistura
has forgotten that his primary role is to promote the
political process. He cannot find it in himself to resume
Syrian talks, which were suspended back in May, or to
clearly admit why that happened, that is, the complete
unwillingness of the opposition to hold serious talks.
We hope that in Mr. De Mistura’s statement to the
Security Council on 8 December we will finally hear
something concrete.
We need to acknowledge the failure of the concept
of “moderate opposition”. It was never convincingly
embodied at the political level, and, militarily speaking,
the few opposition fighters turned out to be soldiers of
the Al-Nusra Front and other extremist groups. It seems
there is an attempt to offset the United Nations inertia at
the political level with one-upmanship on humanitarian
issues: Who can make the grander statement? Who can
propose the more dazzling initiative? However, when
matters come to a head, those initiatives are either
rejected by the opposition, or the United Nations itself
16/26

30/11/2016

is unable to implement them. That fully applies to the
situation in eastern Aleppo.
We share the grave concerns about the plight of
civilians in eastern Aleppo, but easing their suffering
will not come about by halting the counter-terrorist
operation. Leaving Syria and Iraq as terrorist caliphates
or calling on terrorists to use a humanist approach are
also not alternatives. The current situation could have
been avoided if the promise given to us at the end of
February by the Central Intelligence Agency Director,
Mr. Brennan, had been kept, namely, to separate, in the
space of two or three weeks, the so-called moderate
militants, if any even exist, from the terrorists. That
promise was repeatedly renewed, including at the
highest level, but still nothing has been done. It is clear
that we were being led by the nose the whole time.
Either our United States partners and their allies were
in actual fact unable, or did not have the resources, to
keep their promise, or rather they simply did not want
to. Instead, they continued their dangerous attempts to
use terrorists as a tool for regime change in Syria.
It comes as no surprise that it was France and
the United Kingdom, which have long and blatantly
clamoured for regime change in Syria, including
providing generous support to militants, that initiated
today’s meeting — out of their supposed concern for
the situation in eastern Aleppo. In fact, the real reason
is different. The bandits that they, among others, have
so coddled and fuelled are at the point of defeat. Almost
half of that part of the city has been liberated. It could
be the biggest moral victory of the Syrian army since
2012, when jihadist units were sent to the northern
capital and started to gain a foothold, sponsored and
armed from abroad.
Today’s meeting is a desperate attempt to use the
Security Council to save terrorists from destruction
in Aleppo. Incidentally, the constant blocking of the
proposal to place on the sanctions list of the Security
Council such terrorist groups as Ahrar Al-Sham, Jaysh
Al-Islam and others has the same aim. It is clear that
any help given to militants in Aleppo is categorically
support for Al-Nusra terrorists, since it is that group
that is on the Security Council sanctions list and
that is directing the military operations of all of the
illegal armed groups in the neighbourhoods that have
been captured.
We vehemently condemn any attempts to protect
terrorists, including any political action under a
16-40719

30/11/2016

The situation in the Middle East

humanitarian pretext, which, sadly, United Nations
humanitarian workers have been dragged into. How
else are we to interpret, for example, the fact that the
200,000 residents of besieged Deir ez-Zor, which even
by the United Nations analysis makes up a quarter of
all besieged Syrians, only receive 1 per cent of the
humanitarian assistance? Why has nobody even talked
about the fact that the pseudo-humanitarian White
Helmets, which were recently nominated for a Nobel
Prize, made an incredibly cynical video clip of the
rescue operations that they had supposedly carried out,
which they posted online? Where is the condemnation
of all of those unforgivable fake allegations that we
should expect from the supposedly objective, impartial
Western media? Why was there no condemnation of
that by the United States representative earlier today,
who is a professional journalist herself? The standards
of United States journalism, and even policy, have now
sunk to tabloid level, startling the whole world, and
disinformation has become a typical tactic of United
States diplomacy.
The fact that humanitarian problems do not seem
to genuinely interest Paris, London, Washington or
some others is clear from their indifferent attitudes
to the suffering of the people in Mosul. Nor does the
disastrous humanitarian situation in Yemen seem
to bother them either. There over 80 per cent of the
population is in need of assistance. As for Aleppo,
following the liberation of the northern sector of
eastern Aleppo, thousands of people who were being
held by militants as human shields have finally had a
chance to leave the city to receive food assistance and
basic essentials. According to the information we have
on those neighbourhoods, 6,500 people have already
left, including 2,800 children.
The Russian Federation continues to provide
emergency humanitarian assistance to the residents of
Aleppo. At the instruction of the President of Russia,
the Ministry of Defence is sending a special medical
unit, which includes a multipurpose hospital with 100
beds and a specialized paediatric therapy department,
with a daily capacity for mobile/ambulatory treatment
of 420 people. The Ministry of Emergency Situations
is also delivering a field hospital with 50 places for
stationary treatment, with the possibility of providing
ambulatory assistance to 200 patients per day.
We trust that the necessary humanitarian assistance
will be provided to civilians who are able to escape
their captors by United Nations humanitarian actors,

S/PV.7822

which have focused their particular attention on eastern
Aleppo. Incidentally, I was surprised how my United
States colleague, who unfortunately left the meeting,
argued that the residents of eastern Aleppo were
unlikely to move to Government-controlled western
Aleppo because the Government was torturing them.
However, it seems that she is wrong. United Nations
humanitarian workers have repeatedly told us that, in
all cases, when Syrian residents come out of a siege,
they always end up going to Government-controlled
areas. It therefore seems it is the terrorists, not the
Government, whom they consider their torturers.
Against that backdrop, we do not understand
the wish of the so-called humanitarian troika of the
Security Council to force through a non-consensual
draft resolution on Aleppo. That will not help anything.
Rather, it will see a repeat of the dangerous situation we
had on 8 October, when the French delegation tried to
put forward a draft text (S/2016/846) that did not have
the support of all Council members (see S/PV.7785).
Without taking into account our concerns, no draft
resolution will be adopted. We have seen such attempts
before. Calls for unity in the Council alternate with
hopeless draft texts being put forward for vote. It is a
pointless tactic.
A key condition for any ceasefire and for providing
humanitarian assistance is separating the non-terrorist
militants from Al-Nusra. There need to be clear,
mandatory, unconditional instructions that terrorists
who are on the Security Council’s terrorist list should
be excluded from any ceasefire regime. We propose to
the troika not to be so hasty with votes and, given the
current situation, to think about how they could modify
their draft resolution to reflect the United Nations
humanitarian plan for Aleppo. Overall, Russia supports
all impartial international humanitarian efforts and
is ready to work in the interest of implementing such
efforts. Incidentally, the Castello Road has been
fully freed up now and can be used for the passage
of transportation carrying humanitarian assistance.
Sadly, before, the United States, notwithstanding all its
humanitarian rhetoric, refused to stand with our troops
to guarantee the Castello Road delivery of humanitarian
assistance. But at present we do not need the help of the
United States nor the consent of the opposition, so now
we hope that the Castello Road will be effectively used
by the United Nations.
However, for the plan to succeed, it obviously must
first be properly prepared. We need firm guarantees

16-4071917/26

S/PV.7822

The situation in the Middle East

from militants for the signatures of their commanders
that they will not obstruct the passage of humanitarian
convoys. Relevant guarantees must also be given by the
United Nations itself. It is important to have an advance
list of victims and casualties for evacuation and lists of
medical personnel for rotation. We need to have an idea
of the specific types of humanitarian assistance and
arrangements for distribution among those in need. All
steps need to be agreed to by the Syrian Government
and all groups operating in eastern Aleppo. Otherwise,
it will just turn into another propaganda ruse that has
no chance of succeeding.
In terms of separating militants, we need to call
on them and the so-called local councils to compile
lists of Al-Nusra Front terrorists that need to be taken
out of the city, and also lists of armed individuals
who themselves wish to leave eastern Aleppo. If our
Western colleagues are truly concerned about the plight
of civilians in eastern Aleppo, and indeed in the whole
of Syria, then they need above all to take genuine and
practical steps — stop supporting terrorists and lift
unilateral sanctions. They need to provide actual help,
which Russia is doing, and not try to use sensitive
humanitarian problems to advance or achieve their own
political goals.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank the delegations
of the United Kingdom and France for initiating this
emergency meeting, and the Senegalese presidency for
organizing it. Let me also express thanks to our briefers
for their remarkable yet sobering perspectives on the
latest developments in Syria.
Emboldened by the military momentum and the
full-fledged support it receives from its backers, the
Syrian regime shows no mercy and appears to be
ready to sink the whole of Syria into bloodshed of a
magnitude yet unseen, which is something that we have
warned the Security Council about since we joined it
11 months ago.
According to the media and independent sources,
just yesterday the Syrian military committed a horrible
massacre in the neighbourhood of Bab Al-Nairab,
which claimed the lives of 25 civilians, of which most
were women and children. They were hit by air strikes
while trying to escape eastern Aleppo on foot; they
were ordinary civilians, not terrorists. The military
operation in Aleppo is not about countering the terrorist
threat, but about crushing the opposition to the Syrian
regime. It is about gaining ground. The control of
18/26

30/11/2016

territory and the reanimation of the Syrian regime are
the primary aims of those who invest military, financial
and diplomatic assets and manpower in supporting the
lifeline of the brutal dictatorship. But in fact, the only
result of the ongoing operation to retake Aleppo will be
the strengthening of the terrorist groups inside Syria
and throughout the wider region. Al-Qaida will benefit
immensely by acquiring much stronger capabilities for
recruiting new members in Syria among those wishing
to continue resistance against the Al-Assad regime and
those who are discouraged by the continuing absence
of a political solution. The international campaign to
eradicate Da’esh will also suffer a huge blow.
We are further dismayed by the fact that, instead of
choosing to go along with the Special Envoy’s initiative
for Aleppo, the regime forces and its allies are pursuing
the path of military offenses and the annihilation
of their opponents. In our opinion, that proves one
thing — our problem is not a lack of strong and wellthought-out initiatives and resolutions, but rather a
lack of commitment, monitoring, accountability and
implementation. Aleppo is the bifurcation point of the
Syrian conflict. Damascus and its allies are using the
current escalation to support their long-term strategy
to render the city uninhabitable and to depopulate its
opposition-controlled districts.
Reducing Aleppo to ashes and then calling for
political talks is not an option, or maybe it is according
to the Syrian and Russian military. Al-Assad and
Russia have gotten one step closer to turning Aleppo
into another Grozny. The world should not sit idly by
and let that happen. We call on Russia and the Syrian
regime to respect the agreed obligations, including the
cessation of hostilities, particularly in Aleppo, and to
secure the possibility of providing humanitarian aid to
the besieged areas. The world wonders how many more
meetings of the Council need to be convened to achieve
such a simple and humane goal.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to express my
gratitude to Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura, UnderSecretary-General Stephen O’Brien and UNICEF
Regional Director Geert Cappelaere.
Less than ten days ago, at the monthly briefing
here in the Chamber on the humanitarian situation in
Syria (see S/PV.7817), I said that our meetings must
not simply be venues for expressing our concern about
the devastating circumstances, but rather we must take
action and achieve concrete results. Unfortunately,
16-40719

30/11/2016

The situation in the Middle East

the Security Council has not achieved concrete results
since that time.
Today the briefers described the disastrous results
of the escalation of the recent fighting in Aleppo.
Japan commends all humanitarian workers for their
invaluable, courageous efforts to seek every opportunity
to ensure protection and access. But the severe shortage
of food rations, health essentials and other lifesaving
supplies in eastern Aleppo is posing a grave threat to
the population as winter approaches.
We have repeatedly called on the relevant States
to exert the strongest possible influence on the
fighting parties. We must do absolutely everything
possible to alleviate the humanitarian crisis in Aleppo,
so as to protect civilians and medical personnel,
undertake urgent medical evacuations and rehabilitate
medical services. Japan reiterates its support for
the co-penholders — Egypt, New Zealand and
Spain — in their efforts to arrive at a draft resolution.
We also support the initiative to unify the voice of the
international community in the General Assembly. The
Security Council must take action and should not be
viewed as incapable of responding to a humanitarian
crisis of such magnitude.
I heard with keen interest what Special Envoy
De Mistura had to say. He affirmed his view that
military logic is prevailing on both sides. I agree with
the Special Envoy that a stable and durable solution,
one that ensures non-recurrence of terrorist threats,
cannot be achieved through military means. We
must be persistent in seeking a negotiated settlement.
Special Envoy De Mistura told us that, when he meets
the Council on 8 December, he would like to explain
some options that exist. I look forward to listening to
him. In the meantime, we must deal with the urgent
humanitarian crisis. We must unite to uphold the
strategy and take action.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I thank Special Envoy De
Mistura, Mr. O’Brien of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and Mr. Cappelaere of
UNICEF for their respective briefings.
Today’s briefings once again highlighted the
horrifying situation in eastern Aleppo, as the war in
the Syria continues to become even more brutal and
deadly. Just last week, we listened to Mr. O’Brien urge
the Security Council to take action to stop the carnage
in eastern Aleppo (see S/PV.7817). Regrettably, our
continued failure to converge on efforts to end the

S/PV.7822

suffering of Syrians has led to more intense aerial
bombardment and a ferocious ground assault on the
besieged area of eastern Aleppo. We remain gravely
concerned that the incessant and indiscriminate
military offensive against civilians in eastern Aleppo
has now forced some 25,000 people to flee their already
destroyed homes. It is alarming that, in their attempt to
flee for safety, their fate remains uncertain. We are also
appalled that the military escalation has killed scores
of innocent civilians, many of whom are women and
children, and injured thousands more.
The chilling operation in eastern Aleppo in
recent days makes a mockery of the Security Councilmandated ceasefire in Aleppo. We echo the sentiment
that it is never premature to save lives, and we call on
all members of the Council to work towards mandating
a ceasefire, even if for a brief period, to allow for a safe
and unfettered humanitarian operation. We also urge
all parties to the conflict to immediately sign on and
agree to the United Nations humanitarian four-point
plan for Aleppo.
We have collectively called for a political solution
to the Syrian conflict at each and every deliberation
by the Council on this issue. It seems that it is one
perspective that is shared by all Council members.
Yet the military offensive and escalation of violence
continues unabated.
The advance of Syrian forces into eastern Aleppo
signifies that the fighting in the coming days will only
intensify. The carpet bombing of the city only reflects
that the pretext of fighting terrorism is no longer valid
and the aim now clearly is to gain a military advantage
and capture the strategic importance of Aleppo. Even as
the fighting in eastern Aleppo is likely to intensify, the
deliberate and indiscriminate attacks against civilians
and civilian infrastructure, including hospitals and
schools, must not be tolerated. We require no reminder
that attacks against schools and hospitals are among the
grave violations against children.
We strongly condemn the use of barrel bombs,
which the Government previously committed not to
use. There can be no justification for the use of barrel
bombs in civilian populated areas — an act that reflects
blatant disregard for human life.
Powerless children, who account for more than
one third of the population of eastern Aleppo, bear
the biggest brunt of the violence in the besieged city.
Starvation, bombs, burns, the absence of medical care

16-4071919/26

S/PV.7822

The situation in the Middle East

and sieges are among the many ways that the children
of Aleppo are dying. In each report received by the
Council, more than half of the casualties are children,
thereby raising the question of what we are we going to
do about it.
We call upon those countries in and outside of the
Council with influence over the Syrian Government to
leverage their influence to stop the carnage and resolve
this protracted conflict. We have the chance to right the
wrong and to stop further suffering. In fact, we have the
obligation to ensure that the Council responds to this
depressing development. The coming days are crucial,
and it is our sincere hope that the long-held silence
on the part of the Council on the Syrian conflict will
be broken.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank
Messrs. De Mistura, O’Brien and Cappelaere for
their briefings.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela expresses
its concern about the humanitarian situation in Syria,
especially in the city of Aleppo. That is why we value
the efforts of the humanitarian agencies, which, at great
risk and in situations of all-out conflict, do extraordinary
work to help millions of Syrians. We appreciate the fact
that the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, together with the
Syrian Government, has helped thousands of people by
providing food, medicine and other necessities in the
recently liberated areas. Of special importance is the
delivery of food and medicine to Foa’a, Kefraya, Madaya
and Zabadani under the four-towns agreements. In that
context, we support initiatives aimed at alleviating the
humanitarian tragedy in Aleppo. Nevertheless, such
proposals need to take into account the nature and
scope of terrorism as a destabilizing factor.
Our country has been denouncing the threat
of terrorism to peace and stability in Syria and the
region for some time now. As Mr. De Mistura said, the
existence of terrorism in Aleppo is clear. The Al-Nusra
Front, with the support of various armed groups that
some have described as moderate, holds more than
200,000 people hostage and unable to leave the area
under its control. The Syrian Government therefore
has a legitimate right to defend its sovereignty and
territorial integrity against terrorism.
We therefore welcome the fact that areas of eastern
Aleppo have been liberated where more than 90,000
people live. It is a paradox that the so-called moderate
20/26

30/11/2016

opposition says that in Aleppo and other parts of the
country there are people who, instead of fighting
terrorists from the Al-Nusra Front and associated
groups, are preventing civilians from leaving by
way of military operations. Since October, they have
blocked and rejected a series of humanitarian pauses in
eastern Aleppo.
The humanitarian situation in Syria is worsening
by the day, as indicated by today’s briefers. We
therefore hope that we can achieve a minimum level of
consensus to facilitate the entry of humanitarian aid,
without halting the fighting against terrorist groups and
their affiliates.
As Mr. Cappelaere mentioned, Syrians, and
especially children, are asking “Why?”. We also wonder
why some members of the international community are
continuing to finance non-State armed groups with
the single goal of achieving national interests without
caring for the suffering of millions of people. That
is why it is necessary to end the interventionist and
destabilizing policies that deny the Syrian people their
right to live in peace as a sovereign and free nation.
Finally, we would reiterate that overcoming the
humanitarian crisis is linked to ending the armed
conflict. That is why we reaffirm our support to
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General Staffan de
Mistura, in his efforts towards peace aimed at finding
a peaceful political solution to the Syrian armed
conflict. As tragic as the situation is on the ground, it
cannot be an obstacle to the parties negotiating without
preconditions. As all members of the Council have said,
political solutions are the only way to grapple with the
reality. Prolonging the conflict will lead only to greater
suffering and destruction.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank Mr. De Mistura,
Mr. O’Brien and Mr. Cappelaere for their briefings
and commend their tireless efforts to assist Syria and
Syrians in securing a better present and brighter future.
We acknowledge our regret to be involved in this
acrimonious debate over the unbearable fate of the
Syrian people. Like the briefers and Security Council
members who preceded us, we are deeply distressed
about the intensified military operations, including
ground offensives and aerial bombardments, over the
past few days in eastern Aleppo. For almost two years,
we have called on all parties to consider the devastating
impact of the conflict on the civilian population and to
resort to dialogue in order to find appropriate solutions
16-40719

30/11/2016

The situation in the Middle East

to the humanitarian and political issues affecting the
Syrian population, including Aleppo.
However, the reality is that all sides have, first,
chosen the military option and, secondly, intend to
continue receiving logistical and military support,
including heavy weaponry being supplied to the various
opposition groups by international stakeholders,
including some prominent members of the Council,
while the Government is seemingly determined to
regain control of significant rebel-held areas and
reinstate the authority of the State in Aleppo and the
territorial integrity of the country.
We fully agree as to the need to urgently put in place
the means to end the hostilities and to allow humanitarian
aid to get through unhindered. The number of civilian
casualties and displaced persons is inexcusable, and we
strongly condemn all indiscriminate attacks against
civilians and civilian infrastructure.
Against such a backdrop, what are the options? To
submit yet another draft resolution, probably to no avail,
while civilians continue to die? To call urgent meetings
of the Security Council? To issue pious condemnations
of the escalating violence while continuing to supply
weapons to the rebels of the so-called moderate
opposition or to crypto-terrorists? Or to end the
irrational policy of “Al-Assad must go”, accept the
Syrian Government’s sovereignty and resolutely pursue
ways to bring about a political solution to the crisis?
To conclude, we wish to reiterate our position that
we in no way condone violence against the civilian
population in Syria or anywhere else. However, we
also repudiate the financial and logistical support
being provided to non-State armed groups and to rebels
who openly cooperate with terrorist groups and who
commit grave violations of human rights, including
using civilians as human shields. This is the situation
prevailing in eastern Aleppo: a civilian population
being held hostage by armed groups and terrorists that,
if given a chance, will surely flee to another life free
from the yoke of extremists and terrorists.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I, too,
should like to thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Mr. Stephen
O’Brien and Mr. Cappelaere for their tireless work.
Let me be slightly cynical today and say that we have
come to this meeting and have heard more of the same,
just worse. We are continuing our discussions as bombs
continue to rain down on hospitals, schools and civilian

S/PV.7822

infrastructure. Staffan de Mistura said, and several of
us have taken note of his comments, that the logic of
war prevails today on both sides, as both have clearly
decided to continue to pursue the military option. What
he did not say is that this war is utterly barbaric and
does not even respect those incomprehensible things
known as the rules of war.
Using this military logic, the strategic importance
of Aleppo to both sides has swept everything aside — all
human and humanitarian values. When we came to the
Council, the primary concerns were the horrors taking
place in the medieval cities of the Kefraya, Madaya
and Fo’ah. But these fell away from our consideration
at the same time as Aleppo started to gain strategic
importance, and then we started to consider the horrors
of Aleppo, which, at another meeting, we referred to as
carnage and a massacre. Today all of those fighting in
Aleppo are guided by the barbaric logic of war and are
indiscriminately bombing civilian structures, homes,
schools and hospitals.
All of them claim to be fighting terrorists. But we
see the bodies of children being pulled from the rubble
of schools; they presumably were not terrorists. We see
the bodies of patients being pulled from the rubble of
hospitals; they presumably were not terrorists. We see
the bodies of women and elderly people being pulled
from the ruins of homes and buildings; they presumably
were not terrorists either. But apparently it is widely
believed that there are terrorists on all sides. And
therefore from east to west, from west to east, from the
air or from whatever provenance, the bombs continue to
fall and people continue to die.
Some time ago, in this very Chamber, we quoted
the lyrics of a song by Bob Dylan, that notable North
American poet, in which he asks, “How many deaths
will it take until [a man] knows that too many people
have died?” There is a very simple formula to stop the
massacre: an immediate, unconditional ceasefire. That
would put an end to it. We deem the draft resolution
that Egypt, New Zealand and Spain have been working
on to be a useful instrument and therefore stress that
we should give the people of Syria a chance through an
immediate, unconditional ceasefire.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Senegal.
Whatever one’s point of view on the Syrian
conflict, which is entering its sixth year, one image is
unavoidable: that of a country ravaged by war; a country

16-4071921/26

S/PV.7822

The situation in the Middle East

in ruins; a land of fire, blood and tears. The situation
there is one of the worst humanitarian disasters of
our time. The grim toll it is taking is unending. How
many orphans, how many widows and widowers, how
many elderly people and children have been abandoned
to their sad fate without any assistance? How many
people have been wounded or maimed for life? How
many are now refugees or displaced persons? No one
really knows.
What is happening in Syria is untenable. The
bombs keep raining down. Meeting after meeting
takes place, negotiation after negotiation is held,
resolution after resolution is adopted even as human
lives continue to be annihilated and homes, markets,
schools and hospitals destroyed, in violation of all
norms of international humanitarian law. Despite the
laudable efforts of humanitarian organizations and
good intentions, an entire people is dying and an entire
country is crumbling, along with its economy and its
centuries-old sociocultural heritage.
How much longer can this go on? Yet the cost of
peace is never higher than the cost of war. That is why
Senegal hopes that a negotiated solution to the crisis in
Syria is still possible.
Those were the sentiments expressed by my
President, Mr. Macky Sall, when he addressed the
Council on 21 September, in this very Chamber, during
the New Zealand presidency (see S/PV.7774). The
Senegalese delegation thanks France and the United
Kingdom for having taken the initiative to hold this
meeting, which once again is providing us with the
opportunity to consider the humanitarian situation
in Syria.
The Senegalese delegation would like to reiterate
its call for a cessation of hostilities and in particular
for a humanitarian truce so as to allow humanitarian
agencies to provide assistance to those who need it,
especially in Aleppo. We would also like to recall the
obligation incumbent upon all warring parties to respect
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law. I would like to pay tribute to members of the
medical and humanitarian assistance community, who
continue to risk their lives to help the Syrian people in
their quest for peace and a somewhat normal life and
dignity. My delegation takes this opportunity to call on
the various parties to the dispute to allow humanitarian
agencies proper access in order to meet the monthly
humanitarian targets.
22/26

30/11/2016

As much a priority as it might be, the catastrophic
humanitarian situation in Syria is but one of the
symptoms of the political crisis in Syria. We have
entrusted Mr. De Mistura with the task of finding a
solution to the crisis. We renew our call to members
of the International Syria Support Group, especially
its co-Chairs — whom we must name, the United
States and the Russian Federation — to redouble
their efforts to bring about a cessation of hostilities,
which is the sine qua non condition for the provision
of humanitarian assistance as well as the main element
needed for relaunching the political process. The
Council therefore ought to effectively play its due
role as guarantor of international peace and security,
as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, by
assuming its full responsibilities given the ongoing
situation on the ground.
I would also like to recall the interregional
initiative focused on the General Assembly — launched
by Canada aimed at addressing the situation in Syria,
especially in Aleppo — given the failure of the Security
Council, where certain members continue to be mired
in disagreement on the topic. That is why my delegation
renews its support and encouragement to the three
penholders — Spain, Egypt and New Zealand — in
their efforts to address the humanitarian dimension of
the conflict through the adoption of a draft resolution
to put an end to the violence in Aleppo and by breathing
new life into a cessation of hostilities throughout the
entirety of Syrian territory by effectively implementing
resolution 2268 (2016).
In that connection, in addition to contributing
to developing practical responses to the disastrous
humanitarian situation, we believe that an overarching
approach to the question of Syria is more necessary
than ever, including political, humanitarian, security
and non-proliferation aspects. We should also
focus more closely on security concerns, to include
non-proliferation and the fight against terrorism, and
in particular on countering terrorist groups such as the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and the Al-Nusra
Front, so that we can get a better and more complete
picture of the situation. To that end, I would reiterate
our proposal for the holding of a joint briefing to
look into all the mechanisms in place with regard to
Syria. Whether it is held in public or private, such a
briefing should be followed by closed consultations on
the various views on Syria, with the aim of gleaning
a clear perspective on the emergence, evolution
16-40719

30/11/2016

The situation in the Middle East

and the manifold implications — internal, regional
and international — of the situation and to move
towards finding a political solution, which is the only
possible outcome.
The price of peace is never higher than the cost
of war. And, as Senegalese President Sall has said,
inter-Syrian peace is still possible because war cannot
be the destiny of an entire people.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I would first like to make a brief opening
remark before reading out my statement.
We have noted that the invitees to today’s meeting,
who were asked to give the Security Council an
assessment of what is happening in the Syrian city
of Aleppo, made their briefings, respectively, from
London, Geneva and Amman. Not a single of those
United Nations representatives spoke from Syria, which
proved an effective practice at the previous meeting (see
S/PV.7817), where Ms. Elizabeth Hoff, representative
of the World Health Organization, provided the Council
with a great deal of information, as members will recall.
That is a very serious shortcoming, as United
Nations staff in Damascus were excluded from a
Security Council briefing. It is quite peculiar, in fact,
and reminds us of another such instance — when three
States members of the Council worked on a humanitarian
draft resolution without coordinating or consulting
with the delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic. It is as
if here in the Chamber we were recreating surrealistic
scenes from the well-known novel by George Orwell
1984, which members will all be familiar with.
Once again, the representatives and the paymasters
of the Al-Nusra Front and affiliated terrorist groups
have rushed to convene an emergency meeting of the
Security Council in an attempt to rescue those terrorists
and provide them with moral and political support
against the backdrop of the victories by the Syrian
Arab Army and its allies as they counter terrorism in
Syria: the “moderate” terrorism and the “genetically
modified” terrorism.
Before I go into the details of my statement, I would
like to reaffirm to the representatives in the Council

S/PV.7822

of Abu Mohammad Al-Julani, who is half-brother to
Abu-Bakr Al-Baghdadi, head of the so-called Da’esh,
that their continued exploitation of Syrian blood and
the suffering of the Syrian people by portraying what is
happening in Syria as merely a humanitarian crisis will
not deter the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
from discharging its constitutional and legal obligation,
supported by our allies, to combat terrorism and save
Syrians from the scourge and practices of those groups,
in line with the principles of international law and
the implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, just like any other sovereign State Member
of the United Nations.
In that connection, I would like to read out for
those who exploit Syrian bloodshed an excerpt from a
letter written by Syrian children handed over yesterday
to the UNICEF Resident Representative in Damascus.
It appears that the representative of UNICEF, who is
joining us via video tele-conference, has not heard of
this letter, wherein children protest the terrorist attacks
that target schools in Aleppo with missiles:
“We want to go to our schools without fear of car
bombs. We want to play without being suddenly
shelled or bombarded. We want to live in safety,
happiness, joy and peace. The blood of our beloved
Syrian children who have been martyred in cities
throughout the country will not have been spilled
in vain — instead, it will serve as a beacon lighting
the way towards an imminent victory over the
forces of darkness and terrorism”.
Again, that quotation is from a letter sent by the children
of Aleppo to UNICEF, which I would like to draw to the
attention of Mr. Cappelaere, as he is with us here today.
The representatives of the Al-Nusra Front inside
and outside the Security Council will not hear the
voices of those children. They will not hear the horrific
stories and testimonies of tens of thousands of our
people who were saved by the Syrian army and its allies
in Aleppo over the past few days, or about the practices
of the Al-Nusra Front and affiliated terrorist groups
during the past four years. These practices lead to
horrific suffering and tragedy, including selling them
humanitarian assistance and bread at prices beyond
their means. And it does not end with the recruitment
of their children, the enslavement of their women, or
their use as human shields. Those are all real stories
reported by the media 24/7 and have no connection to

16-4071923/26

S/PV.7822

The situation in the Middle East

the tales from One Thousand and One Nights that some
like to tell in the Council.
Incidentally, I would like to tell my colleague the
representative of the United States of America that
Da’esh, the Al-Nusra Front and all the other terrorist
groups that enslave women have issued a price list
for women to be sold in the slave market, with prices
determined by their age. It seems that, according to that
price scale, some of my female colleagues present in
the Chamber would, unfortunately, sell for only $40.
That is the worth of an enslaved woman — only $40.
The liberation of more than 80,000 inhabitants
in Aleppo, including tens of thousands of children,
was never part of the plans of the Ministries for
Foreign Affairs of France, the United States or the
United Kingdom, which have for years claimed that
they were defending those civilians. The call by their
Governments to impose sanctions on Russia and Syria,
after we had liberated our Syrian civilians, proves once
again that those Syrians were exploited by those who
sponsor terrorism, in order to protect the terrorists of
all stripes and to practice cheap political blackmail.
Today hundreds of civilians who had sought to move
from eastern to western Aleppo, in an attempt to flee
terrorist-held areas for those protected by the Syrian
army, were killed by the moderate or genetically
modified terrorists who are loved by the delegations of
the United Kingdom, France and the United States.
There is an elephant in the room that no one wishes
to acknowledge. As Mr. De Mistura and Mr. O’Brien
stated, non-State armed groups — they did not say
terrorists but used the expression “non-State armed
groups” — have prevented the civilians in eastern
Aleppo from leaving. This means that those terrorist
groups are using civilians as human shields.
The farce staged by some in the Council today
through misleading statements, in line with the positions
of their extortive Governments and their destructive
practices, will not eclipse the sunlight or the fact that
our people in certain neighbourhoods of Aleppo have
regained hope and the promise of life following their
liberation by the Syrian army and its allies, which have
provided them with all the necessary means to live
decently, including shelter, food and medicine, and they
thereby now enjoying safety and stability after having
suffered for more than four years.
The protagonists of this theatre of the absurd
who represent the Al-Nusra Front inside the Council
24/26

30/11/2016

failed in denigrating the military achievement of the
liberation of civilians in Aleppo from terrorism. They
also failed in denigrating the image of the humanitarian
and relief efforts on behalf of those freed from the grip
of terrorism, as carried out by the Syrian Government
in cooperation with its allies as friends. In that regard,
I note that the Government of Syria today requested
that the Office of the Resident Representative of the
United Nations in Damascus — as Mr. De Mistura
and Mr. O’Brien are well aware — contribute to the
Government relief effort to alleviate the suffering of
tens of thousands of Syrians in Aleppo, and to use
the stocks contained in United Nations warehouses in
Aleppo and any other assistance that would help meet
the basic needs of our citizens. I would like to add that
the Resident Representative will actually go to Aleppo
because the Syrian Government has approved his visit
there, which is scheduled for tomorrow, Thursday. We
will then see what the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs can do.
I commend the efforts and achievements of the
friendly Russian delegation, which has supported Syria
not only in the war against terror, but in connection
with various aspects of humanitarian and relief work.
The latest instance was when President Vladimir
Putin instructed the Russian Ministries of Defence
and Emergency Situations to send mobile hospitals to
provide medical assistance to the residents of Aleppo
and surrounding areas. I emphasize that those are
real field hospitals, and not mere studios producing
fictitious stories of the so-called white-helmeted heroes
founded by British intelligence James Le Mesurier, who
is apparently of French ancestry, the same nationality
as the person who called for this meeting.
It is time for the curtain to fall on this theatre of the
absurd, which has led to the unprecedented spread of
terrorism and a state of panic in world public opinion,
as this terror has reached every part of the globe.
These States need to realize that terrorism cannot be
used as a tool to turn Aleppo into another Kandahar.
That will not happen, not even in their wildest
dreams — or nightmares.
It is unfortunate that the realm of such trivial political
practice is not limited to the Governments of the States
Members of the United Nations, but actually includes
some senior Secretariat officials who have described
the fate of the tens of thousands of civilians saved by
the Syrian army and its allies from the grip of terrorism
as being unknown and their safety undetermined. It is
16-40719

30/11/2016

The situation in the Middle East

as though they are hastening to support the terrorists
and sending one message after another: “Continue with
your moderate terrorism, and we will whitewash your
record in the Security Council”.
It has become a dangerous fait accompli that some in
the Security Council have shirked their responsibilities
to combat terrorism and maintain international peace
and security, and have turned the Council into a theatre
for political extortion and polarization, as it tackles
the terrorist war against Syria, to the point where
those States have actually obstructed the inclusion of
terrorist groups in the Council’s lists of such groups.
As the Council knows, the latest example of that was
the refusal by the United States, France and Britain to
include Jaysh-e-Mohammed and Ahrar Al-Sham on
those lists.
They have also shirked their responsibility for
the implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 2253 (2015). They
look the other way when other countries support
terrorist groups by providing them with unlimited
media exposure and financial and logistical support, in
addition to takfiri/Wahhabi/jihadi fatwas and opening
up borders to foreign terrorist fighters and weapons. All
this is provided by the Al-Saud regime, the godfather of
global terrorism; by the regime of Erdoğan — who is
under the illusion that he is the sultan of his time — which
is the real sponsor of the global “Muslim brotherhood”
organization; and by the Al-Thani regime in Qatar,
the main financier and sponsor of the Al-Nusra Front,
whose Minister for Foreign Affairs confirmed two
days ago, in a statement to Reuters, that its sheikhdom
would continue to provide support for, and arms to, the
terrorists in Syria even if the incoming United States
Administration were to cut off its support. I conclude,
obviously, with the regime of Hasaballah XIV. I will
give a prize to anyone who knows who that is.
This is also in keeping with Israel’s destructive role,
as it provides support to terrorist organizations in the
area of separation and the environs of the city of Dara’a,
in particular the terrorist Al-Nusra Front. In that regard,
I would like to refer to the Israeli aggression that took
place last night, which was not mentioned by any of the
briefers today. There was an Israeli attack late last night
on Al-Sabboura in western rural Damascus. Israeli war
planes fired two missiles from Lebanese airspace — a
desperate attempt by the Israeli occupation to raise the
morale of takfiri terrorist organizations, which are

S/PV.7822

collapsing following heavy losses in many areas, in
particular in the western rural areas of Damascus.
In conclusion, I again call on the fainthearted in the
Security Council who continue to sympathize with the
genetically modified/moderate terrorists to take back
the barbaric garbage that they have exported to us over
the past five years. If they want them, they should care
for them by setting up self-governing areas in their own
cities in Europe, America and elsewhere. Take them
if you want them. Take the Al-Nusra Front. Take its
members. Give them entry visas and residency permits.
They would be good terrorists in their countries.
My Government remains committed to its policy
of balancing the priority of fighting terrorism, as
the main threat to security and stability throughout
Syria, on the one hand, and the pursuit of a Syrianled political solution based on intra-Syrian dialogue,
without any intervention or preconditions. Hence, the
Syrian Government is still waiting for an invitation
from Mr. De Mistura to resume the Syrian dialogue
that he suspended in May.
The President (spoke in French): Before adjourning
this meeting, as the Senegalese presidency of the
Security Council comes to an end, I would like to
correct a mistake. Earlier in the meeting I failed to
thank, congratulate and encourage our briefers from
this morning: Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Syria; Mr. Stephen
O’Brien, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator; and
Mr. Geert Cappelaere, UNICEF Regional Director for
the Middle East and North Africa. Their testimony and
presentations shed clear light on our work.
I am moreover particularly pleased to express
the deep gratitude of the Senegalese delegation
for the kind cooperation that the members of the
Security Council — the permanent members and
their teams — have all contributed throughout the
month of November in carrying out a particularly
busy programme of work. In their support, I see the
expression of their ongoing commitment to peace and
security around the world and the excellent relations
that unite each of their countries with my own.
I would like to thank all the members of the Secretariat,
starting with Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon himself,
the skilled technical and administrative staff of
conference services, the interpreters, as well as the
representatives, special envoys and security officers. I

16-4071925/26

S/PV.7822

The situation in the Middle East

thank in particular Ms. Hasmik Egian and the entire
Security Council Affairs management team, whose
professionalism and availability were exemplary from
all points of view.
I must also offer my gratitude to our partners in
the press, generally speaking, as well as those who are
accredited to the United Nations, and more specifically
to our friends at the stakeout.

26/26

30/11/2016

As this month comes to an end, we can be pleased
to have been able to bring about consensus around a
number of significant issues that we have been seized
of. We would not have been able to achieve that alone
or without the commitment, support and agreement of
every Council member. As our presidency wraps up, I
know that all members would like, together with me,
to wish every success to the delegation of Spain, which
will assume the presidency in December.
The meeting rose at 2.15 p.m.

16-40719
