United Nations

A/RES/65/194

General Assembly

Distr.: General
28 February 2011

Sixty-fifth session
Agenda item 61

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 21 December 2010
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/65/450)]

65/194. Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees on the activities of his Office 1 and the report of the Executive Committee
of the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on the
work of its sixty-first session 2 and the conclusions and decisions contained therein,
0F

1F

Recalling its previous annual resolutions on the work of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees since its establishment by the
General Assembly,
Expressing its appreciation, in the year which marks the sixtieth anniversary
of the Office of the High Commissioner, for the leadership shown by the High
Commissioner, commending the staff and implementing partners of the Office for
the competent, courageous and dedicated manner in which they discharge their
responsibilities, and underlining its strong condemnation of all forms of violence to
which humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated personnel are
increasingly exposed,
Endorses the report of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the
1.
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on the work of its sixty-first
session;2
0H

2.
Welcomes the important work undertaken by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and its Executive Committee in the
course of the year, which is aimed at strengthening the international protection
regime and at assisting Governments in meeting their protection responsibilities;
Also welcomes the adoption by the Executive Committee of the
3.
conclusion on protracted refugee situations 3 and the conclusion on refugees with
2F

_______________
1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/65/12).
Ibid., Supplement No. 12A (A/65/12/Add.1).
3
Ibid., annex II, sect. A.
2

10-52418

*1052418*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/65/194

disabilities and other persons with disabilities protected and assisted by the Office
of the High Commissioner; 4
3F

4.
Reaffirms the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees 5 and
the 1967 Protocol thereto 6 as the foundation of the international refugee protection
regime, recognizes the importance of their full and effective application by States
parties and the values they embody, notes with satisfaction that one hundred and
forty-seven States are now parties to one instrument or to both, encourages States
not parties to consider acceding to those instruments, underlines, in particular, the
importance of full respect for the principle of non-refoulement, and recognizes that
a number of States not parties to the international refugee instruments have shown a
generous approach to hosting refugees;
4F

5F

Notes that sixty-five States are now parties to the 1954 Convention
5.
relating to the Status of Stateless Persons 7 and that thirty-seven States are parties to
the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness, 8 encourages States that have
not done so to give consideration to acceding to those instruments, notes the work of
the High Commissioner in regard to identifying stateless persons, preventing and
reducing statelessness and protecting stateless persons, and urges the Office of the
High Commissioner to continue to work in this area in accordance with relevant
General Assembly resolutions and Executive Committee conclusions;
6F

7F

Welcomes the initiative of the United Nations High Commissioner for
6.
Refugees to facilitate, in consultation with States, the convening of an
intergovernmental event at the ministerial level on the occasion of the sixtieth
anniversary of the 1951 Convention and the fiftieth anniversary of the 1961
Convention;
Re-emphasizes that the protection of refugees is primarily the
7.
responsibility of States, whose full and effective cooperation, action and political
resolve are required to enable the Office of the High Commissioner to fulfil its
mandated functions, and strongly emphasizes, in this context, the importance of
active international solidarity and burden- and responsibility-sharing;
Also re-emphasizes that prevention and reduction of statelessness are
8.
primarily the responsibility of States, in appropriate cooperation with the
international community;
Further re-emphasizes that protection of and assistance to internally
9.
displaced persons are primarily the responsibility of States, in appropriate
cooperation with the international community;
10. Encourages the Office of the High Commissioner to pursue its efforts to
strengthen its capacity to respond adequately to emergencies and thereby ensure a
more predictable response to inter-agency commitments in case of emergency;
11. Takes note of the current activities of the Office of the High
Commissioner related to protection of and assistance to internally displaced persons,
including in the context of inter-agency arrangements in this field, emphasizes that

_______________
4

Ibid., chap. III, sect. A.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545.
6
Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.
7
Ibid., vol. 360, No. 5158.
8
Ibid., vol. 989, No. 14458.
5

2

A/RES/65/194

such activities should be consistent with relevant General Assembly resolutions and
should not undermine the refugee mandate of the Office and the institution of
asylum, and encourages the High Commissioner to continue his dialogue with States
on the role of his Office in this regard;
12. Encourages the Office of the High Commissioner to work in partnership
and in full cooperation with relevant national authorities, United Nations offices and
agencies, international and intergovernmental organizations, regional organizations
and non-governmental organizations to contribute to the continued development of
humanitarian response capacities at all levels, and recalls the role of the Office as
the cluster lead for protection, camp coordination and management, and emergency
shelter in complex emergencies;
13. Also encourages the Office of the High Commissioner, among other
relevant United Nations and other relevant intergovernmental organizations and
humanitarian and development actors, to continue to work with the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat to enhance the coordination,
effectiveness and efficiency of humanitarian assistance and to contribute, in
consultation with States, as appropriate, to making further progress towards
common humanitarian needs assessments, as stated, among other important issues,
in General Assembly resolution 64/76 of 7 December 2009 on the strengthening of
the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations;
14. Further encourages the Office of the High Commissioner to engage in
and implement in full the objectives of the Delivering as One initiative;
15. Notes with appreciation the progress made in the implementation of the
process of structural and management change, including the global needs
assessment initiative, undertaken by the Office of the High Commissioner, and
encourages the Office to consolidate the various aspects of the reform process,
including the results-based management and accountability framework and strategy,
and to focus on continuous improvement in order to enable a more efficient
response to the needs of beneficiaries and to ensure the effective and transparent use
of its resources;
16. Strongly condemns attacks on refugees, asylum-seekers and internally
displaced persons as well as acts that pose a threat to their personal security and
well-being, and calls upon all States concerned and, where applicable, parties
involved in an armed conflict to take all measures necessary to ensure respect for
human rights and international humanitarian law;
17. Expresses deep concern about the increasing number of attacks against
humanitarian aid workers and convoys and, in particular, the loss of life of
humanitarian personnel working in the most difficult and challenging conditions in
order to assist those in need;
18. Emphasizes the need for States to ensure that perpetrators of attacks
committed on their territory against humanitarian personnel and United Nations and
associated personnel do not operate with impunity and that the perpetrators of such
acts are promptly brought to justice as provided for by national laws and obligations
under international law;
19. Deplores the refoulement and unlawful expulsion of refugees and
asylum-seekers, and calls upon all States concerned to ensure respect for the
relevant principles of refugee protection and human rights;

3

A/RES/65/194

20. Emphasizes that international protection of refugees is a dynamic and
action-oriented function that is at the core of the mandate of the Office of the High
Commissioner and that it includes, in cooperation with States and other partners, the
promotion and facilitation of, inter alia, the admission, reception and treatment of
refugees in accordance with internationally agreed standards and the ensuring of
durable, protection-oriented solutions, bearing in mind the particular needs of
vulnerable groups and paying special attention to those with specific needs, and
notes in this context that the delivery of international protection is a staff-intensive
service that requires adequate staff with the appropriate expertise, especially at the
field level;
21. Affirms the importance of age, gender and diversity mainstreaming in
analysing protection needs and in ensuring the participation of refugees and other
persons of concern to the Office of the High Commissioner, as appropriate, in the
planning and implementation of programmes of the Office and State policies, and
also affirms the importance of according priority to addressing discrimination,
gender inequality and the problem of sexual and gender-based violence, recognizing
the importance of addressing the protection needs of women and children in
particular;
22. Strongly reaffirms the fundamental importance and the purely
humanitarian and non-political character of the function of the Office of the High
Commissioner of providing international protection to refugees and seeking
permanent solutions to refugee problems, and recalls that those solutions include
voluntary repatriation and, where appropriate and feasible, local integration and
resettlement in a third country, while reaffirming that voluntary repatriation,
supported, as necessary, by rehabilitation and development assistance to facilitate
sustainable reintegration, remains the preferred solution;
23. Expresses concern about the particular difficulties faced by the millions
of refugees in protracted situations, and emphasizes the need to redouble
international efforts and cooperation to find practical and comprehensive approaches
to resolving their plight and to realize durable solutions for them, consistent with
international law and relevant General Assembly resolutions;
24. Recognizes the importance of achieving durable solutions to refugee
problems and, in particular, the need to address in this process the root causes of
refugee movements in order to avert new flows of refugees;
25. Welcomes the initiative of the High Commissioner to convene, in Geneva
on 8 and 9 December 2010, the fourth Dialogue on Protection Challenges, on the
theme “Protection gaps and responses”;
26. Recalls the important role of effective partnerships and coordination in
meeting the needs of refugees and in finding durable solutions to their situations,
welcomes the efforts under way, in cooperation with countries hosting refugees and
countries of origin, including their respective local communities, relevant United
Nations agencies, international and intergovernmental organizations, regional
organizations, as appropriate, non-governmental organizations and development
actors, to promote a framework for durable solutions, particularly in protracted
refugee situations, which includes an approach to sustainable and timely return that
encompasses repatriation, reintegration, rehabilitation and reconstruction activities,
and encourages States, in cooperation with relevant United Nations agencies,
international and intergovernmental organizations, regional organizations,
non-governmental organizations and development actors, to support, inter alia,

4

A/RES/65/194

through the allocation of funds, the implementation of such a framework to facilitate
an effective transition from relief to development;
27. Recognizes that no solution to displacement can be durable unless it is
sustainable, and therefore encourages the Office of the High Commissioner to
support the sustainability of return and reintegration;
28. Welcomes the progress that has been achieved in increasing the number
of refugees resettled and the number of States offering opportunities for
resettlement, as well as the contribution that those States make to durable solutions
for refugees, and invites interested States, the Office of the High Commissioner and
other relevant partners to make use of the Multilateral Framework of
Understandings on Resettlement, 9 where appropriate and feasible;
8F

29. Notes with appreciation the activities undertaken by States to strengthen
the regional initiatives that facilitate cooperative policies and approaches on
refugees, and encourages States to continue their efforts to address, in a
comprehensive manner, the needs of the people who require international protection
in their respective regions, including the support provided for host communities that
receive large numbers of persons who require international protection;
30. Notes the importance of States and the Office of the High Commissioner
discussing and clarifying the role of the Office in mixed migratory flows, in order to
better address protection needs in the context of mixed migratory flows, including
by safeguarding access to asylum for those in need of international protection, and
notes the readiness of the High Commissioner, consistent with his mandate, to assist
States in fulfilling their protection responsibilities in this regard;
31. Emphasizes the obligation of all States to accept the return of their
nationals, calls upon States to facilitate the return of their nationals who have been
determined not to be in need of international protection, and affirms the need for the
return of persons to be undertaken in a safe and humane manner and with full
respect for their human rights and dignity, irrespective of the status of the persons
concerned;
32. Expresses deep concern about the challenges posed by climate change
and environmental degradation to the protection activities of the Office of the High
Commissioner and the assistance it provides to vulnerable populations of concern
across the globe, particularly in the least developed countries, and urges the Office
to continue to address such challenges in its work, within its mandate, and in
consultation with national authorities and in cooperation with competent agencies in
its operations;
33. Notes the positive efforts undertaken by the Government of Iraq to
ensure the return and reintegration of Iraqi citizens displaced in and from Iraq, as
well as the measures taken by host countries in the region in support of the
displaced from Iraq, recognizes the serious impact of the displacement on the social
and economic situation in the countries of the region, and in that context calls upon
the international community to act in a targeted and coordinated manner to provide
protection and increased assistance to the persons displaced in order to enable the
countries in the region to strengthen their capacity to respond to the needs in
partnership with the Office of the High Commissioner, other United Nations

_______________
9

Available from www.unhcr.org.

5

A/RES/65/194

agencies, the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement and
non-governmental organizations;
34. Urges all States and relevant non-governmental and other organizations,
in conjunction with the Office of the High Commissioner, in a spirit of international
solidarity and burden- and responsibility-sharing, to cooperate and to mobilize
resources with a view to enhancing the capacity of and reducing the heavy burden
borne by host countries, in particular those that have received large numbers of
refugees and asylum-seekers, and calls upon the Office to continue to play its
catalytic role in mobilizing assistance from the international community to address
the root causes as well as the economic, environmental and social impact of
large-scale refugee populations in developing countries, in particular the least
developed countries, and countries with economies in transition;
35. Expresses deep concern about the existing and potential challenges posed
by the world financial and economic crisis to the activities of the Office of the High
Commissioner;
36. Calls upon the Office of the High Commissioner to further explore ways
and means to broaden its donor base, so as to achieve greater burden-sharing by
reinforcing cooperation with governmental donors, non-governmental donors and
the private sector;
37. Recognizes that adequate and timely resources are essential for the Office
of the High Commissioner to continue to fulfil the mandate conferred upon it
through its statute 10 and by subsequent General Assembly resolutions on refugees
and other persons of concern, recalls its resolutions 58/153 of 22 December 2003,
58/270 of 23 December 2003, 59/170 of 20 December 2004, 60/129 of 16 December
2005, 61/137 of 19 December 2006, 62/124 of 18 December 2007, 63/148 of
18 December 2008 and 64/127 of 18 December 2009 concerning, inter alia, the
implementation of paragraph 20 of the statute of the Office, and urges Governments
and other donors to respond promptly to annual and supplementary appeals issued
by the Office for requirements under its programmes;
9F

38. Requests the High Commissioner to report on his activities to the General
Assembly at its sixty-sixth session.
71st plenary meeting
21 December 2010

_______________
10

6

Resolution 428 (V), annex.
