S/PRST/2011/3

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 February 2011
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6478th meeting of the Security Council, held on 9 February 2011, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Reports of the
Secretary-General on the Sudan”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the February 7 announcement by the
Southern Sudan Referendum Commission of the final results of the referendum
on self-determination for the people of Southern Sudan, which showed that
98.83 percent of voters chose independence. The Council calls on the
international community to lend its full support to all Sudanese people as they
build a peaceful and prosperous future.
“The Council congratulates the parties of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) and the people of Sudan for a peaceful and successful
referendum, and commends UNMIS for its contribution to the process.
“The Security Council warmly welcomes the statements of President
Omar al Bashir and Vice President Salva Kiir on February 7, in which they
accept the final results of the referendum. The Council calls on all member
states to respect the outcome of the referendum and looks forward to
welcoming an independent South Sudan as a new member of the international
community after July 9.
“The Security Council welcomes the work of the Secretary General’s
Panel led by former President Benjamin Mkapa. The Council praises the CPA
parties for their commitment to the CPA, as illustrated by their support for a
timely and credible referendum process. The Council underlines that full and
timely implementation of the CPA is essential to peace and stability in Sudan
and the region and to future co-operation between northern and southern
Sudan and the international community.
“The Security Council further acknowledges that the process mandated
by the CPA represents an exceptional case and does not by itself set a
precedent.
“The Security Council reaffirms its support for the work of the AU HighLevel Implementation Panel and its chair President Thabo Mbeki, and notes
the commitments made by the CPA parties in the January 27 Presidency
meeting and encourages them to continue to strive for a timely agreement on
the implementation of outstanding CPA issues. The Council urges the parties to
11-22975 (E) 090211

*1122975*

S/PRST/2011/3

reach quickly an agreement on Abyei and other critical issues, including
border demarcation, security arrangements, citizenship, debts, assets, currency,
wealth sharing, and natural resource management. The Council welcomes the
start of the popular consultation process in the Blue Nile State and stresses the
importance of inclusive, timely, and credible popular consultations processes
in Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan States, in accordance with the CPA.
“The Security Council deeply regrets the loss of life in violence in Upper
Nile state on February 3 to 5.
“The Security Council underlines the need for the CPA parties to prevent
further clashes and promote calm, including by providing immediate and
ongoing reassurance to people of all nationalities in Sudan, including
Southerners in the North and Northerners in the South, that their rights, safety
and property will continue to be respected. The Council urges the CPA parties
to respect their obligations.
“The Security Council reiterates its deep concern over the increase in
violence and insecurity in Darfur, including ceasefire violations, attacks by
rebel groups, and aerial bombardment by the Sudanese Armed Forces, which
recently displaced approximately 43,000 civilians, and the kidnapping on
January 13 of three members of the United Nations Humanitarian Air Service.
The Security Council recalls the importance it attaches to an end to impunity,
and to justice for crimes committed in Darfur. The Security Council reaffirms
its support for UNAMID and urges all parties to ensure full and unhindered
access for UNAMID throughout the mission area, and to allow humanitarian
workers to provide assistance to all populations in need.
“The Security Council reaffirms its support for the AU-UN led peace
process for Darfur, hosted by the State of Qatar, the work of Joint Chief
Mediator Djibril Bassole and the principles guiding the negotiations. The
Council welcomes the presence of the Justice and Equality Movement and
Liberation and Justice Movement in Doha, and strongly urges all other rebel
movements to join the peace process without further delay or preconditions,
and all parties to engage with a view to concluding urgently a comprehensive
agreement.
“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Council by the end of February on issues related to the Darfur-based Political
Process (DPP), including an assessment of the enabling environment.
“The Security Council reiterates the importance
participation of women in the Sudanese peace processes.

of

increased

“The Security Council will continue to follow developments in Sudan,
including in Darfur, closely.”

2

11-22975
