S/2017/811

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 September 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali
I. Introduction
1.
By its resolution 2364 (2017), the Security Council extended the mandate of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA) until 30 June 2018 and requested me to report on a quarterly basis on
its implementation, focusing on progress in taking forward the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali (see S/2015/364 and Add.1) and the efforts of
MINUSMA to support it.

II. Major political developments
2.
The political and security situation has significantly deteriorated since my
previous report (S/2017/478) and the adoption of resolution 2364 (2017) on 29 June.
The resumption of fighting between the signatory armed groups in northern Mali,
growing insecurity in the centre of the country and mounting political turmoil
surrounding the constitutional review process have delayed the implementati on of
the Agreement. In response to these challenges, MINUSMA extended its good
offices to assist Malian parties in finding solutions to accelerate the implementation
of the Agreement. Progress was made with the signature of a truce between the
Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad (CMA) and the Platform coalition of
armed groups on 23 August and of a document of commitments that includes a
definitive cessation of hostilities. President Ibrahim Boubacar Keita also decided to
stay the constitutional referendum on 18 August.

A.

Implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in
Mali after the end of the interim period
3.
Building on the positive momentum registered during the previous reporting
period, the Government and the signatory armed groups committed to prioritizing
the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali beyond
the expiration of the interim period on 20 June. In this regard, the High
Representative of the President of the Republic of Mali for the Impl ementation of
the Algiers Peace Agreement, supported by the international mediation team and
MINUSMA, facilitated dialogue between the signatory parties within the
consultation framework agreed upon at the high-level meeting of the Agreement
Monitoring Committee on 10 February. In addition, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Mali organized separate meetings with the signatory

17-16372 (E)

290917

*1716372*

290917

S/2017/811

armed groups to forge a consensus on the operationalization of interim authorities in
Kidal; the return of the Governor to Kidal; and the deployment of the Operational
Coordination Mechanism and mixed patrols in Kidal and Timbuktu. On 12 June, the
signatory parties reached an agreement on a revised road map for the
implementation of the Agreement and decided to establish the Operational
Coordination Mechanism in Kidal by 20 July. This did not materialize, as violent
clashes erupted between CMA and the Platform in the Kidal and Ménaka regions on
6 and 11 July, respectively.
4.
The Agreement Monitoring Committee met again on 11 July, and members of
the international community and the Government strongly condemned the
resumption of hostilities and called for an immediate truce. The Committee
welcomed the decision taken on 22 June by the Government to establish a good
offices mission for Kidal and the Niger Delta led by Mahmoud Dicko, head of the
High Islamic Council. The good offices mission held meetings with traditional
leaders and civil society representatives affiliated with CMA in Kidal on 27 July
and those affiliated with the Platform in Gao on 1 August. Both groups issued
communiqués following their respective meetings with Mr. Dicko. While CMA
advocated for the initial deployment of a partial operational coordination
mechanism to Kidal, excluding Platform elements, the Platform insisted on its fullfledged deployment, as well as a regional power-sharing arrangements. No
agreement was reached on the matter.
5.
The Special Representative continued to lead the international community ’s
good offices efforts in support of the Government’s initiative to obtain an immediate
cessation of hostilities. After weeks of fighting, resulting in a significant number of
casualties and the displacement of hundreds of families in the Kidal region, on
23 August the armed groups signed a document committing them to a 15-day
extendable truce, which was renewed for one month on 6 September. Following
reconciliation talks between CMA and the Platform, held from 15 to 20 September
in Bamako, the signatory armed groups signed a document of commitments, which
provided for, among other measures, a definitive cessation of hostilities and the
relaunch of the finalization of the timeline for the full implementation of the
Agreement. MINUSMA military observers and the mixed monitoring and
verification teams conducted investigations into allegations of ceasefire violations
in the Kidal and Ménaka regions. Conclusive evidence was difficult to obtain, since
the clashes had occurred in remote areas without a permanent MINUSMA presence.
6.
On 22 July, the working group on the independent observer, chaired by the
High Representative of the African Union for Mali and the Sahel, Pierre Buyoya,
submitted a list of three qualified candidates for the post of independent observer.
Consultations are ongoing.
7.
On 5 September 2017, the Security Council adopted resolution 2374 (2017),
which imposed a travel ban and an assets freeze on individuals or entities
designated as threatening the peace, security or stability of Mali. The resolution also
established a new Sanctions Committee, mandated to monitor implementation of the
sanctions measures and to designate individuals and entities subject to those
measures, as well as a panel of experts, to assist the Committee in carrying out its
mandate, through periodic reporting.
Political and institutional measures
8.
The full operationalization of the interim authorities continued to be hampered
by internal rivalries and limited administrative, budgetary and plannin g capacities.
Nonetheless, the interim authorities in Gao, Ménaka, Taoudenni and Timbuktu
adopted a priority action plan aimed at enabling access to State funds for the
2/29

17-16372

S/2017/811

delivery of basic services. In Kidal, disagreements between the armed groups over
the establishment of mixed patrols prevented the return of the Platform members
who were members of the interim authorities, thereby delaying their
operationalization. On 28 June, the Peacebuilding Fund launched a capacity building project for the Ménaka and Taoudenni interim authorities on aspects
relating to territorial division, public works and the provision of basic services.
9.
Owing to the prevailing insecurity, there was no progress with regard to the
redeployment of the civil administration to northern and central Mali. Despite a
slight increase in judicial officers, low deployment rates of State officials continued
to adversely affect the delivery of basic social services and undermined citizens ’
confidence in the State. As at 11 September, only 30 per cent of State officials were
present at their duty stations in the northern regions and Mo pti, compared with
38 per cent in January. On 23 August, the Government announced the appointment
of new governors for the Gao and Mopti regions, following months of mobilization
by civil society calling for the replacement of the governor in Gao. Also on
23 August, the governor for Kidal conducted a three-day working visit to Kidal, the
first since his nomination in February.
10. On 21 June, the Council of Ministers postponed the constitutional referendum
planned for 9 July, to allow the Constitutional Court to consider a petition filed by
opposition members of Parliament challenging the legality of the constitutional
review process. On 4 July, the Constitutional Court ruled that the process was
compliant with the constitution but proposed amendments to a number of articles,
which the Government accepted. On 9 August, following months of growing
tensions and demonstrations in Bamako, the platform “An tè a banna! Touche pas à
ma Constitution” comprising, inter alia, political opposition members, civil society
and trade union representatives, issued an ultimatum to President Keita requesting
that he withdraw the draft constitution. On 18 August, President Keita announced
that he was staying the referendum on the Constitution in the nation ’s higher
interest, to preserve a peaceful social climate and to avoid confrontations.
Throughout this period, the Special Representative held several meetings with
senior government officials, majority and opposition political parties and civil
society groups as well as leaders of “An tè a banna! Touche pas à ma Constitution”.
He urged them to exercise restraint and called for constructive dialogue on the
constitutional revision process.
11. The charter for peace, unity and national reconciliation was submitted to
President Keita on 20 June. Drawing on the conclusions of the conférence d ’entente
nationale (conference for national harmony), the charter described a common
vision, shared values and guiding principles for the country and a Malian nation
State. CMA immediately rejected the charter as a reaction to the Government ’s
decision not to refer to Azawad as a political and institutional entity in it. President
Keita dismissed the conference’s recommendation that the Government enter into
negotiations with terrorist groups.
Defence and security measures
12. Progress on the implementation of interim defence and security measures was
slow, owing to a lack of trust between the signatory parties, the volatile security
situation and the absence of clearly defined integration criteria, including a decision
on rank harmonization. The failure by the signatory armed groups to submit lists of
their combatants continued to remain the main obstacle to the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process scheduled to start on 15 October 2017.
Signatory armed groups demanded quotas for the integration of their elements into
all security institutions, not only the armed forces as initiall y agreed. This request
had yet to be addressed by the Government. In Gao, poor conduct and discipline on
17-16372

3/29

S/2017/811

the part of the mixed patrols contributed to growing discontent among the
population, as well as, in some cases, the creation of vigilante groups.
13. On 8 June, an expert-level discussion on security sector reform was held in
New York to assess the status of the implementation of the security and defence
provisions of the Agreement and strengthen international support in that area. The
aim of a high-level meeting planned to take place in Bamako in October is to adopt
a Malian-owned partnership framework on security sector reform, outlining the
respective roles of Mali and its partners, as well as expected contributions.
14. On 27 July, the National Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
Commission and the Integration Commission confirmed that the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process would commence with elements of the
Operational Coordination Mechanism in October, followed by des erters from the
Malian armed forces from the 2012 crisis, elements from signatory armed groups,
and the disarmament of civilian armed groups, in that order. The two commissions
also confirmed that the cantonment process would start at the eight existing
cantonment sites constructed by MINUSMA, for which the Mission is upgrading
security features to mitigate threats during the demobilization process.
15. The first phase of the rehabilitation of the Operational Coordination
Mechanism camp in Kidal, with a capacity to host approximately 600 combatants,
was completed on 26 July. Given the complexity of the environment, command and
control issues, logistical requirements and the need for coordination, the Mission
proposed to the Government and signatory armed groups a phased deployment of
their combatants to the Kidal Operational Coordination Mechanism. The
commanding officers of the Malian armed forces, CMA and the Platform deployed
in Kidal on 28 July to plan and organize the arrival of their respective elements .
16. The Technical Commission on Security met on 16 August and decided on the
adoption of rules of procedures for the Operational Coordination Mechanism in Gao
and the imposition of disciplinary measures following acts of misconduct by its
personnel. The signatory armed groups were requested to remove elements that had
been involved in criminal acts. CMA responded positively, dismissing six of its
members. Commission members and the leadership of the Operational Coordination
Mechanism leadership agreed to conduct regular monitoring visits to raise
awareness of these matters. The Technical Commission on Security met again on
30 August and agreed on measures to enforce the truce, including movements of
troops, vehicles and heavy weapons.
17. The Mission continued the implementation of 34 community violence
reduction projects to create conditions conducive to the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process, obtaining support from the communities
and assisting the restoration of State authority and services in remote areas.
MINUSMA increased its coordination at both the national and regional levels with
the National Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Commission.
MINUSMA and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) organized training for 64 members of the
National Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Commission, the
Commission on Integration and the National Council for Security Sector Reform on
gender mainstreaming with the support of the Peacebuilding Fund. The Government
and signatory armed groups also held three workshops on the criteria and the quota
requirements for signatory armed groups to qualify for integration into the Malian
defence and security forces. However, the integration c riteria had yet to be validated
by the National Council for Security Sector Reform.
18. In anticipation of the development by the Government of Mali of a policy on
the territorial police, the Mission devised a community-oriented policing and
4/29

17-16372

S/2017/811

training module to bring the police, gendarmerie, National Guard and civil
protection closer to the people and trained 54 elements of the security forces,
including 15 women. UN-Women supported the national police in developing an
action plan against gender-based violence with the financial support of the
Peacebuilding Fund.

B.

Support for the Malian defence and security forces
19. The memorandum of understanding between MINUSMA and the Government
on the Mission’s support for the Malian armed forces remained pending for
signature. The Mission provided training, logistics, intelligence sharing, air
transport and medical evacuation to Malian defence and security forces.
Frameworks for security coordination between MINUSMA and the Malian armed
forces were put in place in Gao and Timbuktu. In line with the Mission’s mandate to
support the redeployment of the reconstituted Malian defence and security forces to
the north and centre of the country, the Mission’s camp in Léré, Timbuktu region,
was handed over to the Malian armed forces on 7 September.
20. In response to a Government request for support in strengthening security for
prisons detaining suspected extremists, MINUSMA supported the rehabilitation of
two high-security wings in the main prison in Bamako where presu med terrorists
were held. On 4 August, this support, together with advice on prison security, led to
the adoption of an interministerial order requiring each prison to develop a security
plan.
21. International partners continued to conduct joint operatio ns with Malian
forces. More than 15 Malian-French operations were conducted during the period,
with three main transborder operations along the borders of Mali with Burkina Faso
and Niger. The European Union Training Mission continued to train Malian armed
forces. During the reporting period, MINUSMA trained 269 personnel of the Malian
defence and security forces, including 42 women, in Bamako, Gao and Timbuktu on
combating terrorism and organized crime. On 29 June, a coordination mechanism
was established between MINUSMA, French forces, the European Union Training
Mission and the Malian armed forces.

C.

Mine action, weapons and small arms
22. The Mission has trained 283 Malian defence and security forces personnel in
explosive threat mitigation since February 2017. The Malian police explosive
ordnance disposal team conducted 14 interventions in Bamako. The Malian defence
and security forces weapons and ammunition management capacity was reinforced
with the training of 98 personnel in safe and secure we apons and ammunition
storage and inspection.
23. The Mine Action Service raised awareness of explosive hazards among
vulnerable populations in conflict-affected areas, reaching 13,621 individuals
(3,890 women, 3,216 men, 3,325 girls and 3,190 boys).

D.

Other political developments
24. On 12 June, the Prime Minister, Abdoulaye Idrissa Maiga, presented his policy
statement to the National Assembly, which adopted it on 15 June in a vote of
confidence. The statement set out the Government’s priorities until the presidential
elections in July 2018, namely, the full implementation of the Agreement, the easing

17-16372

5/29

S/2017/811

of social tensions, the implementation of the Presidential Social Emergency
Programme and a review of the country’s position and role in subregional, regional
and international affairs.
25. Although a new date for the constitutional referendum was not announced, the
Ministry of Territorial Administration acquired all the required electoral materials,
with the exception of ballot papers, to hold the referendum. These materials were
deployed to electoral districts, with the exception of Gao. Additionally, materials for
the local by-elections, district and regional polls were purchased. In the absence of a
new basket fund, the Government faced a financial gap of approximately
$32.3 million.
26. In line with the recommendations of the electoral needs assessment mission
conducted in April 2017, the United Nations Development Programme and
MINUSMA prepared a draft electoral assistance project document to suppo rt the
2018-2019 electoral cycle. The draft, on which national and international
stakeholders were to be consulted in October, included capacity -building initiatives
for electoral management bodies, voter awareness and civic education campaigns
and the training and payment of polling station agents. The Mission held four
workshops in June with key stakeholders on election -related conflict prevention and
mitigation mechanisms. In addition, the Mission built the capacity of electoral
management bodies, media, civil society organizations and political party leaders on
gender mainstreaming in elections. In July and August, the same groups were
briefed on the 2016 Electoral Law by the Mission.

E.

Regional developments
27. Insecurity in Mali continued to have significant subregional repercussions, in
particular in border areas with Burkina Faso and Niger, where militant groups
affiliated to various degrees with Mali-based violent extremist groups claimed
responsibility for a number of attacks on security forces and civilians. Four attacks
in Soum province in northern Burkina Faso in March and June were claimed by
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, as was an assault on 25 August in Abala in Niger,
close to the border with Mali. A major terrorist attack on a re staurant in
Ouagadougou on 13 August, resulting in 19 deaths, was also suspected to be linked
to these networks.
28. On 14 June, the Ministerial Platform for the Sahel met in N ’djamena and
agreed to revitalize the Platform and its support mechanisms, inclu ding through
linkages between its working groups and the United Nations integrated strategy for
the Sahel.
29. On 21 June, the Security Council adopted resolution 2359 (2017), welcoming
the deployment by the States members of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G -5
Sahel) of a joint force to help restore peace and security in the Sahel. On 2 July,
Heads of State of the G-5 Sahel and the President of France, Emmanuel Macron,
met in Bamako for an extraordinary summit to discuss the operationalization of the
joint force. The final declaration of the Summit acknowledged the need to
accompany military initiatives with long-term development efforts to address the
root causes of insecurity.
30. In line with resolution 2364 (2017), MINUSMA deployed staff officers to
Mopti to ensure and facilitate coordination with the G -5 Sahel Force headquarters,
located in the Malian armed forces camp in Sévaré, Mopti region.
31. MINUSMA, in partnership with the European Union Common Security and
Defence Policy mission in Mali, the International Organization for Migration and

6/29

17-16372

S/2017/811

G-5 Sahel, continued its advocacy and planning work for the development of a
national border security and management strategy. The Mission focused its advisory
role on practical border security measures at Anderamboukane, Labezanga and Léré
on the Mali-Niger and Mali-Mauritania borders respectively. A Peacebuilding Fund
project, aligned with the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel to support
communities and address security concerns on the borders of Burkina Faso, Mali
and Niger, was signed by the Governments concerned on 29 August.

III. Major security developments
32. The security situation significantly deteriorated. Since mid -July, the situation
in Kidal has worsened, with armed clashes between CMA and the Platform as both
groups vied for control of Kidal. Meanwhile, asymmetric attacks continued against
MINUSMA and international forces, notably in the Gao, Kidal and Timbuktu
regions. Attacks against the Malian defence and security forces almost doubled as
compared with the previous reporting period.

A.

Asymmetric and other attacks
33. Violence spiked even more during the reporting period. Violent extremist
groups and terrorist elements conducted 75 attacks (44 against Malian defence and
security forces, 21 against MINUSMA and 10 against Barkhane), as compared with
37 attacks in the previous reporting period (23 against Malian defence and security
forces, 11 against MINUSMA and 3 against Barkhane). These figures represent an
increase of 102.7 per cent for all attacks. Casualty figures also increased, with
15 MINUSMA and MINUSMA-related personnel deaths (6 peacekeepers, 1 civilian
personnel member and 8 contractors), another 34 injured (25 peacekeepers,
2 civilian personnel and 7 contractors). In the previous reporting period, four
peacekeepers were killed and five injured. Similarly, 39 members of the Malian
defence and security forces were killed and another 44 were wounded, compared
with 33 killed and 54 injured in the previous reporting period. As regards
international forces, no French soldiers were killed, while 17 were injured,
compared with 2 injured during the previous reporting period.
34. Most asymmetric attacks were claimed by the Group for the Support of Islam
and Muslims. Meanwhile, the violent extremist splinter group, Islamic State in the
Greater Sahara, which is currently operating in the Mali -Niger border area, seemed
to be exploiting existing inter-community tensions. On 1 June, a mortar attack
against the bases of MINUSMA and the French armed forces in Timbuktu city,
resulted in the death of one peacekeeper and the wounding of three Malian and eight
French peacekeepers, as well as damage inside the camp. The attack was the fourth
such attack in Timbuktu in four weeks. On 8 June, assailants launched 15 mortar
shells at the MINUSMA camp in Kidal town, and killed four and wounded five
peacekeepers in an attack on a Mission position in the city. On 18 June, 5 people
died and 10 were wounded in an attack on a hotel near Bamako. On 14 August,
armed assailants attacked a MINUSMA camp in Douentza, Mopti region. One
peacekeeper and one member of the Malian armed forces were killed, while another
peacekeeper was injured. On the same day, unidentified armed men attacked the
MINUSMA headquarters in Timbuktu city. Four assailants infiltrated the compound,
before being killed. Five security guards, one national contractor and one Malian
gendarme died in the attack, and another six MINUSMA peacekeepers were
wounded.

17-16372

7/29

S/2017/811

35. To address the increasingly volatile and complex security environ ment, in
August, the Government initiated the development of a national action plan on
preventing and fighting violent extremism and terrorism, with specific child
protection provisions. MINUSMA also continued to support the Malian integrated
strategy for the central region by developing a pilot project on community -oriented
policing, as well as a dedicated intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance plan.
MINUSMA continued to provide support to Malian specialized units dealing with
terrorism and transnational organized crime, including investigative and forensic
support through the co-location of the Malian Specialized Judicial Unit on
Terrorism and Transnational Organized Crime. The latter charged nine persons with
taking part in acts of terrorism during an ambush on a MINUSMA foot patrol near
Aguelhok, Kidal region, in which two peacekeepers were killed on 23 May.

B.

Protection of civilians
36. The protection of the situation of civilians significantly deteriorated in the
Ménaka and Mopti regions. The limited presence and capability of Malian defence
and security forces to respond to threats continued to put civilians at greater risk, as
did the ceasefire violations and clashes in the Gao and Kidal regions and the
unstable situation in Ménaka.
37. In Koro district, Mopti region, intercommunity violence following the 16 June
murder of a prominent Dogon community member resulted in up to 39 fatalities and
forced an estimated 3,000 civilians to resettle in nearby areas. A local conflict
mediation commission with members of the two main Dogon and Fulani civil
society associations travelled to the affected areas to mediate between communities
and prevent a new outbreak of mass violence. The commission recommended that
Malian defence and security forces did not deploy to the area, given the risk that
their presence could aggravate tensions.
38. Other districts in the central region continued to be affected by the presence of
violent extremist groups. For the first time in 2017, this type of threat was obse rved
in the Bandiagara district of Mopti. In Mopti district itself, on 4 July, 100 armed
elements arrived in Dialoubé to assert control of the town, and on 20 August, armed
elements reportedly flogged a dozen women who were not wearing the veil. On
20 July, a wedding party was assaulted and 10 women were beaten 5 km from Mopti
town. In early September in Ténenkou district, over 30 civilians, including women,
were abducted by presumed violent extremists, seemingly because of the civilians ’
opposition to previous incursions by these armed elements. All the abductees were
subsequently released over the following days further to mediation by traditional
authorities.
39. In Timbuktu region, extremist armed elements used intimidation tactics,
including one beheading and three kidnappings, which instilled a climate of fear and
insecurity. Since July, the repeated presence of elements allegedly affiliated to
Hamadou Kouffa, one of the leaders of the Group for the Support of Islam and
Muslims, in the Niafunké district, indicated the potential spread of a threat mostly
recorded to date in the Mopti region.
40. Four children were killed in crossfire during clashes between signatory armed
groups and during armed incidents involving unidentified armed groups, while four
others were killed and eight injured by explosive remnants of war in the Gao, Kidal,
Ménaka and Mopti regions. Additionally, two adult civilians were killed and eight
others injured by improvised explosive devices in the Gao and Kidal regions.
41. From 7 to 10 June, escalating tensions in the Kidal region prompted
MINUSMA to conduct Operation Castor, with approximately 300 peacekeepers

8/29

17-16372

S/2017/811

deployed to secure the city day and night, including 80 peacekeepers allocated to
neighbourhoods assessed as particularly vulnerable. A similar operation was
conducted in Aguelhok. In parallel, MINUSMA engaged local community leaders to
reduce tensions.

IV. Human rights situation
42. The human rights situation remained of serious concern. Violent clashes
involving signatory armed groups and non-compliant armed groups in the Kidal and
Ménaka regions were linked to serious abuses, including enforced disappearance
and the use and recruitment of children. The rights and fundamental freedoms of
local communities, including the freedoms of religion, expression and movement,
were also increasingly threatened in the Mopti and Ségou regions by the presence of
violent extremist groups.
43. MINUSMA documented 112 cases of human rights violations and abuses
across the country, involving 348 victims, of whom 3 were women and 21 were
children, compared with 66 cases and 115 victims in the previous reporting period.
The cases included 13 instances of extrajudicial and arbitrary killings, 9 of enforced
disappearance, 15 of ill-treatment, 9 of child recruitment and use, 4 of conflictrelated sexual violence and 31 of unlawful and arbitrary detention. Signatory armed
groups and some members of the Malian defence and security forces remained
among the main alleged perpetrators of human rights a buses.
44. On 5 August, the Mission issued a press release on some of the gravest cases
documented, announcing that it had confirmed 34 allegations of human rights
abuses in the Kidal region, including enforced disappearances and recruitment and
use of children. MINUSMA further confirmed the existence of two larger graves, as
well as individual tombs, in Anéfit, containing the corpses of individuals reportedly
killed at the time of clashes in the region. The Mission is verifying the status and
identities of those killed, as well as the circumstances leading to the killings.
45. The Malian authorities arrested 116 individuals on terrorism-related charges,
of whom 106 were released, including 5 boys and 2 females. Among the
116 arrested, 22 claimed to have been ill-treated, while 60 were detained by the
gendarmerie without an arrest warrant. As at 11 September, 239 individuals held on
terrorism charges, including 5 boys, remained in detention in State institutions.
CMA and the Platform detained at least 70 individuals (37 on conflict-related
matters and 33 on law enforcement-related matters) in areas under their control. The
total number of individuals who were still being detained by signatory armed groups
was at least 21 civilians and 43 combatants from oppo sing signatory armed groups,
including those detained during previous periods.
46. MINUSMA continued to assist the Government to combat impunity and
promote reconciliation. In August, MINUSMA shared 151 cases of human rights
violations and abuses verified in 2017 with the Ministry of Justice for review and
follow-up. The Mission has established a similar sharing mechanism with the Chief
of Staff of the Malian Armed Forces to address cases allegedly involving Malian
armed forces. MINUSMA monitored the trial of the former self-proclaimed
commissioner of the Mouvement pour l’unification et le jihad en Afrique de l’Ouest
(MUJAO) Islamic police in Gao, which opened on 18 August, for crimes committed
in northern Mali in 2012 and 2013. On 21 August, he was sentenc ed to 10 years in
prison for the illegal possession of weapons of war, criminal conspiracy and
aggravated assault and for breaching national security.

17-16372

9/29

S/2017/811

47. MINUSMA continued to raise awareness among Malian defence and security
forces of human rights principles. The Mission trained 45 members of the Malian
armed forces deployed to Mopti on human rights and international humanitarian
law. As part of the European Union Training Mission in Mali training sessions,
MINUSMA sensitized 181 Malian armed forces elements based in Koulikoro. In
July, MINUSMA organized a two-day conference, attended by 13 members of the
diplomatic corps and regional organizations and 35 high -ranking Malian defence
and security forces officers, on the implementation of the Due Diligence P olicy on
Human Rights.
48. MINUSMA continued to support the operationalization of the Truth, Justice
and Reconciliation Commission, including at the regional level. As of 11 September,
1,585 individuals had made statements to the Commission, bringing the total for
2017 to 5,303.
49. During the first semester (January to June 2017), the Gender -Based Violence
Information Management System recorded 1,368 cases of gender -based Violence.
With a view to addressing conflict-related sexual violence, MINUSMA continued to
engage parties to the conflict on concrete commitments, through sustained advocacy
and technical assistance. On 7 July in Kidal, CMA signed a unilateral communiqué
to prevent and respond to conflict-related sexual violence, for which they are listed
in my reports on conflict-related sexual violence. Similarly, MINUSMA continued
to provide capacity-building for the Platform to implement its communiqué, signed
on 30 June 2016.
50. It was confirmed that, during the August clashes in Kidal between CMA a nd
the Platform, nine children were recruited by the Platform. They were detained by
CMA, then handed over to MINUSMA and UNICEF for interim care pending
family tracing and reunification on 11 August. Seven child casualties as a result of
crossfire incidents and explosive hazards in the Gao, Kidal and Mopti regions were
documented.

V. Humanitarian situation
51. The deteriorating security situation in Mali further negatively impacted the
dire humanitarian situation. Given the limited presence of State authority and the
lack of sustainable development gains in central and northern Mali, humanitarian
needs persisted. Humanitarian actors therefore continued to play an essential role in
meeting the basic needs of vulnerable people.
52. Displacements continued to occur regularly owing to violence in the Kidal and
Ménaka regions and intercommunity violence in the Mopti region, increasing the
number of internally displaced persons from some 52,000 in May to approximately
55,400. Since January 2017, more than 30,000 people have been newly displaced.
The number of Malian refugees in Burkina Faso, Mauritania and the Niger declined
from some 141,500 to approximately 140,900.
53. As part of the Government-led national response plan to food insecurity during
the lean season, the United Nations, in collaboration with partners, provided
seasonal food assistance to 267,500 people out of 601,000 severely food -insecure
people in the crisis-affected areas. The United Nations also provided emergency
food and nutritional assistance to newly displaced persons.
54. Since the previous report, the overall number of closed schools remained at
500, resulting in 150,000 children out of school in the Gao, Kidal, Ménaka, Mopti,
Ségou and Timbuktu regions. The closures were mainly due to insecurity and threats
against education personnel.
10/29

17-16372

S/2017/811

55. A total of 43, mostly crime-related, security incidents affecting humanitarian
actors, such as direct attacks, break-ins at humanitarian compounds and vehicle
theft, were registered, compared with 27 cases in the previous reporting period. On
21 August, a vehicle belonging to a United Nations agency travelling in the
Timbuktu city was attacked by unidentified armed assailants and two United
Nations personnel were injured. Two non-governmental organization workers were
killed and seven others injured in separate incidents. Armed groups temporarily
blocked humanitarian assistance to the northern regions, including food assistance
to some areas of the Kidal and Ménaka regions. The presence of explosive hazards
targeting armed forces in the main areas of humanitarian intervention continued to
threaten access to the affected population. In a new trend, humanitarians are coming
under direct attack by armed men within city limits.
56. Humanitarian funding continued to be inadequate to meet current needs and
provide life-saving assistance. The budgetary requirements of the 2017
Humanitarian Response Plan, which provides for assistance for 1.56 million people,
were reviewed in August to reflect increased needs related to food insecurity during
the lean season. The funding requirements increased from $293 million to
$304.7 million, of which only 26.3 per cent had been received as at 11 September.

VI. Economic development and cultural preservation
57. While Mali succeeded in sustaining economic growth and subduing inflation,
the majority of the population continues to live below the poverty level. The
International Monetary Fund extended its $43.96 million national financial
programme until July 2018. However, prevailing insecurity continued to undermine
the rule of law and provision of basic social services, particularly in the north and
parts of central Mali.
58. The Government held a workshop in Bamako from 17 to 19 July to further
define the development strategy for the northern regions. The workshop called for
additional stakeholder consultations on the establishment of a sustainable
development fund and for the Ministry of Economy and Finance to report on the
status of pledges received pursuant to the International Conference for the
Economic Recovery and Development of Mali, held in Paris on 22 October 2015.
59. The United Nations country team and MINUSMA supported the consolidation
of peace through a range of socioeconomic initiatives aligned with the
Government’s development objectives. The World Food Programme reinforced
social protection for vulnerable populations, the United Nations Children ’s Fund
supported school education for children, in particular girls, and the United Nations
Population Fund worked on integrated reproductive and sexual health services.
During the reporting period, 34 quick-impact projects were implemented to
strengthen the capacity of the State and address the basic needs of the population in
the north and centre of the country. These included training on administrative and
legal procedures for local government officials in Gao, Kidal, Ménaka, Mopti,
Taoudenni and Timbuktu and the provision of office equipment and material to the
regional development agencies in Gao and Mopti. Projects were also used to
provide access to safe water for about 3,000 people in the Gao, Kidal, Mopti, and
Timbuktu regions; education for 610 children in the Gao and Taoudenni regions;
and health care for 17,940 people in remote areas of the Kidal and Mo pti regions.
60. On 5 July, the Peacebuilding Fund steering committee selected governance and
intercommunity conflict as priority issues for its 2018 -2020 project phase and added
the Mopti and Ségou regions to its areas of intervention.

17-16372

11/29

S/2017/811

VII. Mandate implementation and transition planning
61. MINUSMA has begun developing a mission-wide strategic plan, comprising a
phased approach to mandate implementation, a transition strategy and an exit
strategy. Key considerations include prioritization and sequencing of the mission’s
core mandated tasks, taking into account evolving realities on the ground, while also
ensuring that the process is inclusive, transparent and based on best practices, as
well as further integration with and the handover of speci fic tasks to the United
Nations country team. Given budgetary constraints, the Mission is also considering
how to best harness commitments of other stakeholders including the Government
and signatory armed groups, which must be fully engaged in the peace p rocess.

VIII. Capacities of the Mission
A.

Military
62. The force level of 13,289 military personnel comprises 40 military observers,
486 staff officers and 12,763 contingent personnel. As at 11 September, 11,273
personnel, or 85 per cent of the authorized strength, had been deployed. Women
account for 2.2 per cent of military personnel.
63. A technical review conducted by the Office of Military Affairs from 14 to
25 July identified a series of measures to increase operational forces through
reorganization of units, review of command and control capabilities, medical
coverage and reduction in the number of camps, thereby reducing static guard
requirements. The Mission is looking to improve intelligence gathering by
deploying reconnaissance capabilities at the sector and battalion levels.
64. While little progress was made on force generation, important steps were taken
in preparation for the deployment of key assets to improve the force ’s mobility,
intervention and deterrence capabilities. The advance party of the quick reaction
force arrived in Mopti on 10 August, while the main body and helicopter
detachment are scheduled to deploy later this year. A construction party arrived in
Gao in June to begin the camp construction which would accommodate o ne combat
convoy company, with works scheduled to be completed in October. The
deployment of at least two other combat convoy companies is planned for October
and December. Progress was made in generating pledges for an explosive ordnance
disposal company, a special forces company, airfield support units and armed and
military utility helicopter units. The lack of armoured personnel carriers remained a
major obstacle to the Mission’s operations; meanwhile some troop-contributing
countries made progress in reducing their shortages. MINUSMA continues to
require an intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance company for Kidal.
Insufficient contingent-owned equipment and the self-sustainment capabilities of
some infantry units also remain a concern. The lack o f air assets compromised the
Mission’s response across its area of responsibility, including in support of its
protection of civilians mandate. Only three out of seven helicopter units, or six out
of nine attack helicopters and four out of fourteen medium utility helicopters, are
deployed or operational. The medium utility helicopter unit deployed to Kidal,
which was damaged in the attack of October 2016, was unable to resume operations
and is scheduled to be repatriated by the beginning of October. The mil itary fixedwing air transport unit based in Gao, which was damaged in the attack of November
2016, was unable to resume operations and will be repatriated. MINUSMA has
deployed commercial air transport resources to address the support requirements in
each location. Regrettably, the Mission lost an attack helicopter and its crew
members during a crash on 26 July.

12/29

17-16372

S/2017/811

French forces
65. In accordance with resolution 2364 (2017), French forces continued to
intervene in support of MINUSMA within the limits of their capacities and areas of
deployment.

B.

Police
66. The ceiling of 1,920 police personnel comprised 345 individual police officers
and 1,575 formed police personnel. As at 11 September 2017, 1,685 personnel, or
88 per cent of its authorized strength, had been deployed, of whom 84 per cent were
individual police officers (17 per cent of whom were women) and 74 per cent
formed police unit personnel (4 per cent of whom were women). MINUSMA police
continue to require an additional 12 armoured personnel carriers for formed police
units, six armoured cars for individual police officers, as well as 45 individual
police officers with specialized expertise, including in forensics, investigations,
riverine police capacity, security sector reform, counter-terrorism, serious organized
crime and drug trafficking.

C.

Civilian personnel
67. As at 11 September, 79 per cent of all MINUSMA civilian staff had been
deployed, including 80 per cent of international staff, 77 per cent of United Nations
Volunteers and 79 per cent of national staff. Women held 26 per cent of the
international posts, 32 per cent of United Nations Volunteer positions and 19 per
cent of national staff posts.

D.

Camp construction and securing supply routes
68. The Mopti camp for the quick reaction force was completed on 11 August and
occupied by the advance party. The construction of the Mopti integrated super camp
is under way and scheduled for completion in February 2018. Works to upgrade the
Gao airport runway have commenced and are scheduled to be completed in April
2018.
69. A prototype for overhead protection for sleeping quarters for personnel
operating under the United Nations security management system was developed and
tested in August. Revised accommodation layouts for Gao, Kidal, Mopti and
Timbuktu have been completed and roll-out is expected to start in the next quarter.
The redesign of the layout of Gao, Kidal, Mopti, Tessalit and Timbuktu camps is
under way. Major upgrades to defence works in all Mission camps are expected to
be completed by December 2017. These works include the installation of swing and
boom gates in Ménaka, upgrades to the ditch and berm around Kidal camp, the
construction of new bunkers in Timbuktu, reinforcement of the main gates, ditch
and berm around the super camp in Gao and the construction of a ditch and berm
around the new camp in Mopti.
70. Two transportable armoured air traffic control towers were delivered to Gao
and to Kidal, using the Cotonou-Niamey-Gao convoy route. The Togolese formed
police unit moved its contingent-owned equipment from Niamey to Ansongo for
deployment to Ménaka. Between July and August, 44 containers of Chinese
contingent-owned equipment were moved to Gao along this route.

17-16372

13/29

S/2017/811

E.

Environment
71. MINUSMA finalized its Mission-wide environmental action plan. Regional
environmental committees were established and waste/environmental focal points
identified in each military and police camp to support the Mission ’s environmental
management system. An environmental awareness session was included in the
Mission’s mandatory induction training.

IX. Safety and security of United Nations personnel
72. The programme criticality assessment was reviewed and updated in August
2017. MINUSMA took measures to enhance its information collection and analysis
capacity by establishing a Mission secured network. The merger of Force
Headquarters Intelligence Branch and the former All Sources Information Fusion
Unit was completed.
73. MINUSMA has taken key steps to improve its security infrastructure, as
described in paragraph 69. The Mission currently has sense -and-warn systems
deployed in Gao, Kidal and Timbuktu. Plans are under way to install similar
systems in other locations. The indirect fire attack of 8 June on the MINUSMA
camp in Kidal demonstrated the value of sense-and-warn systems, which enabled
personnel to seek shelter in bunkers while multiple shells exploded within the camp.
Some of the equipment was severely damaged during attacks in Kidal and
Timbuktu, prompting the temporary relocation of non -essential staff. The security of
United Nations premises and personnel was also reinforced by means of additional
patrols and escorts, as well as the deployment of quick reaction forces. Integrated
defence plans were also finalized for the regions and Bamako.
74. In response to the asymmetric threats faced by the Mission’s logistics convoys,
MINUSMA continued to provide training on the identification and mitigation of
improvised explosive device threats to 370 Mission military personnel and delivered
a training course on leading these operations in an asymmetric threat environment
for convoy commanders to 43 personnel.
75. The Mission’s capacity to conduct prompt medical and casualty evacuation
remained constrained by the shortage of night operation capable military attack and
utility helicopters in Kidal and Mopti region, limiting the ability of the civilian
specialized aeromedical evacuation helicopters and teams to operate in combat
situations. The Mission increased the number of civilian MI -8 helicopters in
Timbuktu to maintain full casualty/medical evacuation coverage. One MI -8 was
stationed in Ménaka to provide the Mission with immediate evacuation capability in
the region.

X. Conduct and discipline
76. In addition to the two allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse received in
January and June 2016, which are both pending investigation by the relevant troop contributing country, a third allegation was reported in August, also pending
investigation. MINUSMA continued its prevention activities, including training,
public information and outreach activities to inform the local population about the
United Nations standards of conduct, in particular the zero -tolerance policy on
sexual exploitation and abuse.

14/29

17-16372

S/2017/811

XI. Observations
77. I am deeply concerned by recent developments in Mali, in particular the
resumption of violent clashes between the signatory armed groups and the political
turmoil surrounding the constitutional referendum. These developments are
indicative of deeply rooted rifts within Malian society that need to be addressed in
order to bring new momentum in the peace process. Regrettably, almost no progress
was made in the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in
Mali. As the country enters an intense electoral period, culminating in the 2018
presidential elections, the signatory parties’ unwavering support for and
commitment to the peace process is a prerequisite for preventing a desc ent into a
vicious cycle of violence and chaos, jeopardizing the future of Mali and its chances
for lasting peace.
78. The gains in the peace process could easily be reversed if not rapidly
consolidated. Lack of progress in the operationalization of the in terim authorities
and establishment of the Operational Coordination Mechanisms in Kidal and
Timbuktu sends the wrong message. Insufficient progress has been made on the
institutional reforms that would allow for the implementation of key provisions of
the Agreement, such as comprehensive security sector reform or the adoption of a
revised constitution. Time is of the essence now.
79. The resumption of hostilities exacerbated security risks in northern Mali.
While I welcome the signing of a truce, the armed groups must now demonstrate
that they remain truly steadfast in their commitment to the peace process and the
restoration of State authority and services. I call upon these groups not only to
respect the definitive cessation of hostilities but to contribu te proactively to the
implementation of the remaining provisions of the Agreement. Their commitment
must include a submission of their finalized lists of candidates for the cantonment
and disarmament, demobilization and (re)integration processes, so that t hese
processes can commence in earnest. Stabilization and peacebuilding in northern
Mali will otherwise remain unattainable, and the most vulnerable populations will
continue to suffer from the absence of long overdue peace dividends. In this regard,
I take note of the adoption of resolution 2374 (2017) and will make the necessary
arrangements to support the new Sanctions Committee and the prompt
establishment of the Panel of Experts and to ensure close co operation with
MINUSMA.
80. I welcome President Keita’s decision to stay the constitutional referendum to
appease social tensions and prevent a further escalation of protests. It is the
Government’s responsibility to quickly determine the modalities for a new
constitutional review process that is as inclusive and as participatory as possible.
The peace process can be successful only if Malians assume full ownership and
responsibility for it. In this regard, the inclusion of women in the process remains
essential. The benchmark matrix developed between the Government and
MINUSMA should be used among the Malian parties to ensure greater
accountability and ownership. I call upon signatory parties to step up their
commitment, but also upon opposition parties to demonstrate wisdom and unity of
purpose, while the Government needs to embrace its unique leadership role in the
peace process.
81. Delays in the redeployment and extension of State authority throughout the
country and the decrease in the number of State officials across northern and central
Mali are alarming. I am deeply worried by the increase in security incidents by
armed elements and extremist armed groups across central Mali, particularly in the
Mopti and Segou regions. Here, the emergence of vigilante groups to respond to

17-16372

15/29

S/2017/811

unaddressed security threats, particularly in remote areas, is also troubling. This
situation is likely to fuel additional violence and deepen existing fissures between
communities. I therefore call upon the Government to strengthe n the presence of the
civilian administration and defence and security forces in these areas and to
effectively tackle the rising insecurity, while respecting international human rights
obligations. MINUSMA is committed to reinforcing its support to the Ma lian
defence and security forces and the signature of the memorandum of understanding
with the Malian armed forces will be an important step towards the consolidation of
this support.
82. The situation in northern and central Mali requires more than secur ity
measures alone. To effectively address the complex challenges and bring security,
stability and development to these regions, a multidimensional approach is needed,
encompassing justice, development, security, education and job creation, especially
for disaffected youth and young people in general. In that regard, MINUSMA
remains engaged in support of the Government’s multidimensional strategy for the
central regions in collaboration with United Nations agencies and key donors.
83. Meanwhile, the recent deployment of the Mission’s quick reaction force is an
encouraging development. Its full deployment will further increase the Mission ’s
mobility and deterrence capabilities. The Secretariat is doing its utmost to complete
force generation, to implement the recommendations of the last military technical
review and to help the Mission reach full operational capability.
84. MINUSMA and the United Nations country team are also committed to
continuing to support the consolidation of peace and the delivery of p eace dividends
through a range of socioeconomic initiatives, in line with the Government ’s
development priorities. The finalization of the development strategy for the northern
regions is vital for supporting Malian authorities. I urge the Government to ad opt
this strategy without delay and call upon the international community to deliver on
their pledges.
85. I am disturbed by the cross-border dimension of insecurity in Mali and the
growing threat posed by terrorist groups to neighbouring countries, including
Burkina Faso and Niger. I condemn in the strongest terms the despicable crimes
perpetrated by these groups. I welcome the enhanced regional ownership of peace
and security-related initiatives, including efforts towards the deployment of the G -5
Sahel joint force, which can also contribute to an enabling environment for
MINUSMA to fully implement its mandate. The success of the joint force, and that
of MINUSMA, is intrinsically linked to the progress of the Malian peace process. I
appeal to the international community to support this regional undertaking, with
predictable financial and logistical support.
86. The prevailing insecurity undermines the rule of law and the provision of basic
services, particularly in the north and in some parts of the centre. The window of
opportunity for the Government to provide long -awaited peace dividends is slowly
narrowing. The humanitarian situation continues to worsen. I am extremely
concerned by the great number of schools that remain closed and increasing food
insecurity in the crisis-affected regions. I call upon international partners to
contribute generously to the 2017 Humanitarian Response Plan, which remains
significantly underfunded, to address the needs of the most vulnerable.
87. I commend humanitarian actors for continuing to support the Government in
the provision of basic social services to the people in need against a backdrop of
increasing attacks on their personnel. Such attacks constitute war crimes and I call
upon all parties to contribute to the creation of a safe humanitarian space. Ensuring
unhindered humanitarian access will remain an essential task o f the Mission.

16/29

17-16372

S/2017/811

88. I remain concerned about the numerous allegations of serious human rights
violations and abuses, particularly in the Kidal and Mopti regions. The Mission will
continue to support the Malian authorities in their efforts to combat impunity. The
establishment of the International Commission of Inquiry offers the opportunity to
enhance judicial access for the numerous victims and families affected by the
conflict.
89. MINUSMA and the United Nations country team are committed to continuing
to support the consolidation of peace and the delivery of peace dividends through a
range of socioeconomic initiatives, in line with the Government ’s development
priorities. The finalization of the development strategy for the northern regions is
vital for supporting the Malian authorities. I urge the Government to adopt this
strategy without delay and call upon the international community to deliver on their
pledges.
90. I am deeply saddened by the considerable loss of life among Malian defence
and security forces and United Nations peacekeepers. I express my heartfelt
condolences to the people and Government of Mali, MINUSMA troop -contributing
and police-contributing countries and the bereaved families of the victims. No
efforts must be spared to improve the safety and security of MINUSMA personnel,
including through the installation and full operationalization of medical and
casualty evacuation capabilities.
91. Finally, I wish to express my appreciation to the Special Representative,
Mahamat Saleh Annadif, for his indefatigable work and dedication. I also wish to
pay special tribute to the men and women of MINUSMA for their continued
commitment to peace in Mali despite the extremely difficult circumstances. I
commend the members of the international mediation team for their sustained
support for the Malian parties and encourage Algeria, as the lead mediator, to
support renewed impetus to the implementation of the Agreement through the
Agreement Monitoring Committee. I express my gratitude to multilateral and
bilateral partners, United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, as well as
non-governmental organizations and all other partners, for their important
contributions in support of peace and stability in Mali.

17-16372

17/29

S/2017/811

Annex I
[Original: French]

Benchmarks for monitoring the implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
Objectives

1.

Progress indicators

State of
implementation

Deadline

Comments

Political and institutional matters

Significant progress in the implementation of an institutional architecture designed to guarantee the participation
and inclusion of all Malian citizens and enable the restoration of State authority throughout the country
1.1 Establish an
institutional architecture
based on the principle of
free administration and
increased representation
of communities within
national institutions

1.2 Define the
authorities of territorial
communities by
specifying their
respective roles and
responsibilities, and
those of the State

18/29

1.1.1 The interim
authorities responsible
for the administration of
municipalities
(communes), districts
(cercles) and regions in
the north are operational

Ongoing

2017

The interim authorities
were installed in the five
regions of the north on
20 April 2017

1.1.2 The Government of Ongoing
Mali has established
territorial communities,
elected through universal
suffrage and with extensive
authority, by amending Act
No. 93-008 on free
administration and Act
No. 2012-006 on the
administrative organization
of the territory

2017

The texts have been drafted
but have not yet been
approved

1.1.3 For every region the
Government has
established a Regional
Assembly, elected by direct
universal suffrage, to which
authorities and resources
have been transferred

Ongoing

2017

Adoption of the new
election law; the law on
territorial communities is
being drafted

1.2.1 The Government
has ensured that each
region is able to establish
and manage collective
infrastructure and basic
social services

Implemented

1.2.2 Every region has
developed an economic,
social and cultural
development plan and
will be responsible for
land management

Implemented

17-16372

S/2017/811

Objectives

Progress indicators

1.2.3 Every region is
responsible for
establishing and
implementing a tax
system suited to its
economic structure and
development objectives,
in accordance with
current legislation
2.

State of
implementation

Deadline

Comments

Not
implemented

Defence and security aspects

Implementation and progressive functioning of inclusive defence and security forces that are accountable to
citizens and comply with human rights and the rule of law, thereby strengthening national cohesion and
contributing to the promotion of regional security
2.1 Implement reform
of the security and
defence sectors

17-16372

2.1.1 Decrees are
adopted defining the
make-up, role and
operation of the National
Disarmament,
Demobilization and
Reintegration
Commission, the
Commission on
Integration and the
National Council for
Security Sector Reform

Implemented

The decrees have been
adopted by Cabinet

2.1.2 The National
Disarmament,
Demobilization and
Reintegration
Commission, the
Commission on
Integration and the
National Council for
Security Sector Reform
are established in an
inclusive manner and are
operational

Implemented

All the commissions are
operational

2.1.3 The National
Disarmament,
Demobilization and
Reintegration
Commission, the
Commission on
Integration and the
National Council for
Security Sector Reform
have developed a new
national vision of defence
and security, taking

Ongoing

Completion expected

19/29

S/2017/811

Objectives

Progress indicators

State of
implementation

Deadline

Comments

relevant local, national
and international factors
into account
2.2 Implement
cantonment and
disarmament,
demobilization and
reintegration
programmes for
combatants, in
accordance with the
guiding principles of the
Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali
and in keeping with
international standards

2.3 Reconstitute and
progressively redeploy
defence and security
forces throughout
national territory

20/29

2.2.1 The National
Disarmament,
Demobilization and
Reintegration
Commission has drawn
up a national
disarmament,
demobilization and
reintegration and
cantonment programme,
with the support of the
United Nations
Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA) and other
partners

Implemented

2.2.2 The Commission
on Integration has set up
a support programme
which defines the
measures necessary for
the reintegration of
ex-combatants and takes
into account cross-cutting
issues (gender equality,
human rights and the
protection of civilians)

Ongoing

2.3.1 The Technical
Commission on Security
and the Operational
Coordination Mechanism
have submitted an
implementation plan for
security arrangements in
the north, with the
deployment of joint
patrols to provide
security for the
cantonment and
disarmament,
demobilization and
reintegration process

Implemented

The programme was
validated in December 2016

First half of
2017

An outline of the
integration benchmarks and
technical quotas has been
drafted for approval by the
National Council for
Security Sector Reform

17-16372

S/2017/811

Objectives

3.

Progress indicators

State of
implementation

2.3.2 Under the aegis of
the Operational
Coordination Mechanism,
joint units of combatants
from signatory parties
and the defence and
security forces, including
special counter-terrorist
units, are operational and
carrying out joint patrols
that contribute to the
restoration of security

Ongoing

2.3.3 The gradual
redeployment throughout
Mali of reconstituted
defence and security
forces is in effect and
guarantees that security
and public order are
maintained

Ongoing

Deadline

Comments

First half of
2017

The battalion of the
operational coordination
mechanism has been
established in the Gao
region, but it is not fully
operational owing to a lack
of heavy weapons
The refurbishment and
equipping by MINUSMA of
the operational coordination
mechanism camps in Kidal
and Timbuktu is ongoing
Planning is ongoing

Humanitarian assistance, socioeconomic and cultural development and the provision of basic social services

Establishment of structures and mechanisms designed to achieve inclusive, participatory and sustainable local
development
3.1 Create the
conditions necessary to
facilitate the return,
repatriation,
resettlement and
socioeconomic
reintegration of all
displaced persons and
refugees; enable
communities to benefit
from peace dividends;
and strengthen social
cohesion and
humanitarian assistance

17-16372

3.1.1 Establishment of
monitoring mechanisms
for displaced persons and
refugees, in accordance
with regional and
international instruments

Ongoing

Identification of 30 return
zones in 20 priority
municipalities by the
Ministry of Solidarity and
Humanitarian Action, with
the support of the Office of
the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR)
The third meeting of the
Mali-Mauritania-UNHCR
tripartite commission for
the voluntary repatriation
of Malian refugees in
Mauritania was held on
21 July 2017

21/29

S/2017/811

Objectives

Progress indicators

3.1.2 Neutral and
impartial humanitarian
assistance is delivered in
areas impacted by the
crisis to those most
vulnerable (residents,
returnees, displaced or
repatriated persons),
enhancing their means of
subsistence and resilience

State of
implementation

Ongoing

Deadline

Comments

At the end of July 2017, the
total required for the
humanitarian response plan
was increased by 4 per cent
to $304.7 million. As at
4 September 2017, only
26 per cent of the plan had
been financed
Projects totalling $7 million
financed by the Central
Emergency Response Fund
have continued to be
implemented in the Gao,
Kidal, Mopti and Timbuktu
regions, with a focus on the
following areas: shelter/
non-food items, water/
hygiene/sanitation,
nutrition, food security and
health
UNHCR is delivering food
to repatriated adults and
children in the Gao,
Ménaka, Mopti and
Timbuktu regions

3.1.3 With the support
of humanitarian and
development partners
under the 2015-2017
emergency humanitarian
plan and the United
Nations Development
Assistance Framework,
peace dividends are
brought to communities
in order to reduce
socioeconomic disparities
among regions, with
increased access to basic
services in the poorest
regions

22/29

Ongoing

The humanitarian and
development component
has been established with
different technical and
financial partners. The aim
is to develop sustainable
solutions that will benefit
people living in areas
affected by the crisis

17-16372

S/2017/811

Objectives

Progress indicators

3.2 Mobilize the
resources necessary to
implement the specific
development strategy
for the northern regions
of Mali

3.2.1 Establishment of a
northern development
zone with an
interregional advisory
council, comprising
representatives of
Regional Assemblies, and
with a specific
development strategy
relevant to the
sociocultural and
geographic realities and
the climate of the region

17-16372

State of
implementation

Deadline

Comments

Ongoing

The
development
zone’s
governance
bodies will
be
established
once the
new regional
councils
have been
established

The specific development
strategy for the north was
drafted at a national
workshop held from 17 to
19 July 2017

3.2.2 Establishment of a
sustainable development
fund, comprising the
resources pledged during
the International
Conference for the
Economic Recovery and
Development of Mali,
held in October 2015,
with the support of
technical and financial
partners

Ongoing

2017

It was recommended during
the above-mentioned
workshop that technical
consultations should be
held with the signatory
movements regarding the
sustainable development
fund

3.2.3 Establishment of a
regional development
agency in each region for
programme management
and monitoring
implementation of the
commitments undertaken
by the Government to
benefit the regions, under
the authority of the
President of the Regional
Assembly

Ongoing

3.2.4 Programme
agreements are concluded
between the State and the
regions for the
implementation of multiyear investment
programmes, with the
participation of the
territorial communities
concerned

Ongoing

Regional development
agencies cannot be
established in the Ménaka
and Taoudenni regions until
the draft law establishing
the territorial communities
in those regions has been
signed

2016

The planning contract was
signed between the State
and the Gao region in July
2017. With no regional
development agencies in
place, those of Ménaka and
Taoudenni are pending

23/29

S/2017/811

Objectives

4.

Progress indicators

State of
implementation

Deadline

Comments

Justice and reconciliation

Prevent impunity and promote genuine national reconciliation by ensuring legal and judicial assistance and
access through the implementation of transitional justice mechanisms and comprehensive justice sector reform, in
accordance with international standards
4.1 Organize a national
reconciliation
conference on the
underlying causes of the
conflict

4.2 Establish
transitional justice
mechanisms

4.3 Reform the justice
system and strengthen
the rule of law in order
to enhance traditional
and informal justice
mechanisms, improve
access to justice for
perpetrators and victims,
and end impunity

24/29

4.1.1 An inclusive
national reconciliation
conference on the
underlying causes of the
conflict is organized,
with the support of the
Agreement Monitoring
Committee, to ensure
genuine national
reconciliation

Implemented

March 2017

The national reconciliation
conference was held from
27 March to 2 April 2017

4.1.2 A charter for
peace, unity and national
reconciliation is drawn
up on the basis of
consensus and based on
the outcomes of the
national reconciliation
conference

Partially
implemented

The Charter for Peace,
Unity and National
Reconciliation and a
mapping of all lands in
Mali were submitted to the
President of the Republic
on 20 June 2017. However,
the Coordination des
mouvements de l’Azawad
has rejected the Charter in
its current form

4.2.1 The Truth, Justice
and Reconciliation
Commission is
operational and has
regional offices
throughout the country

Ongoing

Five regional offices out of
six are operational

4.2.2 An international
commission of inquiry is
established and
operational

Ongoing

The instrument officially
establishing the commission
is being prepared

4.3.1 The justice system
is strengthened to
improve access to justice
to justice for perpetrators
and victims

Ongoing

Following the appointment
and reassignment of judges
around the country, judges
in the northern regions are
gradually taking up their
posts. However, the
security situation is forcing
some to relocate
temporarily to other regions

A total of 5,267 statements
from victims and witnesses
have been recorded

17-16372

S/2017/811

Objectives

Progress indicators

4.3.2 The perpetrators
of human rights
violations are prosecuted
and convicted in
accordance with
international standards

State of
implementation

Ongoing

Deadline

Comments

Since January 2017 and as
part of the mechanism for
sharing information
between MINUSMA and
the Ministry of Justice:
– Two meetings have been
held
– A total of 151
documented cases of
human rights violations
and abuses were
transmitted between
January and May
– A technical adviser to the
Secretary-General of the
Ministry of Justice has
been appointed to monitor
the assistance provided by
the judicial authorities.
In 2017, of 102 cases that
were brought to trial in
criminal court, four
individuals were convicted
of offences constituting
human rights violations or
abuses

17-16372

4.3.3 The victims of
human rights violations,
including sexual or
gender-based violence,
are treated fairly by the
justice system, receive
reparations and benefit
from new judicial
protection measures

Ongoing

From 2013 to 2016, at least
132 persons filed
complaints of offences
constituting conflict-related
sexual violence committed
between 2012 and 2013 in
the northern regions of
Mali. As at 31 August 2017,
judges had questioned at
least 52 of those
complainants. No trials
have yet begun

4.3.4 Traditional and
customary mechanisms
are integrated into the
justice system, without
prejudice to the sovereign
right of the State

Ongoing

A workshop to discuss the
issue of traditional justice
and the institution of the
cadi was held on 27 and
28 July 2017. The aim was
to clarify the jurisdiction
and role of cadis, with a
view to their
institutionalization

25/29

S/2017/811

Objectives

Progress indicators

4.3.5 Institutions
regulating and protecting
specific rights, such as
freedom of expression, of
the press and of
communication, are in
place or strengthened and
work effectively

State of
implementation

Deadline

Comments

Implemented

4.3.6 The Anti-Corruption Implemented
and Financial Crime
Commission is established

26/29

17-16372

S/2017/811

Annex II
Military and police strength of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
as at 31 August 2017
Military component

Police component

Staff officers and units

Individual police officers

Formed police units

Country

Men

Women

Total

Men

Women

Total

Men

Women

Total

Men

Women

Total

Armenia

1

–

1

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Austria

3

–

3

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Bangladesh

1 527

12

1 539

–

–

–

280

–

280

280

–

280

Belgium

17

3

20

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Benin

261

1

262

13

1

14

140

140

153

1

154

Bhutan

3

–

3

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Bosnia and Herzegovina

2

–

2

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

1 673

46

1 719

30

1

31

134

6

140

164

7

171

Burundi

–

–

–

3

–

3

–

–

–

3

–

3

Cambodia

296

7

303

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Burkina Faso

Cameroon

Total police

2

–

2

17

–

17

–

–

–

17

–

17

Chad

1 392

6

1 398

3

4

7

–

–

–

3

4

7

China

389

14

403

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Côte d’Ivoire

149

3

152

8

2

10

–

–

–

8

2

10

Czechia

–

1

1

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Denmark

60

5

65

5

–

5

–

–

–

5

–

5

Egypt

74

–

74

5

–

5

140

–

140

145

–

145

El Salvador

93

11

104

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Estonia

10

–

10

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Ethiopia

1

–

1

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Finland

5

1

6

7

2

9

–

–

–

7

2

9

France

20

1

21

8

1

9

–

–

–

8

1

9

Gambia

4

–

4

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Germany

544

15

559

12

4

16

–

–

–

12

4

16

Ghana

221

–

221

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Guinea

847

10

857

10

9

19

–

–

–

10

9

19

Guinea-Bissau

1

–

1

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Hungary

–

–

–

1

–

1

–

–

–

1

–

1

Indonesia

8

–

8

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Italy

1

–

1

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Jordan

1

–

1

4

–

4

–

–

–

4

–

4

Kenya

5

4

9

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Latvia

2

–

2

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Liberia

66

7

73

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Lithuania

5

–

5

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Madagascar

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

17-16372

27/29

S/2017/811
Military component

Country

Mauritania

Police component

Staff officers and units

Individual police officers

Formed police units

Total police

Men

Women

Total

Men

Women

Total

Men

Women

Total

Men

Women

Total

5

–

5

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Nepal

151

4

155

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Netherlands

270

9

279

4

–

4

–

–

–

4

–

4

Niger

855

7

862

19

14

33

–

–

–

19

14

33

Nigeria

69

16

85

1

–

1

118

22

140

119

22

141

Norway

14

2

16

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Portugal

2

–

2

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Romania

1

–

1

7

–

7

–

–

–

7

–

7

Senegal

814

13

827

16

–

16

259

9

268

275

9

284

Sierra Leone

8

–

8

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Sri Lanka

7

–

7

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Sweden

192

21

213

4

2

6

–

–

–

4

2

6

5

–

5

4

–

4

–

–

–

4

–

4

Togo

912

28

940

1

8

9

265

13

278

266

21

287

Tunisia

–

–

–

53

2

55

–

–

–

53

2

55

Turkey

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland

2

–

2

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

United States of America

21

5

26

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Yemen

4

–

4

8

–

8

–

–

–

8

–

8

252 11 267

243

50

293

1 336

50

1 386

1 579

100

1 679

Switzerland

Total

28/29

11 015

17-16372

S/2017/811

17-16372

29/29
