S/2014/805

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 November 2014
Original: English

Letter dated 11 November 2014 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the letter of the President of the Security Council
dated 23 July 2014 (S/2014/529) in which he requested a written update by
12 November on the situation in Guinea-Bissau for the consideration of the Security
Council before the expiration of the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) on 30 November. The present
letter is submitted in response to that request and contains an update on the political
and security situation in Guinea-Bissau since my report of 18 August (S/2014/603).
It also covers significant human rights, humanitarian and socioeconomic
developments since then. It highlights the progress made by the Government in
determining its national priorities and provides information on the strategic
assessment mission that I deployed to Guinea-Bissau to conduct the comprehensive
review requested by the Council.
Political and security developments
During the period under review, the situation in Guinea -Bissau was
characterized by intense activities on the part of the newly elected Government to
identify its priorities, plan for an international donor round table and put in place
measures to ensure stability.
On 22 September, the Government submitted to the National Assembly its
programme for the period 2014-2018, containing immediate and long-term
priorities. Introducing the programme, the Prime Minister, Domingos Simões
Pereira, stated that the Government was implementing its emergency plan and
would, among other things, pay salary arrears to civil servants, begin the 2014/15
academic year, increase agricultural production, strengthen cholera and Ebola
prevention and preparedness efforts and improve the supply of public utilities.
Underscoring the need for national consensus on structural reforms, the Prime
Minister proposed bimonthly debates in the parliament and committed himself to
presenting annual expenditure reports to both the National Assembly and the Court
of Auditors as a way of ensuring transparency. He also stressed the need to review
key legislation, including the Constitution and the electoral code, and to launch an
inclusive national dialogue on peace and reconciliation. On 23 September, the
National Assembly unanimously adopted the programme and approved the amended
budget for 2014, at some 120 billion CFA francs ($239.5 million).

14-64104 (E)

171114

*1464104*

S/2014/805

In his statement to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session, delivered
on 29 September, the Prime Minister voiced his Government’s commitment to
consolidating peace and stability. He expressed gratitude to the inter national
community for its support and called for continued assistance. He outlined the
Government’s plans for an urgent programme, focusing on basic service delivery to
the population, a contingency programme, aimed at reviewing natural resource
management and contracts, and a medium-term programme, to be presented during
a donor round table that the Government would organize early in 2015. He also
underscored the importance of reforming the security sector, extending State
authority and combating drug trafficking and organized crime.
On 7 October, the Prime Minister wrote to the Resident Representative of the
United Nations Development Programme in Guinea-Bissau to request financial and
technical support for the organization of the donor round table. On 18 October, the
Government convened a ministerial-level retreat to discuss, among other things,
preparations for the round table. At the conclusion of the retreat, the Prime Minister
provided a briefing to the international community on his Government’s vi sion for
the development of the country and its strategy for the round table. He said that the
vision focused on four priorities: governmental stability through structural reforms,
including in the defence and security sectors; industrialization of agricul ture to
enable the transformation of crops into value-added products; investment in energy
and transport infrastructure, with an emphasis on clean energy, roads and ports; and
preparation of urban centres for migrants from rural areas. He stressed that Gui neaBissau had a rich biodiversity that should be monetized and protected through sound
investment by credible partners. UNIOGBIS and the United Nations country team
are supporting the Government in its efforts to organize the round table.
During the reporting period, the security situation remained stable. On
15 September, the President, José Mário Vaz, issued a presidential decree to dismiss
the Chief of General Staff of the Armed Forces, General António Indjai. According
to the decree, the decision was taken in accordance with the power granted to the
President and the Government under article 68 of the Constitution. On
17 September, the President promoted Brigadier Biaguê Na N’tan to the rank of
General and appointed him as the successor to General Indjai. On 30 September, the
President issued a decree to grant pardons to six individuals who had been convicted
by the Supreme Military Court of Guinea-Bissau in connection with an incident
involving the airborne regiment located at the Bissalanca air force base in Bissau on
21 October 2012. He said that the pardons had been granted in the context of
promoting national unity and reconciliation.
On 26 September, a bus struck an anti-tank mine near the town of Bissorã,
leaving 23 dead and 17 wounded. An investigation by the local police concluded
that the mine dated back to the war of independence. The United Nations supported
the efforts of the Ministry of Health and the Embassy of Portugal to medically
evacuate a victim. On 14 October, the Minister of Defenc e wrote to my Special
Representative, Miguel Trovoada, to request technical assistance for additional
clearance of explosive remnants of war, including landmines. Following that
request, the United Nations deployed an expert on 4 November to assess the ris ks
and determine how it could support the Government’s efforts.
On 2 October, the President appointed Hermenegildo Pereira as Prosecutor
General. Before that appointment, he had been the Deputy Head of the

2/5

14-64104

S/2014/805

Anti-Corruption and Economic Unit in the Office of the Prosecutor General. On
9 October, Filomena Lopes was appointed as the new Director of the Judiciary
Police. A former prosecutor, she will be responsible for, among other things,
combating drug trafficking and organized crime. The Government has also
appointed new regional governors and directors general in a number of ministries,
while emphasizing the need to ensure competence.
On 15 September, the Steering Committee on Security Sector Reform held its
first meeting after more than two years of inactivity. Chaired by the Minister of
Defence, the meeting was attended by representatives of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), the African Union, the European Union, the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, UNIOGBIS and other bilateral
partners, including Portugal and Spain.
Human rights, humanitarian and socioeconomic developments
UNIOGBIS and the United Nations country team have been supporting efforts
by the Government and civil society organizations to prepare for the sec ond
universal periodic review of Guinea-Bissau by the Human Rights Council,
scheduled for January 2015. The Government’s report, which was due to be
presented on 24 June, at the twenty-sixth session of the Council, is still being
prepared and is expected to be submitted in November. A joint report to the Council
by local non-governmental organizations, as part of the civil society contribution to
the review, was submitted on 18 September.
From 24 to 27 October, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime , in
collaboration with the National Assembly and the Government, organized a high level workshop to discuss efforts to combat drug trafficking, money-laundering,
corruption and transnational organized crime. The workshop also considered the
role of the parliament and the Government in combating transnational organized
crime and strengthening the rule of law. It provided an opportunity for the
Government to update the three-year national plan for combating drug trafficking
and organized crime, prepared in June 2011, and to define new priority areas
accordingly.
The authorities, assisted by the World Health Organization and the United
Nations Children’s Fund and other international partners, are working to prevent the
spread of Ebola to the country. The Government has launched a public information
campaign on national media, including UNIOGBIS radio space. Isolation sites have
been identified in the main health-care centres and health workers are receiving
training and equipment to diagnose and handle patients. The United Nations system
in Guinea-Bissau is monitoring the situation closely and will continue to assist the
Government in mobilizing the required resources. The World Bank has announced a
pledge of 600,000 euros to support the efforts of the Ministry of Health to prevent
Ebola in the country.
Engagement and coordination among international partners
My Special Representative has been actively working to ensure continued and
effective coordination among international partners. To that end, he resu med the
practice of monthly meetings with all international partners represented in Bissau,
the first of which was held on 30 September.

14-64104

3/5

S/2014/805

In October, he travelled throughout the subregion to meet key regional
partners of Guinea-Bissau, including the Presidents of Benin, Equatorial Guinea,
Ghana, Nigeria and Senegal, in addition to the Deputy President of the ECOWAS
Commission. He also travelled to Lisbon and Brussels to meet the Prime Minister
and the President of Portugal and several high-ranking representatives of the
European Union and the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries. His active
engagement will assist in harmonizing the respective positions of bilateral and
multilateral partners and ensuring maximum coordination and complementarity of
international efforts to implement security sector, political and economic reforms,
combat drug trafficking and fight impunity. Between 15 and 19 September 2014, a
third joint assessment mission, led by the African Union and including
representatives of ECOWAS, the International Organization of la Francophonie, the
European Union and the United Nations, travelled to Guinea -Bissau. Its objective
was to assess the political and security situation and the progress made in
concluding the transition process and restoring constitutional order. The mission
also provided key international partners with an opportunity to engage with the
newly elected Government on its plans and priorities.
On 26 September, the international partners, including the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries, took part in a consultative meeting, convened by
the African Union and ECOWAS in the margins of the sixty-ninth session of the
General Assembly, to discuss the report of the mission. They took note of the
recommendation made therein to extend the presence of the ECOWAS Mission in
Guinea-Bissau beyond 31 December 2014 and strongly appealed to all international
and bilateral partners to support the Government in the implementation of its
security sector reform programme and other reform s. They also called for the
relaunching of the International Contact Group on Guinea -Bissau, which last met in
June 2012 in Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire. The next meeting of the International Contact
Group is scheduled to be held on 18 November in New York.
International partners and financial institutions have increased their pledges in
support of the newly elected Government. The European Union has indicated that it
will provide 10 million euros in budgetary support in November 2014 and another
8 million euros in the first half of 2015. It is also planning to sign a three -year
protocol with Guinea-Bissau on fisheries, with a first instalment of approximately
11.7 million euros to be provided by the end of 2014. In addition, it is providing
funding to tackle transnational organized crime, prevent the spread of Ebola and
expand health and rural development projects.
On 11 September, the Government of Timor-Leste announced that it would
provide $6 million for the payment of one month’s salary to State employees. The
Government of China is discussing renewing its agreement with Guinea -Bissau on
fisheries, extending its agreement to deploy medical teams to the military hospital in
Bissau and the central hospital in Canchungo, providing technology for rice
production and building a new justice compound to accommodate all courts in
Bissau.
On 25 September, the International Monetary Fund announced that a staff level agreement had been reached on an emergency programme that would be
supported by the Fund’s Rapid Credit Facility, valued at 2.7 billion CFA francs
($5.4 million). The Fund also welcomed the recent progress made by the
Government in fiscal management and endorsed its priority programme and its

4/5

14-64104

S/2014/805

rectified budget for 2014. It noted that the implementation of s ecurity sector reforms
remained a key requirement for durable stability.
Comprehensive review of the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
In its resolution 2157 (2014), the Security Council requested me to c onduct a
comprehensive review of the mandate of UNIOGBIS to ensure that it was aligned
with the priorities identified by the new Government. To that end, I deployed a
multidisciplinary strategic assessment mission to Guinea -Bissau from 3 to
14 November. The findings and recommendations will be included in my report to
the Council in January 2015. I should therefore like to recommend that the Council
consider technically rolling over the mandate of UNIOGBIS for a period of three
months, until 28 February 2015, which would give the Council time to fully
consider the recommendations made in my report of January 2015 about any
adjustments to the mandate.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

14-64104

5/5
