UNITED NATIOIVS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL
THIRTY-FOURTH

NEW

COUNCIL
RECORD’S

,.

YEAR

YORK

CONTENTS

Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2158) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Report of the Security cduncil Commission established under resolution 446 (1979)
(S/13450 and 0x-r. 1 and Add..l) I.....................................

1
1
1

WPV.2158

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol W...) are normally published in quarterly Supplements of the Oflcial Recor& of the Security Coundl. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2158th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 20 July 1979, at 10.30 a.m.
Presifdenr: Mr. Ivor RICHARD
fUnited Kinedom
Great Britain and North&n Ireland). -

congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the month of July. The skill and wisdom
you have so amply demonstrated in the past arc a formidable asset to the Council in dealing with the thorny issues to
be considered in the course of this month. I need hardly
comment on the warm and friendly relations between your
country and mine, which should provide assurance of our
full co-operation with you in carrying out the responsibilities of the presidency.

of

Presenr: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.

3. I also take the opportunity to express gratitude to
Ambassador Troyanovsky of the Soviet Union, who so ably
guided the work of the Council during the month of June
with the gracious style which we have all come to admire.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2158)
I.

Adoption of the agenda

2. The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Report of the Security Council Commission established under resolution 446 (1979) (S/13450 and
Corr.1 and Add.1)

4. My delegation has studied the report of the Security
Council Commission established under resolution 446
(1979). We have also listened with keen interest to the clear
and eloquent introductory statements made by the members
of the Commission. We are satisfied that the Commission
approached its task with a serious, responsible and balanced attitude. The members spared no effort to secure the
cooperation of all parties, and made every attempt to
gather information from the relevant sources in order to
carry out a thorough investigation of the situation relating
to settlements in the occupied Arab territories, including
Jerusalem. In that regard, my delegation shares their feelings of disappointment and dissatisfaction at the failure of
the Government of Israel to co-operate with the Commission and at its refusal to allow the Commission to visit the
occupied territories. That negative attitude is inexcusable
and, in our view, contrary to the best interests of Israel itself.
We are pleased, none the less, that the Commission persevered in its efforts and, with the cooperation and assistance
of all other parties, was able to gather valuable information
and to reach fair and reasonable conclusions based on a
careful examination of the evidence presented to it.

The meeting was called to order at 11.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
me !3ituation ill tbe occupied Arah territories:
Report of the Security Council Commission established
mder resolution 446 (1979) (S/13450 and Corr.1 and
Add.1)
1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
taken at the previous meetings, I invite the representative of
Jordan to take a place at the Council table. I invite the
representatives of E t, Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic and the Acting %I airman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
to take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber. I invite the representative of the Palestine
Liberation Organization to take a place at the Council
table.

5. The members of the Cti.limission deserve our praise for
the work they have performed and the report they have
produced. Their report shows us a grave and dangerous
situation prevailing in the occupied territories, resulting
from the policy ,and practices of the occupying Power in
promoting the establishment of Israeli settlements in those
territories. The consequences of that policy in both the
political and human aspects, as indicated in the report, are
disastrous and tragic and must give rise to j the greatest
apprehensions for the future.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nuseibeh (Jordan)
took a prclce at the Council table, Mr. AbdeI Meguid (Egypt),
Mr. Lamdan (Israel Mr. El-Chouj? (Syrian Arab Republic)
and Mr. Roa Kouri (Acting Chairman of the Committee on
the Exe&e of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People) took the pIacesreservedfor them at the side of the Council
chamber and Mr. Terri (Palestine Liberation Organization)
took a place at the Council table

6. The findings ,of the Commission confirm that in the
process of implementation of the policy of settlements, the
basic human rights of the inhabitants are being disregarded,

2. Mr. NEIL (Jamaica): Sir, the delegation of Jamaica
would like at the outset to extend to you our warmest
1

_-

reason it is all the more sad that we shall soon be faced with
the prospect of bidding you farewell. I take this opportunity
to thank you profusely on my behalf and on behalf of my
delegation, for the advice, assistance and co-operation that
you have so freely, generously and unreservedly extended to
me and the members of my Mission at all times. With all my
heart, I wish you all successfor the future.

private properties expropriated, houses destroyed and pressures exerted on the indigenous inhabitants to emigrate and,
over all, a process of displacement of the Arab population is
taking place. The evidence given to the Commission provides a painful picture involving the disruption and dislocation of the lives of ordinary people and their families, whose
future is rendered uncertain by the policies pursued by the
occupying Power.

13. May I also extend, on behalf of myself and mydelegation, our warmest ihanks to your predecessor, Ambassador
Troyanovsky of the Soviet Union, for his able and efficient
handling of our affairs during the month of June.

7. In political terms, the policy of establishment of Israeli
settlements in occupied Arab territory is potentially disastrous: it promotes an atmosphere of tension, friction and
confrontation; it increases the feelings of bitterness and
grievance which are the source of conflict. It is an obstacle
to peace, for the establishment of those settlements in the
occupied Arab territories aggravates the problem of the
Middle East and renders more difficult the search for solutions to achieve a just and lasting peace in the area.

14. The Security Council has, by its resolution 446 (1979),
specifically mandated a three-member Commission from
among its own members ‘to examine the situation relating
to settlements in the Arab territories occupied since 1967,
including Jerusalem’*. The establishment of that Commission wasan important step forward in the Council’s dehberations. It reflected a desire to proceed beyond the reiteration
of general principles to the plane of more concrete action.

8. The goal of a just and comprehensive peace camtot be
achieved by adding to the accumulated grievances of the
past: it requires efforts to remedy past injustice, particularly
by the restoration of the inalienable rights of the Palestinians, both as individuals and as a people entitled to the right
of self-determination.

15. It can be said without hesitation that the report of the
Commission has fully vindicated the concerns expressed in
the Council by virtually’every member State-including,
needless to say, Bangladesh. Indeed, it has justified the main
substance of resolution 446 (1979). It is a telling indictment
of Israel that is scarcely diminished by Israel’s adamant
refusal to co-operate with the Commission.

9. My delegation does not accept the contention that the
establishment of settlements can be justified on the basis of
security considerations. Nor do we recognixe any right of
Israel to ownership of the territory occupied since 1967,
including Jerusalem. We are firmly opposed to the acquisition of territory by force of arms and we reject as invalid all
actions and measures tending towards the annexation of
such territory by the occupying Power.

16. The facts contained in the report speak for themselves.
The conclusions of the Commission with regard to the
extent and implications of the settlements, their impact on
the local Arab population and their elects on the search for
a durable peace in the Middle East, all confirm the obvious.
Israel cannot deny the evidence that it is engaged in a wilful,
systematic and large-scale process of establishing settlements, that land seized for that ,purpose now covers 27 per
cent of the occupied West Bank and virtually all of the
Golan Heights, that some of thosesettlements have been
built on privately owned land, and that they are not solely
for security purposes, but are being put to gainful and
permanent agricultural use and that there is a distinct corm-:
lation between the emplacement of Jewish settlers and the
displacement of Arab populations. Nor can Israel deny-that
those &IS are being achieved at the- direct cost of the
indigenous inhabitants, with the violation of their basic
human rights and the deprivation of their natural resources,
particularly water.

10. With regard to the legal aspects of the question, as the
Commission has rightly concluded, the changes consequent
on the establishment of Israeli settlements constitute a violation of international law, in particular the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 August 1949. That has consistently been our
position.
11. Fillv. Jamaica fully endorses the recommendations
set forth in he Commission’s report. Israel should,as a first
step, be called upon to cease, on an urgent basis, the establishment, construction and planning of settlements in the
occupied territories. We believe that this step is essential ifa
climate of trust and confidence is to emerge and efforts
towards a just and lasting solution to the Middle East
problem are to be facilitated. Further, Israel should be
called upon to implement faithfully the Security Council
resolutions that have been adopted since 1967 on the question of Jerusalem. Those steps would represent a modest
but important beginning to the solution of the problem of
the Middle East..

17. The Commission concluded that the pattern of the
settlement policy was causing profound and irreversible
changes of a geographical and demographic nature in those
territories, including Jerusalem,and that such changes constituted a violation of the fourth Geneva Convention, as
well as numerous United Nations resolutions.
18. The,implications for over-all peace in the region are
equally inescapable. The Commission unequivocally reaffumed the decision taken by tbeSecurity Council in resolution 446 (1979), whereby it determined that
“the policy and practices of Israel in establishing settlements in the Palestinian and other Arab territoriesoccupied sina 1967 have no legal validity and constitute a

12. Mr. KAISER (Bangladesh): Mr. President, may I say
how happy I am to seeyou presiding over our atfairs for thii
month. This is one of those bittersweet occasions that all of
us in the diplomatic world must face. I am confident that
your knowledge, wisdom, and experience, and your pragmatism and characteristic efficiency will enable us to dispose of our work with purpose and dispatch. For thii
2

serious obstruction to achieving a comprehensive, just
and lasting peace in the Middle East”‘.

23. It is recognized that all peoples everywhere crave
peace. Israel has sought to categorize all those who initiated
this debate--and thereby those participating in it-as the
enemies of peace. In its psychosis of isolation, indeed, Israel
has lashed out at the entire international community for
“‘distorting” and “fabricating” facts. It seems ironic that in
our close-knit and interdependent world, Israel should
reserve to itself the right not only to usurp another’s land
and dispossess its people, but also to be the sole repository
of the determination of what constitutes peace, justice and
truth. As the representative of Jordan so rightly put it,
international law cannot be used to justify lawlessness. In
the tinal analysis, it is recognized that there are many roads
to peace. But peace cannot be imposed by fiat, by political
expediency or by might. Peace, to endure, must be peace
based on justice, equity and reasonableness.

19. The ‘immediate subject to which the Council must
address itself is therefore the impact and consequences of
Israel’s settlement policy. As the Commission’s report has
clearly emphasized, this cannot be divorced from the solution of the Middle East problem as an integral whole, the
root of which-the hard core.-is the realization of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people. The Council
must demand that Israel forthwith put an end to the estab
lishment, construction and planning of new settlements in
the occupied territories and abandon those existing settlements. A crucial element in such a process is that Israel be
denied external material and financial assistance in the
event of its defying this injunction.

24. It is in this context that the search for durable peace in
the Middle East must continue unabated. The position of
Bangladesh on this question is categorical. It need hardly be
reiterated that the three-essential components for a just and
lasting peace remain: Israeli withdrawal from all Arab tenitories occupied since 1967, the restoration of Holy Jerusalem to Arab sovereignty; and the restoration of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination, independence and national sovereignty.

20. A vital matter in any resolution on this question is the
status of Jerusalem. We fully endorse the Commission’s
recommendation that the Council should call upon Israel to
abide scrupulously by Security Council resolutions on that
question adopted since 1967. The Israeli contention that
Jerusalem, one, undivided and indivisible, should remain
forever the capital of Israel and of the Jewish people cannot
obscure the military conquest of East Jerusalem and the
basic violation of international law involved. The Israeli
argument serves two purposes; it justifies its annexation
and, secondly, it endows that annexation with an ecumenical purpose. Neither is sacrosanct. Continued Israeli occupation will certaimy preclude any over-all settlement.

25. Mr. I-IRCKA (Czechoslovakia) (inrerprerution j?on
Russhm): Mr. President, I should like to take this opportunity to congratulate you, on behalf of the Czechoslovak
delegation, on your assumption of the iniportant post of
President of the Security Council. I should also like to wish
you every successin your future activities after the conclusion of your mission to the United Nations and in particular
to the Security Council.

21. Jerusalem symbol&s the most cherished feelings of
the adherents of the three great religions around the gTbbe.
That is as much a religious as a political .fact and it is of
crucial significance. The Holy Places, the retention of their
historical and religious legacy and their accessibility to pilgrims from all parts of the world were a trust that was
fulfilled for ages by the indigenous Palestinian citizens of
Jerusalem, both Moslem and Christian. Those citizens are
the universally recognized sentinels of such historic places.
Israel cannot be permitted to displace them arid to pressure
them out of their timeless role. The deteriorating situation
now obtaining in Jerusalem and the indiscriminate actions
Israel is taking to interfere with religious freedoms and
practices-including the desecration and despoiling of holy
books, relics and places of worship-cannot be allowed to
continue. The Council must take appropriate corrective
and remedial action to arrest and reverse that potentially
explosive situation.

26. At the same time, the Czechoslovak delegation would
like to express its deep appreciation to the representative of
the fraternal Soviet Union, Ambassador Troyanovsky, who
most ably guided the work of the Security Council last
month.
27. The problem on the agenda of the Security Council is
not a new one. United Nations documents and a number of
studies by other international organs testify fully to the
gravity of this problem, which is one of paramount importance if we are to eliminate this dangerous hotbed of tension
in the Middle East. However, during the past few years and,
one may stress, particularly since the conclusion of the
separate peace treaty, this problem has acquired new dimensions. The policy that has been followed for decades and
that was from the outset&designed to drive out an entire
people is now being pursued more actively. By that policy,
settlements are being establiied and other actions are
being taken to deprive the -Palestinians of their legitimate
national rights. The effect has been a real change in the
geographical, demographic, cultural, economic and historical nature of the occupied territories. It is for this reason
that the discussion of this matter in the Security Counciland indeed, as has already been noted, the very raising of
the issue-is fully justified and extremely relevant at this
time.

22. In conclusion, I wish to express our grateful thanks to
the members of the Commission. They have fulfilled their
mandate with exemplary devotion, skill and objectivity
within tremendous political constraints. To impugn their
impartiality, as Israel has done, is seriously to challenge
one’s own credibility, for those members represent three
continents of our globe as well as their respective countries,
none of which is considered biased with regard to the
interests of Israel. It is our conviction that the retention of
this Commission and its continued objective appraisal of
the situation pertaining to settlements have now become an
imperative necessity. It is not only this Council which needs
to be informed, but world public opinion as well.

28. The report submitted to the Council by the Commission established under resolution 446 (1979) contains useful
3

information describing the methods being used to effect the
cofonization of Arab lands, including the city of Jerusalem.
The facts show that what is involved is a gradual annihilation of the people and a flagrant violation of international
law. The Commission has discharged its mandate and done
what it wasasked to do by the Council in March of this year.
Although the Commission’s recommendations do not go
beyond the framework of decisions already taken, they
nevertheless realistically reflect the actual stage of affairs.

consisting of three members of-the Council to examine the
situationrelating to settlements in the Arab territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem.
34. Four months have now passed and we are now considering the question on the basis of the report of the Council
Commission whose members were the representatives of
Portugal, Bolivia and Zambia. Despite the fact that the
Israeli authorities refused to allow the Commission to enter
the occupied territories or to co-operate with it, the Commission’s members, headed by Ambassador Leonardo
Mathias, did a large amount of useful work and collected a
great deal of factual material which objectively reflects the.
actual state of affairs in the Arab lands that are now undei
Israeli occupation. The contents of the report and its
annexes are eloquent confirmation of this. The Commissidn
was extremely thorough in its work and deserves the appreciation of the members of the Council. The result of the
Commission’s work and the discussion of its report are
further confirmation of the increasing gravity of the problem of the Arab territories occupied by Israel.

29. The Czechoslovak delegation agrees with the comments made on the report in the statement by the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization, on 18 July
[215&h meering3. We also feel that its mandate permitted
the Commission to concentrate on only one aspect of the
tragedy of the Palestinian people, namely the situation relating to the settlements in Arab territories occupied since
1967. Other key aspects of the Palestinian problem will be
discussed in the Security Council this month and at that
time the Czechoslovak delegation will take the opportunity
to state the basic tenets of its position.
30. The Czechoslovak delegation is willing to support the
proposals made in statements by the representatives of
Jordan and the Palestine Liberation Organization. We
understand that those proposals will be included in the draft
resolution which is being prepared on this item. We view
those proposals as measures which could, under certain
circumstances, curb the brutality of the occupying authorities and ease life somewhat for the Palestinian people in the
occupied territories.

35. The facts cited in the report convincingly show that
the ruling circles of Israel are consistently following a policy
of colonization and Israelization of the occupied Arab lands
and are trying to incorporate them into Israel. Such a
policy, which is a flagrant violation of universally recogi
nized norms, involves driving out the indigenous Arab
population from its ageaId lands, methodically destroying
Arab villages and settlements and then establishing Israeli
settlements on those same lands. It is quite clear from the
report that the policy of establishing Israeli settlements in
Arab lands is not a chance phenomenon. It is part of the
deliberate and strategic policy of the Israeli leadership to
implement the long-held designs of Israel to establish a
“Greater Israel”. According to the data collected by the
Commission, there are now 133 Israeli settlements in the
occupied territories. Israel is actively establishing and continuing to establish such settlements in the West Bank of the
Jordan, the Golan Heights, the Gaza Strip, around Jerusa:
lem and within the city itself. In the Israeli settlements in the
West Bank, which take up 27 per cent of all the territory in
that region, there are now about 90,000 settlers. As far as
concerns the Golan Heights, that territory has been almost
completely taken over by the Israeli expansionists.

31. At the same time we should like to reaflirm our view
that a decision by the Council should respond to what is
required of this body in dealing with the problem. In particular, it should clearly condemn the policy of the Israeli
authorities and it should contain firm measures for pressure
on Israel, including the measures provided for by the Charter of the United Nations, so as to ensure that the aggressor
complies with the decisions taken by the Council in this
area.
32. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (inrerprefationfiom Russian): Mr. President, first of all I
should like to’ congratulate you on your assumption of the
important post of President of the Security Council for July.
The items on the agenda of the Council are both important
and complex. However, we are convinced that Ambassador
Richard, with his tremendous experience, knowledge and
diplomatic skill will successfully deal with the business of
guiding the wo.rk of the Council thf month.

36. In its report, the Commission has shown that the
establishment of Israeli settlements is accompanied by the
mass violent explusion of Arabs from the occupied territories. More than 130,000 Arabs h&e been driven out of lands
in the Golan Heights alone. The Israeli occupying authorities do not hesitate in selecting the means they use in order
to Israelize the occupied Arab lands. These methods include
police terror&g of the inhabitants, measures of economic
pressure and the destruction of Arab culture and religious
monuments.

33. We still remember vividly the discussion in the Council of the question of the situation in the Arab territories
occupied by Israel which was held in March this year. At
that time, iibout 30 representatives of various countries
expressed in their statements their anxiety and concern over
the situation that is developing in those territories. They
also condemn.ed the policy and practices of the Israeli
authorities in colonizing and virtually annexing those ageold Arab territories. The Council maintained that the
actions of Israel in establishing settlements in the Palestinian and other Arab territories constituted a serious
obstruction to achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in- the Middle East and it established a Commission

37. The Commission’s report and the conclusions %hatit
reached convincingly show something that has been frequently stated in the Security Council by representatives of
Arab and many other States and something, too, that the
Israeli representatives.have triedfo deny, namely that Israel
certainly does not intend to withdraw from the Arab lands
and that it is doing everything possible in order to keep the
lands that it has seized for ever.
4

...

38. The Security Council must take a very serious approach
to the warning of the Commission that the Israeli policy in
respect of the establishment of settlements in the occupied
territories “is causing profound and irreversible changes of
a geographical and demographic nature in those territories,
including Jerusalem*’ [S/134.50 and Con-. 1, para. 225J.

44. My country, the-Soviet Union, has been and remains a
consistent supporter of a comprehensive and just settlement
in the Middle East, a settlement taking into account the
legitimate interests of all the peoples in the region. Such a
settlement should provide for the complete withdrawal of
Israeli troops from all the Arab territories Israel has been
occupying since 1967. It should also satisfy the legitimate
rights of the Arab people of Palestine, including their right
to establish their own State. It should guarantee the right of
all States in the region to an independent existence and
development. Such a settlement would ensure justice for all
the countries in the region, including Israel itself. However,
judging by everything that is happening, Israel’s policy is
based not on the interests of peace but, rather, on Israel’s
aspiration to expand at the expense of other people’s lands.

39. It is clear that the policy being followed by Israel,
namely, that of annexation of the occupied Arab territories,
is. primarily directed against the indigenous local interests
and inalienable national rights of the Arab lands and peoples that have been victimized by the Israeli aggression and,
above all, against the right to establish a national homeland
for the Palestinians. The ruling circles in Israel wish to
perpetuate the situation of the Palestinians as refugees without any rights and scattered around the world.

45. The Soviet delegation would like to stress that the
Security Council must deal very seriously with the contents
of and the conclusions drawn in the report of the Commission established under resolution 446 (1979). We are firmly
convinced that the Council’s duty is strongly to condemn
the policy and practices of the Israeli authorities in colonizing and virtually annexing the occupied Arab territories.
We should call on Israel to put an immediate halt to that
policy and those practices.

40. The Security Council and the General Assembly have
frequently discussed this Israeli policy of colonizing Arab
lands. In its resolution 446 (1979), the Security Council
clearly and unambiguously confirmed the illegality of that
policy of establishing Israeli settlements in occupied Palestinian and other Arab lands and called upon Israel to abide
scrupuiously by the 1949 fourth Geneva Convention. However, Israel once again demonstrated its complete disregard
of Council decisions, declaring after the Council had
adopted resolution 446 (1979) that it had very broad new
plans for establishing new settlements and expanding existing ones in the Golan Heights, the West Bank and other
Arab territories. Then in May of this year, Israel oficially
announced that it intended to establish thii year 20 new
settlements in Arab lands.

46. We fully agree with the view expressed by the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization in his statement on 18 July [2Z56th meeting] that the only way to solve
the question of the Israeli settlements is to do away with the
settlements and return the land to the rightful owners,
whether Palestinians, Syrians, Egyptians or anyone else,
and to ensure the complete withdrawal of Israeli troops
from all the territories occupied since 1967.

41. It is also noteworthy that the colonization by Israel of
the occupied Arab territories has become particularly provocative since the signing of the separate Egyptian-Israeli
treaty.

47. The Security Council should take immediate measures to halt the illegal activities by Israel in the occupied
Arab lands. It should ensure implementation of decisions it
has already adopted. In that connexion, the Soviet delegation supports the proposals that have been expressed here
that the Council should consider the question of applying in
respect of Israel the sanctions provided for under Chapter
VII of the Charter.

42. Those who participated in that separate deal attempted to picture the treaty as a so-called first step towards a
Middle East settlement and as something in the interests of
all those involved in the conflict. But no one could be misled
.by those attempts. The separate treaty is nothing but a deal
designed to prevent the implementation of the legitimate
rights of the Arab people of Palestine, including its right to
establish its own State and to perpetuate the Israeli occupation of Arab territories. That was confirmed quite clearly in
statements by Israeli leaders after the conclusion of the
separate treaty, when, with cynical frankness, they stated
quite openly that Israel would not stop establishing settlements in the occupied Arab territories, that Israel would
never change the current status of Jerusalem and that Israel
would never permit the establishment of a Palestinian State.

48. In conclusion, I should like to thank all the speakers in
the Council who have addressed warm words to the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Ambassador Troyanovsky, in respect of his work as President of
the Security Council last month.
49. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Jordan, on whom I now call.
50. Mr. NUSEIBEH (Jordan): As the debate pertaining
to Israeli colonization and the ongoing establishment of
Israeli settlements draws to an end, I have but a few remarks
to add on the whole question.

43. Quite naturally, the separate treaty between Israel and
Egypt, which was concluded with the active participation of
the United States of America, has been condemned by
many countries of the world, including Arab countries and
peoples, whose interests and rights are very seriously jeopardized by the treaty. A separate treaty leads to a further
exacerbation of tension in the region and ties even tighter
the knot of the contradictions in the Middle East situation.
It seriously hinders the attempts to achieve a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace in the Middle East.

51. First, the Security Council Commission established
under resolution 446 (1979) has made a major contribution
to the whole issue by presenting to the Council a most
definite portrayal of what has been going on in the Palestinian and other occupied Arab territories, both quantitatively and qualitatively, over the past 12 years. There is no
longer any blurring of vision or confusion as to the magni5

tude and the most ominous implicauons of Israeli colonixation, if not outright annexation, and self&dent aggression.
We no longer have to depend on disparate, piecemeal,
contentious and wilful attempts at the diminution of what is
at stake. The Commission therefore’ deserves the highest
commendation for its signal contribution in giving the
Security Council and the world full knowledge of the
situation.

53. Thirdly, we are all aware that we are living in a world
of power.politics. But even within that frameworkthequest
for a just, comprehensive and lasting peace, which is our
most cherished aspiration, hinges upon resolute action on
that pivotal issue.
54. It is the earnest hope of my Government that the
Security Council and the powers-that-be will heed the clearcut message of the Commission and turn the tables in the
direction of the achievement of a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace, within which national restitution and the
exercise of their inalienable rights would be ensured for the
Palestinian people, like any other people in the world.

52. Secondly, it is naturally beyond the capability of three
distinguished members of the Commission to take remedial
action. They have diagnosed the malignancy of the disease
and put it squarely at the doors of the members of the
Security Council, who acting in concert, are alone capable
of taking remedial action.

The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

6
L&ho in United Nations. New York

Rice: su.s.

1.50

7!2-7oalz-March

19824250
