S/PV.8273

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8273rd meeting

Thursday, 31 May 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Wronecka . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Poland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Djédjé
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Michon
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-16538 (E)
*1816538*

S/PV.8273

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.

In another case, young soldiers attacked the island
of Meer in former Unity state. Women, children and
the elderly were slaughtered. Other civilians drowned
while trying to flee, including children. Again I would
ask, what would each of us say to those people?

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of South Sudan to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2018/515, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United States of America.
I shall now give the floor to those members who
wish to make statements before the voting.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): What
would members of the Security Council say if they
were sitting across the table from a rape survivor in
a protection-of-civilians site? What would they say to
the countless women who had to witness their own
husbands and children being shot right in front of
them? What would they say to the two brothers who
were forced to watch as those fighters gang-raped their
mother and then were forced to actually take turns
shooting at their mother until she was dead?
Those are not hypotheticals. Those are the stories of
real people whom I saw and heard when I visited South
Sudan. That is the sad reality because the leaders of
South Sudan have failed to protect them. Those stories
are not exceptional. Those kinds of horrific abuses
happen all too frequently in South Sudan. Armed
groups, including Government forces, are assaulting,
robbing and slaughtering civilians almost every
single day. Four million people have been displaced
by fighting, another 2.5 million people have become
refugees, and the fighting is getting worse.
Multiple United Nations special representatives
described in a statement what has happened in recent
weeks.
“Testimonies indicate that women and girls
of all ages have been subjected to rape, including
pregnant women, lactating mothers and girls as
young as 4-years-old.”
2/8

31/05/2018

We should be telling them that we will do everything
possible to help protect them and stop their suffering.
We should be explaining to the people of South Sudan
that the Security Council will take decisive action
to hold their leaders accountable for those atrocities.
We should be putting real pressure on them to end
the fighting.
The Security Council has not imposed an arms
embargo, even though the need is obvious. The Council
has not sanctioned a single individual since 2015, even
as the violence associated with the renewed civil war
has killed thousands of people. The South Sudanese
Government actually promoted one of the handful of
individuals the Council previously sanctioned to the
position of Chief of the Defence Forces. That is not just
an insult to the Council, it is a farce. The United States
has lost its patience. The status quo is unacceptable. It
is long past time for all of us to demand better for the
South Sudanese people. I for one went to South Sudan
with an open mind. I had a genuine conversation with
President Salva Kiir, and since then all we have been
asked to do is wait. We are told more time is necessary
for talks, or more time is necessary before the Council
will be able to impose sanctions. But all we see on the
ground is more fighting and more atrocities.
Last December the parties in South Sudan signed
the agreement on the cessation of hostilities. A few days
ago they supposedly recommitted to that agreement
with church leaders. So far, those are just words on
paper. The parties have violated that agreement from
day one. Neither the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development nor the African Union have applied
consequences for the violators. What we need now is
concrete action by the full international community
to hold the warring parties accountable. The draft
resolution before us today (S/2018/515) is a modest
step in that direction. It extends the sanctions regime
for 45 days. It demands that the parties fully adhere
to the cessation of hostilities. We hope they seize this
opportunity for the sake of the South Sudanese people.
This is a draft resolution that we should all support.
We urge Council members to use this time to think
about the reality of life in South Sudan. I have said
18-16538

31/05/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

often that my fear when it comes to South Sudan is that
the children are growing up uneducated, unskilled and
resentful. That will be the issue of each one of us when
they become adults. Those children deserve a brighter
future and, in the face of such barbaric violence, the
Council’s failure to act denies them that future. I do not
think any of us could look a survivor of this conflict
in the eye and say the right thing to do today was to
delay. We must stop making excuses and take real steps
to end the conflict instead. I for one cannot justify
anything else.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): The situation in South
Sudan worries all of us, in particular those of us in
the region. We fully understand the gravity of the
situation, and we share the pain and suffering of the
South Sudanese people. However, we also know that
the seemingly unsurmountable multifaceted problems
facing the country can be addressed only through an
all-inclusive political process. We have made some
undeniable progress in that regard. It is understandable
if the seriousness of the South Sudanese parties and
the slow pace of the peace process are creating a lot
of frustration. We in the region are also extremely
frustrated. However, as much as we understand the
frustration of the many who have done a great deal to
help the people of South Sudan, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) is at the critical
moment of concluding the High-Level Revitalization
Forum and presenting its bridging proposal. The
adoption of the draft resolution before us (S/2018/515)
would be detrimental to the process. It is a very tragic
development indeed.
There has been a clear understanding on the part of
IGAD, the African Union (AU) and the United Nations
that there is a need to coordinate efforts to push the
peace process forward and achieve the desired result.
That unity of purpose and complementarity of efforts
is what has been dictating everything we do in IGAD.
The Security Council taking action now without
synchronizing or calibrating its position regarding the
AU would not only be unhelpful, it would also seriously
undermine the peace process at a time when there are
encouraging signs that a political outcome involving
compromise could be within reach. The possibility
that the peace process might collapse totally as a
consequence of this cannot be ruled out. And we mean
that. Those who are closer to the problem might also be
closer to the truth.

S/PV. 8273

What is more ironic is that the draft resolution
before us for adoption comes at a time when IGAD has
reaffirmed its commitment to take targeted measures
against parties and individuals who are found to be
spoilers, and this was also reinforced by the African
Union. The IGAD Council of Ministers convened in
an extraordinary meeting today, and it deliberated on
those issues on the basis of the report provided by the
Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism. What was evident in the
outcome of that meeting was IGAD’s resolve to take
punitive measures against commanders who are directly
involved and those who are found to be violating the
cessation of hostilities agreement.
An IGAD Extraordinary Summit of Heads of State
and Government is also expected to be held soon. It
therefore would have been logical and sensible for the
Council to adopt a short, technical extension of the
sanctions regime and drop the annex for now in order
to give IGAD a chance during this critical moment in
the peace process. Waiting two months would not have
caused the sky to fall. We have been working with the
penholder and all other members on the issue, and we
have been trying to convey this message in good faith
over the past couple of days. At the moment, we know
that the draft resolution on the table does not enjoy the
support of IGAD or the African Union. It also does
not enjoy consensus among Council members. We
know that a Council divided on this issue will not be
helpful to the peace process, and it will not send the
right message to the parties. That is what we have been
trying to avoid. That is also why we have been working
with the penholder in good faith and in a spirit of
cooperation. Unfortunately, our concerns have not been
fully taken into account, and we are forced to abstain
in the voting on the draft resolution. In fact, that is the
least we could do.
We seek the support and understanding of
members of the Council because we feel we have the
responsibility as Chair of IGAD and as the country
intimately involved in the mediation efforts. We are
duty-bound to salvage the peace process in spite of the
many challenges and difficulties. In conclusion, let me
say that politics is the art of the possible. Diplomacy
is not conducted to vent frustration. That is what this
draft resolution is the result of.
As a matter of principle, IGAD has not said that
sanctions should not be imposed; they should be. As
we have stated, we will abstain in the voting on the

18-165383/8

S/PV.8273

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

draft resolution because the text is manifestly harmful
to the peace process. It undermines the efforts of the
subregion, the region, IGAD and the AU. We only
hope that it will not drive the parties away from the
peace process.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): Despite the efforts made by the parties
during negotiations to broker an agreement, Equatorial
Guinea simply cannot support the draft resolution
(S/2018/515)submitted by the United States. We believe
that the annex to the draft resolution, which includes a
list of individuals on whom sanctions will be imposed,
will hinder the negotiations taking place on the ground.
The Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) was mandated to mediate between the parties
to the South Sudanese conflict. Until the African Union
decides otherwise, we will maintain our trust in that
organization as the most appropriate body for finding a
negotiated political solution to the situation. Although
we acknowledge the deadlock, we firmly believe that
progress could be made in the coming months.
In a communiqué issued today, IGAD calls for
additional time to conduct its work. We believe that it
is important to grant that request. The commitment by
the parties to holding a face-to-face meeting between
President Salva Kiir and Mr. Machar just before the
next African Union Summit, to be held in Mauritania,
is a major achievement. The measures outlined in
the text could leave the international community
without valid interlocutors with whom to negotiate,
which would inevitably have an adverse impact on the
political process. We believe that dialogue must be
given another opportunity.
With regard to the South Sudanese conflict, it
must be stressed that we all agree that it is important
to exert pressure on the parties to sit at the negotiating
table and reach an agreement. The only difference is
how and when. Equatorial Guinea asks our colleagues
in the Security Council, as well as the international
community, to be a bit more patient, for we recognize
that the situation will not be resolved overnight. It is
important to make optimal use of our time and not
interfere in or disregard the legitimacy of the regional
organizations the Security Council has continued
to support.
If no progress is made in the coming months, IGAD
has promised to submit specific proposals in an effort
4/8

31/05/2018

to put pressure on uncooperative parties and impose
possible sanctions. We ask that IGAD be given a chance.
The President: The Council is ready to proceed to
the vote on the draft resolution before it. I shall put the
draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Côte d’Ivoire, France, Kuwait, Netherlands, Peru,
Poland, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Equatorial
Guinea, Ethiopia, Kazakhstan, Russian Federation
The President: The draft resolution received nine
votes in favour, none against and six abstentions. The
draft resolution has been adopted as resolution 2418
(2018).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): The United Kingdom
welcomes the adoption of this important resolution
(resolution 2418 (2018)).
The situation in South Sudan is appalling.
Thousands have been killed. More than one fifth of the
population is on the verge of famine, more than half
is food-insecure and a third have fled their homes.
Widespread human rights abuses continue to be reported.
We strongly welcome and support regional efforts led
by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) to revitalize the peace agreement and broker
an agreement between the parties. But it is clear that
the parties are still not prepared to compromise in the
interest of peace.
Even while peace talks were taking place, violations
of the cessation of hostilities continued. We have seen
horrific reports of violence and human rights violations
and abuse. Just today the media is reporting that the
Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism has recorded multiple ceasefire
violations, allegations of gang rape, murdered children
and the use of child soldiers. That cannot be allowed
to continue.
18-16538

31/05/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

It is clear that the solution to South Sudan’s crisis is
lasting peace. I agree with my colleague from Ethiopia
about the need to address the problems of South Sudan
through an all-inclusive political process. Without
it suffering will spread and the consequences will
endure for many years to come. Genuine compromise
is essential to secure a political agreement that stands
the test of time.
The United Kingdom believes that resolution 2418
(2018) is an important step in increasing the pressure on
the parties to compromise in the interest of peace and in
the interest of the people of South Sudan. The Security
Council has today shown that it will act. Let that be a
clear message to the parties and to those who wish to
prevent peace going forward.
I acknowledge that it is unfortunate that the Council
could not agree unanimously today, but I believe that
we are united in our vision for South Sudan. I believe
we all remain supportive of IGAD and its work. Let us
therefore not cease in our resolve to find peace or give
any comfort to those who oppose it.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): On 21 December
last year, the parties to the conflict in South Sudan
agreed on a cessation of hostilities. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands welcomed it as a positive step towards
a political solution. But it was just days, perhaps even
hours, before the fighting resumed. Once again we saw
the leaders of South Sudan choose war over peace,
despite calls by the Security Council, the region, civil
society organizations and, most important, the people
of South Sudan.
Choosing war over peace must stop. That is why
we voted in favour of resolution 2418 (2018). Today the
Council sent a strong message to all parties in South
Sudan, stressing that there is an urgent need for a full
commitment to the cessation of hostilities, an urgent
need for a full commitment to a political agreement
and an urgent need for a full commitment to the wellbeing of the people of South Sudan. If the parties
in South Sudan continue to behave solely based on
their narrow self-interests, the Council will consider
serious consequences.
We regret that the unanimous adoption of the
resolution was not possible. We believe that it would
have been possible had the Council been granted
additional time for full engagement through closer
cooperation with the region.

S/PV. 8273

The resolution has now been adopted. We thank
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
for its continuous leadership, and we join it in urging
all parties to the High-Level Revitalization Forum to
negotiate in good faith and make real compromises. It
is now up to the leaders of South Sudan to show that
they are serious about peace, about finding a political
solution and about the well-being of the people of
South Sudan.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): The millions of
South Sudanese caught up in this brutal conflict have
waited too long for their leaders to bring about an
end to the fighting. Despite the efforts of the region
to broker an agreement, the parties have not made the
compromises necessary to set the country on a path
towards peace, reconciliation and recovery. Instead
of engaging constructively and in good faith in the
negotiations at the High-Level Revitalization Forum,
the parties have continued to advance their interests
through military means.
Harrowing reports of violence against civilians,
including widespread sexual and gender-based violence,
continue to emerge from South Sudan. Violations
and abuses of international human rights law and of
international humanitarian law must come to an end.
With other members of the Security Council, we
share a deep sense of frustration at the intransigence
of the leaders of South Sudan. The Council stated its
determination to ensure that the parties abide by their
obligations and responsibilities in our presidential
statement of 14 December 2017 (S/PRST/2017/25). The
repeated violations of commitments by the parties must
have consequences. Resolution 2418 (2018), adopted
today, sets out clear conditions and deadlines for the
parties, adding international pressure to regional
efforts. It is for that reason that we voted in favour of it.
At the same time, we deeply regret that the Council
was not able to adopt the resolution by consensus. We
worked actively with members to find agreement on a
text that would have garnered greater support. To that
end, we believe that the resolution could have been
better coordinated with ongoing efforts in the region.
A regionally brokered and inclusive political
solution remains the only viable means of achieving
peace in South Sudan. We call on the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and the wider
region to continue efforts towards such a political
solution. In that regard, we welcome the outcome of the

18-165385/8

S/PV.8273

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

IGAD Council of Ministers meeting today. To give the
peace effort the best possible prospect for success, it is
imperative that we now stand unified and speak with a
single voice to the parties.
Today’s resolution presents a clear choice for the
parties. We urge them to immediately respect the
cessation of hostilities agreement and urgently engage
in good faith on reaching a viable political agreement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation abstained in the
voting on resolution 2418 (2018), on extending sanctions
against South Sudan.
We are concerned by the security situation in the
country and by the fact that, despite the December
2017 agreement, there has been continuing fighting in
the country. We call on the South Sudanese parties to
quickly find a compromise solution in the interests of
the entire South Sudanese population.
Nonetheless, we believe that it is wrong-headed
to threaten the introduction of sanctions against
those high-ranking individuals who were involved
in the negotiation process at an important moment
for the completion of the latest round of the HighLevel Revitalization Forum on the peace agreement,
sponsored by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD). We are of the view that the Forum
currently represents a unique arena in the attempt to
find a political solution to the conflict in South Sudan.
We therefore believe that it is important to provide
genuine support to IGAD’s mediation efforts. We
think the imposition of artificial timelines or deadlines
for the negotiation process, or measures adopted that
conflict with positions expressed by regional players,
is unacceptable.
On the whole, we continue to doubt that the
introduction of sanctions against members of the
Government and an arms embargo on South Sudan could
play a positive role in reaching a political settlement
and normalizing the situation from a security point of
view. During the course of work on a new sanctions
draft resolution in July, we will also proceed from the
position that it is unacceptable to have any preordained
stance on broadening sanctions.
Finally, we categorically reject what we believe to
be the penholders’ damaging and disrespectful position
towards their colleagues in the Security Council, once
again imposing a too-strict time frame on the Council,
6/8

31/05/2018

which is simply unacceptable when taking such farreaching decisions on sanctions under Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): The South
Sudanese political process is currently in a critical phase.
The Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), the African Union (AU), and countries of
the region are stepping up their mediation efforts,
and various parties within South Sudan are actively
engaged in dialogue and consultation. It behooves
the international community to have due regard for,
and carefully listen to, the views of the country in
question, regional organizations and other countries
in the region, jointly support the mediation efforts of
regional organizations and help the parties in South
Sudan return to trying to reach a political settlement
with a view to stabilizing the situation and putting the
country on an expeditious path towards development.
China has maintained a consistent position on the
issue of sanctions based on the belief that sanctions are
a means to an end, not an end in and of themselves.
The Security Council should exercise great caution in
implementing sanctions, and its action ought to help
advance the political settlement process in South Sudan
and lend support to the good offices and mediation
efforts of regional organizations, such as IGAD and
the AU.
However, the annex to resolution 2418 (2018), just
adopted, includes some high-ranking officials of the
Government of South Sudan on the proposed sanctions
list and threatens an arms embargo. Given the current
circumstances, those elements are not conducive to
furthering the political peace process in South Sudan
and could further complicate the situation. There was
also no consensus within the Security Council or
among the countries of the region.
In the light of these considerations, China
abstained in the voting on resolution. China hope that
the members of the Security Council will continue to
engage in consultations on relevant issues, with a view
to finding a proper solution and joining forces with
the South Sudanese parties, regional organizations
and countries of the region in order to move to peace
process in South Sudan forward. We stand ready to
work with the international community and continue
to play a constructive role in bringing lasting peace and
stability to South Sudan.
18-16538

31/05/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Committed as it is to the people
of South Sudan and to the political process led by the
relevant regional organizations, Bolivia would like to
explain its vote today.
Our abstention in the voting on resolution 2418
(2018) responds to specific elements that were not taken
into account by the penholders with respect to the list
of persons identified in the annex, which had been
brought to their attention by several delegations. As
we have said before on several occasions, we supports
the legal waiting period before adopting measures,
including sanctions measures, against those who violate
cessation of hostilities agreements and obstruct peace
processes. Such decisions, which are relevant not only
for South Sudan but also for the region, must be agreed
in principle in conjunction with the relevant regional
and subregional organizations.
We would like to also express our concern that the
resolution was not adopted by unanimity. The Security
Council is not sending the right message. We believe
that the Council should stay united behind the political
process led by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD). Of course, today’s decision
weakens that position.

S/PV. 8273

The parties must now take advantage of the coming
weeks to reach an adequate political agreement. Today’s
resolution should make them aware of their responsibility
in that regard. The international community must stay
fully mobilized to promote favourable conditions for
peace and security in South Sudan. IGAD, the African
Union and regional and international partners, as well
as the Council, have a role to play. The coming weeks
will be pivotal for South Sudan.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan is deeply
concerned that, despite the signing of the agreement on
the cessation of hostilities, the protection of civilians
and humanitarian access, as well as numerous calls from
the Security Council and all signatories, we continue
to receive reports of continuing military actions and
flagrant violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law. Moreover, the parties to the
conflict have not made sufficient compromises to
overcome the outstanding issues on governance and
security matters.

Mr. Michon (France) (spoke in French): The
Security Council just adopted resolution 2418 (2018),
which renews the sanctions regime on South Sudan.
France voted in favour of the resolution, which should
help to put an end to the violence in South Sudan and to
advance the political process.

We therefore express our readiness to discuss
appropriate additional measures by the Council
against those who violate the agreement. However,
the position of countries in the region and regional
organizations,
namely,
the
Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and the African
Union (AU), should be taken into account in the
Council’s deliberations on such measures. We all
support a bigger role for regional organizations in the
work of the Security Council. Our delegation abstained
in the voting on resolution 2418 (2018) because the
positions and concerns of the countries of the region
with regard to the timing of such actions were not
adequately reflected. We support the idea of postponing
the Council’s new measures and giving IGAD some
additional time to realize the objectives of the Highlevel Revitalization Forum process.

The international community and the Council
could not — cannot — remain impassive in the face
of the clashes on the ground in the past few months
and the continuous violations of human rights.
In that connection, we welcome the efforts of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
through the High-level Revitalization Forum to bring
the parties back together and find a political solution.
However, we regret that the parties did not seize upon
that opportunity to reach a political agreement that
would provide peace prospects for South Sudan and its
long-suffering people.

It is of critical importance that the Council remain
united in supporting the efforts of IGAD and the
AU. We should give Government officials as a party
to negotiations the chance to achieve the desired
progress, and we strongly urge them to do so. We
welcome the decisions set out in the communiqué of the
Extraordinary Session of the IGAD Council of Ministers
on the situation in South Sudan, adopted today, and
hope that the parties will be able to reconcile their
differences and make significant progress on bridging
proposals on governance and security issues. This is a
wake-up call for the Government to be proactive and

Finally, we welcome the IGAD Council of Ministers
communiqué issued after the meeting held today in
Addis Ababa. We reiterate that the only solution to this
conflict is through the political process currently being
led by IGAD.

18-165387/8

S/PV.8273

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

to genuinely engage in the peace process. Otherwise,
the consequences of inaction and further delays will
be dire for the Government, which was put on notice
today with the adoption of the resolution. However, we
are against the annex and including the names of the
officials before we see the results.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): Allow me to
congratulate you, Madam President, at the end of your
duties as the President of the Security Council for this
month. Your tenure was indeed full and eventful. Also,
we would like to congratulate Poland for joining the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development Partners
Forum. We look forward to your upcoming visit to
South Sudan.
I would also like to thank the countries that have
abstained from supporting resolution 2418 (2018)
because the peace process in South Sudan is at a critical
juncture right now. There is a light at the end of the
tunnel, and the annex to the resolution is unfortunate
and unhelpful. The danger is that it might not produce
the desired result for those who supported the resolution.
Nevertheless, the Government of South Sudan will
work with the region to achieve lasting peace for the
people of South Sudan.

8/8

31/05/2018

The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
Before adjourning the meeting, I would like to
convey my sincere thanks to the members of the
Security Council, as this is probably the last scheduled
meeting of the Council for the month of May. On
behalf of my colleagues in the Polish delegation, I
would like to express the sincere appreciation to all of
the members of the Security Council, especially my
colleagues the Permanent Representatives — excellent
diplomats — and the experts and colleagues from the
Council’s secretariat for their support. Indeed, it was a
busy month. I hope that we managed to reach consensus
from time to time. Personally, I felt all of their support
and it was an extremely enriching experience. I learned
a lot, but I hope I was also able to deliver results. Without
everyone’s contribution and without everyone’s open
heart and spirit, we could never have achieved what we
achieved. I should also mention the interpreters in the
Chamber, whose role is crucial. I thank them for their
work. This was an extremely interesting adventure.
As the Russian presidency approaches, on behalf
of the entire Council, I wish our colleagues from the
Russian Federation good luck and great success. We
return tomorrow under the auspices of their presidency.
The meeting rose at 4 p.m.

18-16538
