A /73/PV.60

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

60

th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 19 December 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda items 14 and 119 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium
Summit
Draft resolution (A/73/L.66)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The General
Assembly has before it draft resolution A/73/L.66,
entitled “Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular
Migration”. The global compact was adopted at the
Intergovernmental Conference to Adopt the Global
Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration,
held in Marrakech on 10 and 11 December. I would
like to reiterate my thanks to the Kingdom of Morocco
for its impeccable organization of the Conference, to
Member States for their strong participation and to civil
society for its support of the process. I would also like
to thank the Permanent Representatives of Mexico and
Switzerland, Ambassadors Juan José Gómez Camacho
and Jürg Lauber, who facilitated the preparatory
process of the compact that we are discussing today
under the leadership of my predecessor, President
Miroslav Lajčák, to whom I also pay tribute. I am
grateful as well to Ms. Louise Arbour, the Special
Representative of the Secretary General, and her team
for their extraordinary work.

The text of the global compact is the result of a broad
and intense process of intergovernmental negotiations.
It reflects the desire of States to address, jointly and
with a balanced and comprehensive vision, a complex
challenge that by its very nature is both cross-border
and global. We have before us a historic opportunity
to cooperate, exchange best practices and learn from
each other so that migration, as a phenomenon that has
marked the history of humankind, benefits all of us.
Let there be no doubt. The compact does not
affect the sovereignty of any State; on the contrary,
it reinforces it. No State, no matter how powerful,
can solve the challenges of international migration
alone. The compact’s 23 objectives set out guiding
principles that reassert the sovereignty of States and
protect human rights, the positive impact of migration
in sustainable development, the gender perspective,
the best interests of the child and the multisectoral
approach. Who, for example, can be against guidelines
that strengthen the fight against migrant smuggling and
human trafficking? I firmly believe that we all want
to eradicate that scourge, which, furthermore, affects
women and girls most acutely.
The General Assembly’s endorsement of the
compact will enable us to reduce vulnerabilities in
migration, address the needs of the communities of
origin, transit and destination and fight negative rhetoric
and discrimination against migrants. It will also help to
empower migrants and their host communities. It will
facilitate their access to decent labour and contribute to
their safe and dignified return and readmission.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-44630 (E)

*1844630*

A/73/PV.60

Once the General Assembly endorses the compact,
the moment to translate our commitments into
actions will come. We will need concerted efforts at
all levels, with the participation of all the relevant
actors — Governments, the United Nations system,
migrant organizations, civil society and the private
sector. We will have to work hard to disseminate the
contents of the compact and, above all, to convey the
legitimate reasons behind this non-binding instrument,
giving a human face to migration and ensuring that it
works for everyone and that it is indeed safe, orderly
and regular. In order to make the United Nations
more relevant for everyone, we must consider the
more than 250 million migrants around the world and
the communities that host them. Half of the migrant
population are women and we must be especially
sensitive to that.
The global compact that we are about to endorse
is people-centred, while addressing the structural
causes of migration. Migration must be an option,
not an act of desperation. The global compact will
steer us in the right direction. I am confident that the
decision we make today concerning the compact will
reflect our determination to defeat fear and choose
hope, while transforming the challenges of migration
into opportunities for all. I call on the Assembly to
contribute to this historic moment.
I should like to inform Member States that I received
a letter from His Excellency Mr. Nasser Bourita,
President of the Intergovernmental Conference to Adopt
the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular
Migration, which adopted the global compact. The
President of the Intergovernmental Conference brought
to my attention paragraph 2 of the resolution adopted by
the Conference, which decided that the global compact
for safe, orderly and regular migration will also be
known as the Marrakech Compact on Migration.
In that regard, if there is no objection, I propose to
orally revise the draft resolution contained in document
A/73/L.66 by adding, at the end of paragraph 2, the
words “and which will also be known as the Marrakech
Compact on Migration”. The entire paragraph would
therefore read as follows.
“Endorses the Global Compact for Safe,
Orderly and Regular Migration adopted by the
Intergovernmental Conerence as contained in the
annex to the present resolution, and which will also
be known as the Marrakech Compact on Migration.”
2/28

19/12/2018

We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/73/L.66, as orally revised.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Pollard (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): This oral statement
is made in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
First, pursuant to paragraph 46 of the global compact
for safe, orderly and regular migration, contained in
the annex to draft resolution A/73/L.66, the Heads of
State and Government and high representatives would
request the Secretary-General, drawing on the network,
to report to the General Assembly on a biennial basis on
the implementation of the global compact, the activities
of the United Nations system in that regard and the
functioning of the institutional arrangements.
Second, pursuant to paragraph 49 (a) of the global
compact, considering that international migration
requires a forum at the global level through which
Member States can review the implementation progress
and guide the direction of the work of the United
Nations, the Heads of State and Government and
high representatives would decide that the high-level
dialogue on international migration and development
currently scheduled to take place every fourth session
of the General Assembly shall be repurposed and
renamed the “international migration review forum”.
Third, pursuant to paragraph 49 (b) of the global
compact, the international migration review forum shall
serve as the primary intergovernmental global platform
for Member States to discuss and share progress
on the implementation of all aspects of the global
compact, including as it relates to the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, and with the participation of
all relevant stakeholders.
Fourth, pursuant to paragraph 49 (c) of the global
compact, the international migration review forum
shall take place every four years beginning in 2022.
Fifth, pursuant to paragraph 49 (d) of the global
compact, the international migration review forum
shall discuss the implementation of the global compact
at the local, national, regional and global levels, as well
as allow for interaction with other relevant stakeholders
with a view to building on accomplishments and
identifying opportunities for further cooperation.
18-44630

19/12/2018

A/73/PV.60

Sixth, pursuant to paragraph 49 (e) of the global
compact, each edition of the international migration
review forum will result in an intergovernmentally
agreed progress declaration, which may be taken into
consideration by the High-level Political Forum on
Sustainable Development.

$32,500, starting in 2022 on a quadrennial basis, will
be included under section 2 of the proposed programme
budget, entitled “General Assembly and Economic and
Social Council Affairs and Conference Management”,
which will be reflected in the proposed programme
budget for those respective years.

Seventh, pursuant to paragraph 54 of the global
compact, the President of the General Assembly
would be requested to launch and conclude, in 2019,
open, transparent and inclusive intergovernmental
consultations to determine the precise modalities and
organizational aspects of the international migration
review forums and articulate how the contributions of
the regional reviews and other relevant processes will
inform the forums, as a means to further strengthen the
overall effectiveness and consistency of the follow-up
and review outlined in the global compact.

The statement that I have just read out has been
made available on the PaperSmart portal.

It is anticipated that the requests contained in
¦paragraphs 46 and 49 (e) of the global compact will
constitute an addition to the documentation workload of
the Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management, comprising one pre-session document
of 8,500 words to be issued in all six languages,
starting in 2020 on a biennial basis, and one postsession document of 10,700 words to be issued in all six
languages, starting in 2022 on a quadrennial basis. That
would entail additional requirements for documentation
services in the amounts of $26,000, starting in 2020
on a biennial basis, and $32,500, starting in 2022 on a
quadrennial basis.
In addition, with regard to the international
migration review forum that would be held every four
years beginning in 2022, pursuant to paragraph 49
of the global compact, it is understood that all issues
related to the forums, including the format, organization
and scope, have yet to be determined. Accordingly,
in the absence of modalities for the meeting, it is not
possible at the present time to estimate the potential
cost implications of the requirements for meetings and
documentation. Upon the decision on the modalities,
format and organization of the forums, to be made in
2019 pursuant to paragraph 54 of the global compact,
the Secretary-General would submit the relevant costs
of such requirements, in accordance with rule 153 of
the rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
Accordingly, should the General Assembly adopt
draft resolution A/73/L.66, additional requirements
of $26,000, starting in 2020 on a biennial basis, and

The President (spoke in Spanish): Before giving
the floor for explanations of vote before the voting, I
would like to remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Szijjártó (Hungary): I would first like to
commend you, Madam President, for your achievements
and performance as President of the General Assembly
so far, and to wish you every success during the rest of
your term.
Our position is that the United Nations is about
to commit a serious mistake by approving the global
compact on safe, orderly and regular migration,
contained in draft resolution A/73/L.66, which we
find to be an unbalanced, biased and extremely promigration document. We are concerned that this
document will contribute to launching new, massive
migratory flows all over the world, which will put the
entire globe at enormous risk. The document suggests
that migration should be a fundamental human right,
which is definitely not the case. It suggests that it is
acceptable for someone to wake up one morning,
pick a country and then violate a number of rules in
order to get there. We find that unacceptable. And
we find it unacceptable that the global compact on
migration not only encourages such endeavours but
also expects countries to support them. Again, we find
that unacceptable.
This document describes migration as if it were
the best thing to have ever happened to humankind, but
that is not true. Migration is a dangerous phenomenon
that has shown itself capable of destabilizing countries
of origin and transit countries and inflicting enormous
security risks on countries of destination by creating
parallel societies, among other things. This document,
however, says nothing about the rights of people who
just want to live in their own homes in peaceful, safe
and secure circumstances as they have done in the past.
This document says nothing about the rights of people
living in countries of possible destination. No one has

18-446303/28

A/73/PV.60

asked those people what they think about what this
document suggests, which is that we should accept the
premise that migration transforms all of our countries
into countries of origin, countries of transit or countries
of destination. That is something that we do not accept.
Hungary, for example, does not want to fall into any of
those categories. We do not want to become a country
of origin, a country of destination or a country of
transit. The global compact on migration contains goals
and objectives that are against the security interests of
Hungary and the Hungarian people.
Hungary proclaims and reaffirms its belief that
decisions on how to protect the border and whom to
allow to enter the country’s territory are among the
most important sovereign decisions that a country can
make. We therefore maintain our sovereign right to
facilitate or restrict access to our territory. It is up to
Hungarians to decide who we would like to live with in
our own country. For us, the security and safety of the
Hungarian people and Hungary itself are the number-one
issue. We find it unacceptable that the global compact
on migration suggests that border protection measures
should be based on human rights considerations, an
extremely dangerous and damaging approach that we
firmly reject. Border protection should be considered
an issue of national security and an obligation of every
single country. The violation of a border between two
peaceful countries should be considered as a serious
criminal offence and result in serious punishment.
The compact also suggests that migration would
be the best answer for addressing labour-market and
demographic challenges for certain countries. We
strongly disagree. Countries must find their own
answers to those challenges. That is a core principle of
national security and sovereignty. No policies, whether
economic, social or related to the family, should put
pressure on a country’s sovereignty. We should let
countries decide those issues themselves. The global
compact on migration also suggests that multicultural
societies would be better or more valuable than
homogeneous ones by definition. We strongly reject
that. Such judgments and decisions must be left for
any given society or nation to make independently. For
example, Hungarians do not believe that our society
is less or more valuable than that of a country that
considers itself multicultural.
The European Union (EU) policy on migration was
based on a very similar approach to that of the global
compact on migration, and it has failed. The migration
4/28

19/12/2018

policy of the European Union has been understood as an
invitation. As a result, hundreds of thousands of illegal
migrants have entered European territory without any
kind of control or check, and parallel societies have
been created. We are living under the most serious
threat of terror that Europe has ever seen. More than 30
terrorist attacks have been committed on EU territory
during the past three and a half years by persons with
migratory backgrounds, and more than 300 people
have been killed. I am afraid that the United Nations
is about to make a similar mistake with the global
compact on migration. We have heard United Nations
officials using the argument that the global compact on
migration would not be legally binding. Come on. The
words “commit” and “commitment” appear in the text
80 times, and we just heard from the representative of
the Secretariat that there will be continuing supervisory
measures. National action plans will have to put together
in order to implement the global compact. How can it be
said that it is not legally obligatory?
I would like to announce that Hungary will vote
against the draft resolution on this issue. We will
continue to base our migratory policy on common
sense. We do not want to see the events of 2015
repeated in Hungary, when 400,000 illegal migrants
violated our borders, marched through our country,
attacked our police and showed absolutely no respect
for our rules of behaviour, regulations and culture.
We will continue protecting our border strongly and
strictly, and we will not allow anyone to enter the
territory of Hungary illegally. Instead of counting on
migration, we will modernize our education system and
help families address challenges related to demography
and the labour market. We will preserve Hungary as a
Hungarian country.
We think that the international community,
including the United Nations, should put an end to
migration rather than encouraging it. We should not
support the business model of human traffickers. And
we should help people in need where they are, to enable
them to stay in their homes, or as close to their homes
as possible.
Hungarian citizens have had the chance to express
their opinion about migration three times in recent
years — in a referendum, during a national consultation
and in the most recent parliamentary elections. Based
on that authorization from the Hungarian people, I
would like to announce that Hungary will vote against
the global compact on migration.
18-44630

19/12/2018

Mr. Locsin (Philippines): The Philippines will vote
in favour of, and strongly supports, draft resolution
A/73/L.66, which would endorse the global compact for
safe, orderly and regular migration. Some of our friends
in this endeavour have withdrawn under pressure from
political constituencies, while others opposed it from
the start for the same reason. That is only right. We
should respond to our constituencies, for we are all
democracies. Still, while others have their reasons,
with which we may agree or not completely disagree,
where we do disagree we must not leave them without
an answer.
We have defeated the notion that migration is bad.
And we made our case with facts, not with alarming
fantasies about the loss of jobs that no Westerner would
take. When jobs are lost, they are not usually taken by
migrants but by people who stay home, work harder
for lower pay and beat the higher-paid competition in
other countries. We have made our case with reason, by
showing that migrants have been useful additions to the
workforces of host countries. They are a good response
to unfair foreign competition.
It is not fear but facts that have shaped our perception,
and it is reason, not passion, that has distinguished our
discussions in the United Nations, if nowhere else. We
should be proud to acknowledge that a decent regard for
the opinion of mankind, prompted by the better angels
of our nature, has dictated our decision regarding the
global compact.
Migration is a shared responsibility for countries
of origin, transit and destination. No one State can
address it alone, nor should any State presume to take
the lead in saying what can and cannot be done about
it. That is why the global compact for migration was
undertaken. It needed the input of all, or as many as
had good intentions towards migrants. The word
“compact” was picked precisely because it has no
settled meaning in international law, unlike “treaty”,
which, in international practice, has often been a mere
scrap of paper, torn up time and again by surprising
acts of aggression. Beginning with its title, a compact
excludes any suggestion of enforceability other than the
compulsion of conscience — if one has one. And if one
does not, it is even less compelling. Rather, the word
hints at the shared feeling of a common endeavour to
address something that we would not want to be visited
on ourselves and our families, we who are fortunate to
have countries that we are happy to call our own. There
will always be claims that good intentions become

A/73/PV.60

obligations, but they are as easily ignored as they are
made. That is part of the right to free expression that we
all uphold without qualification.
By clear delineation, the compact merely seeks
mildly to suggest what might be done out of decency
about the problems encountered by migrants. It does
not presume to tell States what to do with people who
happen to be in their midst, for that is surely a strictly
sovereign decision. We see that in the unsolved problem
of Rakhine state created by one empire at the expense of
a subject nation. None of us should presume to dictate
to the latter how to solve it, but we might talk politely
about what might be the decent thing to do.
The compact assumes that States, not just in the
exercise of their sovereignty but out of practical
common sense, must start and end with effective
national controls over their borders. A world without
borders, like a world without string to hold things
together, would be chaos. Indeed, one of States’ key
roles is to identify which of its citizens are and are not
law-abiding, so as to give first priority to protecting the
former against the lawless among them — for that is the
defining role of the State. It is a role for which no other
State or collection of States can substitute. In particular,
there can be no foreign opinion about or interference
with a State’s policy on crushing crime by any means
that achieves its purpose. Irregular migration is illegal,
but it is not a crime as that word is decently understood.
It is indeed a slippery slope from proscribing hate
speech to disallowing all expressions of disagreeable
opinions, which are the foundation of democracy and
also its poison pill.
Some here decry the current retreat from
multilateralism, and yet they are the same people who
have withdrawn from the global compact for migration
because of its multilateral character. The global
compact for migration is a triumph of multilateralism.
It is an assertion of sovereignty, acting in concert with
other sovereignties for humane objectives, but in no
way does it deny a particle of sovereignty’s full extent
and reach. However, there can be no question that world
Government is an unmitigated evil. It was on the basis
of such hegemonic aspirations that throughout the Cold
War and post-Cold War worlds the worst crimes against
humanity in history were committed. We will have
none of that from any quarter.
In sum, the compact does not derogate one iota from
sovereignty, but it reveals sovereignty’s fundamentally

18-446305/28

A/73/PV.60

moral nature. A key aspect of sovereignty is the care
that States must take of the people who live in them,
even if they are on the move, from countries of origin
through countries of transit to where they finally end
up, to be welcomed or booted out. The compact merely
speaks truth to sovereign power and reminds it of its
moral aspect. Sovereignty is as much a duty of care as
it is an assertion of unlimited freedom of action. Where
migration is concerned, the two combine in the willing
assumption of that duty. And that is the problem. States
wish they could pick and choose which migrants to
take or reject, and for the most part they are able to.
But migrants do not stand on auction blocks, passively
awaiting the auctioneer’s cry of “sold”. That is the fond
desire, but this is the modern world. It cannot be a neat
process to select from a moving tide of humankind that
is fleeing the injustice of places with bad Governments
that were sponsored by hegemons during the Cold War,
or the injustice of being born in weak and therefore
violent States. The compact seeks merely to tidy that
process. Migrants are not slaves in transport but free
human beings on the move, with more courage to
improve their condition abroad than endurance to
persist in the wretched places they must flee or perish
in. And while the lust to wander is immemorial, there is
still no place like home — if you can live in it.
Sometimes the needs of States and migrants
overlap, and sometimes they do not. One result of that
is the false and ugly narratives of migration peddled
by those who have benefited from migration but fear
too much of it. Without migrants, Western cities would
be cesspools. Without them, as my friend Fernando of
Mexico said, there would be no World Cup as we know
it today, and no current Miss Universe, with the partScottish, part-Filipina Catriona Gray lava-walking the
runway for her one and only Filipino people. That is the
enigma of arrival, the arrival of needed migrants, some
of them but not all of them. That is where sovereignty
comes up not against a challenge to its unlimited
freedom to act, but against the moral imperative to live
up to a standard of reciprocal decency in its actions.
One day a sovereign people may find themselves
migrants with no country as well. We repeat that no
enforceable obligation can be laid on sovereignty, but
certain standards are expected of it, and a failure to
meet them results only in self-condemnation. So at
the global compact for migration negotiations, the
Philippines proposed treating migration as much as a
matter of migrants’ expectations as of a State obligation
to uphold a standard of decency in the rites of migrant
6/28

19/12/2018

passage and arrival, welcome and rejection. It is true
that the compact raises expectations, but while we may
or may not join in deriding international guidelines,
standards and commitments that infringe on our
absolute sovereignty to choose any means to achieve
our purposes, it is nonetheless a fact that expectations
are beyond the remit of sovereignty to contain.
Hope springs eternal, as it did for the Pilgrims
who crossed an ocean in the expectation of a life better
than the miserable one they had in Europe. They were
fortunate to encounter natives on the other side of
the world who gave them the benefit of the doubt and
provisions to tide them over the cruel winter. But no
power can extinguish hope, and it is not a crime to wish
for better and to do something about it. It may be illegal,
but it is not criminal. The global compact for migration
took two years of difficult negotiations over complex
issues and strong opposition, not least from countries
of migrant composition. The experience may not have
been good, but we persevered in the confidence that
decency would prevail, and it is in decency that we have
anchored the compact.
Mr. Prasad (Fiji): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the Pacific small island developing States
(SIDS) that are represented at the United Nations. We
thank and commend the Government of the Kingdom of
Morocco for its excellent hosting of the recently convened
Intergovernmental Conference to Adopt the Global
Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration, held
last week. The historic city of Marrakech was a fitting
venue for the adoption of this historic compact, which
was agreed to by 164 countries. We congratulate the
international community on its collective efforts to
reach that milestone achievement, which speaks to our
enduring faith in the force of multilateralism.
International migration affects all countries,
small and large, developed and developing. The global
compact for migration will act as a global framework
and guide for assisting the global community in
addressing many dimensions of global migration in a
holistic and comprehensive way and for optimizing the
benefits of migration while also addressing the risks
and challenges for individuals and communities in
countries of origin, transit and destination. The global
compact for migration in no way undermines national
migration policies or national sovereignty, but will
rather assist and guide countries in strengthening their
own approach in addressing that issue. We commend
the work of the co-facilitators, the delegations of
18-44630

19/12/2018

Mexico and Switzerland, for their excellent work on
draft resolution A/73/L.66 and the thematic sessions,
regional consultations and other consultations
convened during the year. We also thank Ms. Louise
Arbour, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for International Migration, for her overall
efforts, particularly on the Secretary-General’s report
(A/72/643) on making migration work for all. Her
contributions were very helpful in shaping our thinking
and giving a fresh analysis. We very much welcome the
outcome of the consultations, which were based on an
inclusive approach, as the global compact recognized,
that properly reflects the three key pillars of the United
Nations system — sustainable development, security
and human rights.
For Pacific island developing States, the compact
highlights a critical issue, the nexus between migration
and climate change. We are pleased to see the
compact include a specific section on migrants who
move across borders as a result of sudden or slowonset natural disasters, the adverse effects of climate
change, environmental degradation or other precarious
situations that are not of their own making. The Pacific
SIDS have supported the global compact for migration
since the text was agreed to in July here in New York.
We especially welcome the sections that promote an
inclusive approach to climate-induced migration.
Together with the recommendations of the Task
Force on Displacement of the Warsaw International
Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with
Climate Change Impacts, the global compact for
migration provides a blueprint for guiding the policies
of all countries, especially our own, on addressing
climate-induced migration.
Vulnerable Pacific island developing States will
increasingly experience the adverse effects of climate
change as a cause of displacement and, ultimately,
migration. The compact marks a much-needed shift in
perspectives, as the international community begins to
acknowledge the interlinkages between the effects of
climate change and human rights, including the right to
safety, health, livelihoods and food security. Those are
struggles that we Pacific islanders are only too familiar
with. They are not abstract. As Pacific SIDS, we will
need access to new and predictable resources to help
address the slow or sudden-onset effects of climate
change. We appreciate the link drawn between the
compact and the United Nations development system.
In order to assure better delivery, we need to scale up

A/73/PV.60

the United Nations presence in our region, particularly
the North Pacific.
Our population’s small size does not lessen the
severity of the situation that we are facing. Whole
islands are at risk, and some of us are facing an
existential threat to the very survival of entire countries.
Their populations have nowhere to go. They look to
the compact and the United Nations with much hope.
We have come a long way together in dealing with the
complex issue of international migration. More than
258 million migrants live outside their country of birth,
and their numbers are increasing. The compact marks a
small step but also a giant leap.
At a time when there are strong headwinds in the
pathway of multilateralism, the Marrakech compact
demonstrates the great force of compromise, consensus
and collaboration even on the most difficult global
challenges of our times. On behalf of the Pacific small
island developing States, we are delighted to support
the Marrakech compact and call for the adoption of
draft resolution A/73/L.66, as orally revised today.
Mr. Veprek (United States of America): The
United States cannot support the global compact
for safe, orderly and regular migration. We therefore
object to the adoption of a draft resolution (A/73/L.66)
that welcomes the adoption of a compact rejected by
some Member States. We are not bound by any of the
endorsements, commitments or outcomes resulting
from the compact process or contained in the compact
itself. We note that several other Member States have
expressed concerns about the compact as well.
The United States proclaims and reaffirms its belief
that decisions about how to secure its borders and whom
to admit for legal residency or citizenship are among
the most important sovereign decisions that a State can
make. They are not subject to negotiation or review in
international instruments or forums. The United States
maintains the sovereign right to facilitate or restrict
access to its territory, in accordance with its national
laws and policies, subject to its existing international
obligations. Furthermore, we believe that the compact
and the process that led to its adoption, including the
New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants,
represent an effort to advance global governance at the
expense of the sovereign right of States to manage their
immigration systems in accordance with their national
laws, policies and interests. We are concerned about the
possibility that the compact’s supporters, recognizing

18-446307/28

A/73/PV.60

the lack of widespread support for a legally binding
international migration convention, are seeking to use
the compact and its outcomes and objectives as a longterm way to build international customary law, or socalled soft law, in the area of migration.
We are particularly concerned about the novel use
of the term “compact” to describe the document. Unlike
standard titles for international instruments, “compact”
has no settled meaning in international law, but it
implies legal obligation. The compact could therefore
be amenable to claims that its commitments are legal
obligations, or at least evidence of international
consensus on universal legal principles. The United
States objects to any such claims, and holds that
neither the compact nor any commitment by States to
implementing its objectives creates any legal obligations
for Member States or creates new rights or protections
for foreign nationals as a matter of conventional or
international customary law.
The compact fails to distinguish adequately
between foreign nationals who have legal status in
host countries and those who are present unlawfully.
Strengthening control over borders is central to
national security, economic prosperity and the rule
of law. The way we talk about crossing international
borders should reflect the centrality of law and the need
for such movements to be in accordance with national
laws. In the United States, foreign nationals who are
not present lawfully are not irregular, they are illegal
aliens violating the laws and immigration policies of
our nation and are subject to prosecution and removal.
The compact does not sufficiently address the issue of
the large numbers of foreign nationals residing illegally
in many States. In many countries, citizens, including
those who themselves emigrated from other countries,
are concerned about this issue, and it undercuts their
faith in the ability of their Governments to faithfully
execute their laws. In democratic nations, where
Governments are responsive and accountable to the
people, it also hurts the ability of States to consider
implementing new forms of legal immigration.
The compact intentionally downplays the costs
of immigration to destination countries, by failing
to account for legitimate national security concerns
and debates, the loss of employment opportunities,
especially for lower-skilled and more vulnerable
citizens, declining social trust and stresses on public
services. As President Trump said in his address to
the Assembly in September 2017 (see A/72/PV.3), in
8/28

19/12/2018

receiving countries the substantial costs of uncontrolled
migration are overwhelmingly borne by low-income
citizens whose concerns are often ignored by both
media and Government.
In sum, the compact strikes the wrong balance.
Its pro-migration stance fails to recognize that wellmanaged legal immigration must start and end with
effective national controls over borders. It lists many
desirable outcomes but fails to acknowledge that the
effective security of States’ borders must precede all
other objectives. That undermines its credibility as
an effective road map for addressing the migration
challenges that all States face.
In addition to our broad concerns regarding
emerging attempts to globalize migration governance
at the expense of State sovereignty, the United States
has specific objections to the compact’s text and
objectives that run contrary to our law and policy.
They include, but are not limited to, the compact’s
calls for the prevention of all instances of intolerance
against foreign nationals and the promotion of certain
perspectives for media professionals in how they report
on or characterize migrants. That raises concerns
about respect for freedom of opinion and expression
and freedom of the media, all core tenets on which the
United States was founded.
The compact’s calls for eliminating or adjusting
detention requirements for illegal aliens run counter to
our interest in establishing a well-managed immigration
process that promotes the rule of law. Calls in the
compact for Governments to allow all temporary foreign
workers to change jobs once they are in a country
will affect the ability of Governments to define and
manage their labour needs effectively and prevent the
displacement of national workers. The compact sets the
expectation that States should provide levels of social
services to foreign nationals greater than they might
consider appropriate. All States provide and regulate
access to social services in various ways and with
various capacities, and the United States does not have
international obligations pertaining to the provision of
social services to aliens who are not refugees.
The compact encourages firewalling service
provision within Governments to protect the privacy
of aliens, in order to eliminate the possibility that
aliens will seek to avoid services to which they
are allegedly entitled. The United States promotes
information-sharing among relevant departments and
18-44630

19/12/2018

levels of Government in accordance with its national
laws and policy of promoting the steady enforcement
of those laws. The compact’s references to a range
of international instruments that many countries
have not signed or ratified creates a false sense of
implicit international support and recognition of
such documents.
The compact seeks to establish broad frameworks and
regulatory processes to facilitate immigration-related
remittances. We believe that the correct way to address
policies on remittances is through existing financial
cooperation mechanisms such as the Financial Stability
Board and the Financial Action Task Force, in order
to avoid contradicting existing laws, standards and
practices or acting at cross-purposes with current
work streams, including those that seek to prevent the
transfer of illicit and terror-related funds. The compact
mentions a right to family life and other rights to privacy
and legal identity. We are concerned that the way these
terms are used throughout the compact creates false
representations of the actual rights represented in
the relevant international human rights instruments.
Paragraph 14 of the compact also references “win-win
cooperation”. We continue to oppose that phrase, which
has been promoted by a single Member State in order to
insert a domestic policy agenda of its Head of State into
United Nations documents.
On 6 December the United States distributed a
statement on the compact to all States Members of the
United Nations, and we refer Member States to that
statement for a detailed list of our objections. While
we honour the contributions of the many immigrants
who have helped to build our nation, we cannot
support a compact or process that imposes or has the
potential to impose international guidelines, standards,
expectations or commitments that might constrain
our ability to make decisions in the best interests of
our nation. As President Trump said in his September
2017 address,
“Our Government’s first duty is to its people, to
our citizens, to serve their needs, to ensure their
safety, to preserve their rights and to defend their
values” (A/72/PV.3, p. 11).
For those reasons, the United States has called for a
vote on draft resolution A/73/L.66.
Mr. Gertze (Namibia): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the Group of African States
in explanation of vote before the voting.

A/73/PV.60

The African Group warmly welcomed the formal
adoption by consensus in Marrakech on 10 December
of the global compact for safe, orderly and regular
migration, also known as the Marrakech compact
on migration. Its adoption last week was a historic
moment for the international community, particularly
the migrant community. It is a landmark document that
constitutes a road map for preventing the suffering of
thousands of migrants, and it will provide the space
to develop cooperation strategies that will benefit all.
Above all, it is the inspiring product of almost two
years of multi-stakeholder consultations and intense
intergovernmental negotiations, to which the African
Group contributed constructively and in a spirit of
compromise. Every delegation had the opportunity to
contribute to the formulation of the text by making
proposals and sharing and discussing ideas and best
practices. On 13 July, we reached a delicate and balanced
agreement on the text of the global compact. The
African Group had several proposals that it would have
liked to see included in the text. However, considering
that the compact is a multilateral agreement, we joined
the consensus and accepted the text. We are therefore
committed to defending and promoting the text that
we all agreed to this summer. It is very unfortunate
that after all those negotiations, concessions and
agreements, the General Assembly is voting today on
the global compact.
The African Group strongly believes in
multilateralism. It is the framework that guides our
work here in the United Nations, and we should
therefore all stand firm and defend it. The Marrakech
compact is a pure product of multilateralism. Contrary
to some of the confusing myths that have arisen around
this document, it is not legally binding, nor does it
create a new right to migrate. It is a framework for
international cooperation that specifically reaffirms
the principle of State sovereignty. In that sense, we
should all defend the Marrakech compact and strive to
ensure its best possible implementation. We should all
protect it from politicization. For all of those reasons,
the African Group will fully support the Marrakech
compact and strongly encourages all to vote in favour
of draft resolution A/73/L.66.
Mr. Blanchard (Canada): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Kingdom of Morocco for its exceptional
leadership and hospitality in Marrakech last week.
Secondly, I want to thank and commend Ambassadors
Lauber and Gómez Camacho for their resilience and

18-446309/28

A/73/PV.60

leadership in facilitating the drafting of this historic
compact. And finally, I also want to congratulate and
salute someone who is already a beacon in Canada for
all that is fair, just and right, Ms. Louise Arbour, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
International Migration. I thank her for her exemplary
leadership and vision.
This compact shows that no issue is too big,
complex or sensitive to be effectively addressed through
multilateralism. Migration is a global reality, an issue
that by definition transcends borders and requires a
coordinated global approach. Last week in Marrakech,
together with the vast majority of States Members of
the United Nations, Canada affirmed its strong support
for the United Nations global compact on migration. It
was a good day for migrants and for multilateralism.
It was a historic milestone, representing our shared
understanding and the importance of our ability to
come together within the United Nations system to
address a complex global issue that no single country
can successfully deal with on its own. While every
country has a sovereign right to determine its own
migration policies and a responsibility to its citizens
to manage its borders effectively, working together to
encourage well-managed regular migration systems
and discourage irregular migration pathways benefits
all countries and all people. The compact provides us
with a valuable and necessary shared global framework
to work together to that end.
Canada is a country that draws strength from its
diversity. It is part of our national identity. As Prime
Minister Trudeau has said many times, Canada is
strong not in spite of its differences but because of
them. Canada and the Canadian people have benefited
greatly from the positive impact that migrants have on
our society. We have benefited economically, socially
and culturally, with migrants supporting the growth of
our labour force and bringing new skills. Migrants also
contribute through their entrepreneurship, by creating
new jobs and boosting innovation. I see these benefits
clearly every time I go home to Toronto, 47 per cent
of whose population was born outside Canada. More
than half of Torontonians identify as belonging to
a visible minority group. In fact, the city boasts 200
ethnic groups, with more than 140 languages spoken.
That diversity has propelled Toronto to its status as
the fourth most populous city in North America and a
first-tier global financial centre. I could go on with the
10/28

19/12/2018

same story for other cities such as Calgary, Edmonton,
Vancouver and many others.
(spoke in French)
These benefits are not limited to destination
countries. Countries of origin also benefit through
increased networks, investment opportunities and
remittances, as well as the skills and experience that
returning migrants bring with them. In Canada, we
are proud of our migration system. With the adoption
of the compact, there will be more opportunities to
share lessons learned to further improve our migration
system, discuss ways in which we can encourage the
use of regular migratory channels and better ensure the
integration of migrants and their contribution to our
society. The compact builds on the commitments that
we all made in the framework of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, and it emphasizes the positive
contributions of women and the importance of gender
equality and of pursuing rights-based approaches. It also
recognizes the importance of protecting populations in
vulnerable situations, addressing challenges such as
human trafficking and underlying causes with a view
to deterring irregular migration. The compact does
not attempt to replace national migration policies or
impose arbitrary requirements related to migration.
It is rather a framework built on principles and best
practices with the aim of informing the efforts of all
countries to strengthen their own migration systems in
their own contexts.
(spoke in English)
The compact responds to the facts. We know that
between 2000 and 2017, migration increased by nearly
50 per cent globally. But to keep that fact in perspective,
it represents only 3.4 per cent of the entire global
population. We must therefore continue to draw on
evidence in deciding our policies and approaches. The
vast majority of migrants use regular channels, often
seeking economic or social opportunity. However,
people are increasingly fleeing their homes owing
to challenges such as conflict, natural disasters and
climate change. Our global situation, today and for the
foreseeable future, will include migration. We cannot
ignore that reality. We must find ways to harness the
opportunities that migration presents and to address
its challenges. Today we have an opportunity to begin
working together.
Canada firmly believes in the benefits of
comprehensive, well-managed migration systems
18-44630

19/12/2018

that support the social, economic and cultural
contributions of all migrants. As Secretary-General
Guterres has indicated, we must aim for a world in
which we can celebrate migration’s contributions to
prosperity, development and international unity. It is
in our collective power to achieve that goal. Canada is
committed to working together with the United Nations
and all partners, at home and abroad, to meet our
common goal of a safer, more inclusive and prosperous
world. I encourage members to join Canada in adopting
draft resolution A/73/L.66, endorsing the global
compact for safe, orderly and regular migration.
Mr. Escalante Hasbún (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): I would first like to reiterate that during the
Intergovernmental Conference in Morocco my country
has already expressed its position on the global compact
for migration, which the General Assembly is formally
considering in today’s meeting. However, I would like
to mention some of the reasons why El Salvador will be
voting in favour of the compact.
We are voting for it because migration and mobility
are inherent aspects of our human condition, because
for more than 500 years the American continent has
been built by migrants, forced and voluntary, and
because migration will continue with or without a global
compact. We are voting for it because the compact was
not negotiated out of the blue, but as a direct response
to the mandate in the 2016 New York Declaration for
Refugees and Migrants. We are voting for it because the
compact represents a consensus reached in July among
more than 190 actively participating Member States and
observers of the United Nations, after days of extensive
open, inclusive and transparent consultations.
We are voting for it because the adoption of
the compact is a transcendental step towards a more
comprehensive approach to migration within the
framework of the United Nations, with a focus on rights
throughout the migration cycle, and because it is based
on the principles of shared responsibility, international
cooperation and respect for national sovereignty in
the development of migration policies. We are voting
for it because the information in the compact is based
on existing international law, including the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, which was also voted
on, and its article 13. In other words, what we are
talking about is nothing new. We are simply seeking
to rationalize the international migration governance
framework in order to make it safe, orderly and regular
for everyone.

A/73/PV.60

We are voting for it because it is reprehensible
and shameful that some believe that human rights
belong to everyone, without distinction of race, color,
sex, language, religion, political or any other opinion,
national or social origin, economic status, birth or
any other condition — including, in my delegation’s
view, gender identity and sexual orientation — except
in the case of those who are migrants. We are voting
for it because under the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, in Goal 10.7, we are already committed
to facilitating the orderly, safe, regular and responsible
mobility of people, including through planned and
well-managed migration policies. We are voting
for it because no State can successfully manage
migration alone. We need cooperation frameworks
at the regional and international level that involve all
countries — since we are all countries of origin, transit,
destination or return — in order to manage migration
better. We are voting for it because El Salvador does not
want irregular, unsafe or disorderly migration. We want
our men, women, children, girls and adolescents to see
migration as an option, not a necessity.
We are voting for it because El Salvador believes
that the compact should not be used as a tool to win
political followers, promoting harmful and distorted
stories about the document itself and about migration,
using rhetorical and ideological devices based on
disinformation and on falsifying reality. We are voting
for it because no country is 100 per cent pleased with
the text of the compact, including my delegation, which
would like to have seen stronger language on various
issues, but we respect the fact that this is the result of a
genuine multilateral process. We are voting for it because
the compact is not binding, and its impact will depend
to a great extent on our approach to its implementation,
through productive discussion focused on specific
objectives and taking into account the characteristics
of each region. We are voting for it because when it
comes to things that matter, my delegation will always
prefer cooperation and dialogue over an isolationist
approach, which serves only short-term political ends
and contributes nothing constructive to our long-term
structural challenges.
We are voting for it because we reiterate our rejection
of every kind of xenophobia, discrimination or any other
action that seeks to criminalize migration, and because
my country rejects any action that runs counter to the
best interests of children, especially the detention or
separation of children and adolescent migrants. We are

18-4463011/28

A/73/PV.60

voting for it because El Salvador stands ready to take
measures to implement the compact at the national and
regional levels and to participate actively in the 2019
follow-up negotiations established in paragraph 54.
I could continue listing many more reasons, but we
do not have the time. For all of these reasons, El Salvador
will vote in favour of draft resolution A/73/L.66 and
respectfully encourages all other delegations to do
the same.
Mr. Iglesias Mori (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Chile’s migration policy is based on the following
principles: respect for and the protection of the universal
human rights of all migrants, regular or irregular, at all
times, in all places and in all circumstances; the right
of all persons to leave their country of origin and move
freely in the territory of another country where they
are legally present; and the sovereign right of States to
determine who can enter their territories and in what
circumstances as a matter regulated by domestic law in
accordance with their international obligations.
Based on those principles, we want migration that
is safe, fair and regular. That means pursuing an opendoor policy for receiving migrants who come to begin a
new and better life with the intention of respecting our
laws, integrating into our society and contributing to
our country’s development. At the same time, however,
it means pursuing a closed-door policy to keep out
those who come to harm us, such as criminals, drug
smugglers, organized crime and human traffickers.
With that in mind, we believe that some aspects of
the global compact for migration are not entirely in line
with our migration policy and its underlying principles.
For example, the compact encourages irregular
migration because it does not clearly distinguish
between regular and irregular migrants when it comes
to issues such as family reunification and the provision
of social security benefits. It also promotes the entry of
vulnerable migrants who have neither asked for asylum
nor been recognized as refugees. The compact introduces
new requirements relating to returning migrants,
which for countries of destination means creating
conditions for the social and economic integration of
returning migrants even in cases where they have been
expelled. The compact affects the sovereign right of
all States to determine how to safeguard their borders
and, in particular, the conditions for entry into their
territories. Chile’s regulation of its migration policy
is essentially a domestic matter, without prejudice to
12/28

19/12/2018

multilateral cooperation or our compliance with our
international obligations.
Chile is a country that believes firmly in the
importance of multilateralism and is committed to
dialogue and international cooperation, especially
when it comes to migration. However, in this specific
case, we have decided to abstain in the voting on the
global compact, given the fact that it does not fully
safeguard the legitimate interests of our country and
makes it difficult to protect our borders.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): Ireland will be proud
to vote in favour of the global compact for safe, orderly
and regular migration. Migration is a global issue
requiring global solutions. I am speaking today not to
qualify Ireland’s position but to highlight and underline
our commitment to and support for the compact. We
believe that migration is one of our most important
shared challenges, and that multilateralism offers us an
obvious path to addressing that challenge. Many of us
here see it as the only way. In 2016, with our Jordanian
friends, Ireland was proud to co-facilitate the New York
Declaration for Refugees and Migrants that has now led
to the global compacts for migration and on refugees.
As a member State of the European Union, we are also
proud to stand with the Assembly today as together we
set out to ensure that the reality of large migration is
safer and better managed.
My country, Ireland, knows migration. We have
a long history of Irish people migrating all over the
world, and we believe that gives us a responsibility to
play our part now. Seventeen per cent of our own Irish
citizens are currently living abroad. They join with
the 70 million people or so of Irish descent worldwide,
descendants of those Irish forced to seek livelihoods
elsewhere during centuries of political and economic
uncertainty. We know what it feels like to be migrants.
Today, on our own small island, more than one in six of
our residents was born abroad. We are now benefiting
from the contribution of the new Irish and those who
have made Ireland their home.
The global compact may not be legally binding,
but it offers us a strong framework as we move ahead
together to provide hope and a prospect to the 250 million
men, women and children who deserve nothing less. We
highly commend the Marrakech compact on migration
to the Assembly for its commitment and support.
Mr. Kashaev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation supports the
18-44630

19/12/2018

adoption of the global compact for safe, orderly and
regular migration. This compromise document covers
many aspects of international migration, including its
humanitarian dimensions, development issues, human
rights and the fight against crime. We hope that the
global compact will become a foundation for long-term,
comprehensive international cooperation, aimed among
other things at creating channels for legal migration
and mechanisms for the effective control of migration
processes, developing tools to combat illegal migration,
including readmission, and combating migration-related
crime. In States where mass emigration occurs it is
equally important to establish sustainable conditions
conducive to a peaceful life and to people’s return to
their homelands, such as by providing those countries
with assistance in socioeconomic development and
institution-building.
It is crucial to make every effort to rule out the
possibility of terrorists and other criminals infiltrating
States of destination rather than people who genuinely
need help. We should also work together to eradicate
xenophobia and social, racial, national and religious
hatred and enmity towards migrants.
We want to once again express our non-acceptance
of the concept of shared responsibility, which in its
current form merely implies putting the burden of
hosting forced migrants on States that frequently have
nothing to do with the reasons for the mass migration
of peoples. We are not in favour of shifting the burden
to others when the current complex migration situation
is largely a result of irresponsible interference in the
internal affairs of sovereign States in the Middle East
and North Africa. In that context, the countries that
actively participated in that interference should bear the
first and greatest responsibility for its consequences,
including those related to migration.
We also believe that the reference in the compact
to the activities and recommendations of the Agenda
for the Protection of Cross-Border Displaced Persons
in the Context of Disasters and Climate Change and the
Platform on Disaster Displacement is inappropriate.
There is currently no reliable and universally
recognized scientific data that enables us to speak
of a direct correlation between climate change and
the displacement of peoples, or of any dominance of
environmental factors in forcing displacement. Besides
that, the Platform’s activities do not have the support
of all countries, and its conclusions have not been

A/73/PV.60

approved by the relevant entity, the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change.
Needless to say, the global compact is not a
legally binding instrument and does not impose legal
or financial obligations on participating countries.
Instead, it presents a specific direction for the
development of current attitudes and approaches
to international migration and outlines a universal
approach to the issue. Both within the framework of
international cooperation and at the national level, we
have to develop concrete mechanisms for implementing
the global compact, taking into account the national
interests of the parties, including in the area of security,
and their first priority of promoting the interests of
their own citizens. I should mention that the Russian
Federation has already actively embarked on work in
this regard. On 31 October, the President of the Russian
Federation approved an updated concept for our State
migration policy that contains a number of provisions
implementing the principles and objectives of the
global compact. Based on that, we will vote in favour
of draft resolution A/73/L.66 today. Russia is open to
cooperating with all States on this important issue.
Mr. Gafoor (Singapore): Singapore attended
the Intergovernmental Conference hosted by the
Government of Morocco on 10 and 11 December
during which the global compact for safe, orderly
and regular migration was adopted. We attended the
Marrakech Conference in a spirit that reflected the
principles of international cooperation, multilateralism
and the Charter of the United Nations, and we thank
the Moroccan Government for its hospitality. We also
participated actively throughout the intergovernmental
negotiations on the global compact.
Singapore regards the global compact as a
multilateral effort to improve the prospects for migrants
and migration, and we will continue to participate
constructively in such efforts. However, we can
support them only within the constraints of our national
circumstances. The reality is that Singapore is a small
country and one of the most densely populated island
States in the world, which creates unique constraints and
circumstances for us. We believe that all countries have
a sovereign right to determine the conditions in which
migrants may enter, reside and take up employment in
their territories in accordance with international law,
including the applicable human rights obligations. We
also believe that States have a sovereign right to decide
whether and how to implement the operating principles

18-4463013/28

A/73/PV.60

and the policy options listed in the objectives of the
global compact. As the international community seeks
to address the underlying issues affecting people’s safe,
orderly and regular movement, we have to recognize
and take into account the different national contexts,
realities, capacities and levels of development of
Member States and respect their national policies
and priorities.
While the global compact is a commendable effort,
it does not achieve the balance required to satisfy our
concerns. Accordingly, Singapore will abstain in the
voting on draft resolution A/73/L.66.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Last week at the
Intergovernmental Conference in Morocco, Indonesia
joined the consensus on the adoption of a global
compact for safe, orderly and regular migration. Today,
in the General Assembly in New York, Indonesia
is once again pleased to contribute to furthering our
shared determination to achieve better governance of
global migration, and we will therefore vote in favour
of draft resolution A/73/L.66.
Despite the overwhelming support for the global
compact’s adoption, it is regrettable that some countries
have decided not to support it. Indonesia encourages
them to remain committed to multilateralism.
Collaboration is no longer an option; it is a necessity.
If we really believe in multilateralism, this is the right
time to cast a vote for it. The global compact is the first
intergovernmental document on migration negotiated
under the auspices of the United Nations, the most
multilateral and universal of all forums. I should add
that realizing better governance of global migration
is beyond the capacity of any one country. The global
compact should therefore unite rather than divide us,
and we should strengthen our spirit of collaboration
rather than let suspicions fester. We should rely on
our common sense and our sense of decency, as was
eloquently stated by my colleague Teodoro Locsin,
Foreign Secretary of the Philippines.
As a country of origin, transit and destination
for migrants, Indonesia views the global compact
as a visionary and balanced document that provides
countries with various methods and best practices.
With regard to its adoption today, we would like to
underscore some pertinent points. First, on the human
rights of migrants, while emphasizing State sovereignty,
the global compact asserts that protecting the rights
of migrants, regardless of their migration status,
14/28

19/12/2018

is a critical foundation for realizing the benefits of
migration. Secondly, the implementation of the global
compact must be based on a common understanding,
shared responsibilities and unity of purpose. Thirdly,
the United Nations system must work in synergy to
assist States in implementing the global compact. The
United Nations Network on Migration should coordinate
effectively, avoid duplication and work synergistically
with the United Nations development system.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Indonesia’s
readiness to continue working with the international
community in order to implement the global compact,
and we also want to appeal to all here in this forum to
vote in favour of the draft resolution. It is the decent
thing to do. It is the right thing to do. It is the human
thing to do. I urge members to vote with their hearts for
the sake of migrants all over the world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/73/L.66, entitled “Global Compact for
Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration”, as orally revised.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African
Republic, Chad, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia,
Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
18-44630

19/12/2018

Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Peru,
Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, South Sudan,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tunisia,
Turkey, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Czech Republic, Hungary, Israel, Poland, United
States of America
Abstaining:
Algeria, Australia, Austria, Bulgaria, Chile, Italy,
Latvia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Romania, Singapore,
Switzerland
Draft resolution A/73/L.66, as orally revised, was
adopted by 152 votes to 5, with 12 abstentions
(resolution 73/195).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Afghanistan,
Benin, Botswana, Guinea, Panama, Sao Tome and
Principe and Turkmenistan informed the Secretariat
that they had intended to vote in favour.]
The President (spoke in Spanish): Before giving
the floor to speakers in explanation of vote, I would
like to remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats. I also want to point out that we have
43 countries that have asked to speak in explanation
of vote, and I therefore kindly ask delegations to make
their statements as brief as possible.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, the Kingdom of Morocco wishes to align itself
fully with the statements delivered or to be delivered in
explanation of vote on behalf of the Group of African
States by the representatives of Namibia, before the
vote, and of Comoros, after the vote. We would like to
add some remarks in our capacity as the host country
of the Intergovernmental Conference that adopted

A/73/PV.60

the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular
Migration, also known as the Marrakech Compact on
Migration, in Marrakech on 10 December.
I would first like to express to you, Madam
President, the sincere and warm gratitude of the
Kingdom of Morocco for you and your team’s immense
efforts and invaluable contributions in ensuring the
success of the Marrakech Conference. I also want to
express our gratitude for resolution 73/195, endorsing
the Compact, which we have just adopted. In that
regard, Morocco welcomes the oral revision you made
to the draft resolution in order to include the title of
the Marrakech Compact on Migration, in keeping with
the decision taken at the adoption of the Compact on
10 December.
The adoption last week by consensus of the
Marrakech Compact marked a historic moment
for the United Nations and for migration. It attests
to the desire of the international community to
strengthen the management of migration through
a proactive and cooperative approach and above
all through the protection of migrants and their
interests. The Marrakech Compact is the result of
dialogue, cooperation and consultation. In that regard,
I want to reiterate Morocco’s hearty thanks to the
two co-facilitators, Ambassadors Juan José Gómez
Camacho of Mexico and Jürg Lauber of Switzerland,
who succeeded in bringing our positions closer together
and reaching a robust compromise on the delicate and
sensitive matter of migration. In endorsing the Compact
today, the General Assembly has underscored this
successful exercise in multilateralism. It is now up to
the international community to ensure the appropriate
follow-up to and implementation of the Compact.
Marrakech was never an end in itself. It is the start of
a long process for strengthening the management of
migration based on the Compact’s provisions.
I should not conclude without expressing the
sincere and deep gratitude of the Kingdom of Morocco
to all who worked night and day behind the scenes to
ensure the success of the Marrakech Conference. Our
thanks go first and foremost to Secretary-General
António Guterres, as well as the Department for
General Assembly and Conference Management, led
by Ms. Catherine Pollard, the Departments of Safety
and Security, Management and Public Information and
the Office of Information Communication Technology.
Finally, Morocco would like to express sincere thanks
to Ms. Louise Arbour, the Special Representative of the

18-4463015/28

A/73/PV.60

19/12/2018

Secretary-General for International Migration, and her
entire team, without whom the Conference would not
have been such a major and resounding success.

73/195, thereby asserting the fact that Poland will not
join the Compact. We would now like to share a national
statement in that regard.

Mrs. Chatardová (Czech Republic): I have the
honour to present my country’s explanation of vote on
behalf of the Czech Republic.

Poland does not consider the Global Compact
for Migration the right instrument for managing
international migration, as it could limit our ability
to make decisions in the best interest of our nationals
as well as migrants. Poland will therefore maintain
its entirely sovereign right to facilitate or restrict
admission to the country in accordance with our
national laws and policies, subject to our existing
international obligations. As the Compact fails to
distinguish sufficiently between regular and irregular
migration, Poland would face significant difficulties
in implementing some of the commitments arising
from the Compact’s provisions, particularly including
identity cards, the decriminalization of irregular
migration and national child detention standards.

From the outset, as a staunch defender of
multilateralism, the rule of law and human rights, the
Czech Republic participated actively in the negotiations
on the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular
Migration. In that spirit, I would first like to express
our sincere gratitude to both facilitators, Ambassadors
Juan José Gómez Camacho and Jürg Lauber, to Miroslav
Lajčák, the President of the General Assembly at its
seventy-second session, and to Ms. Arbour, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for their
leadership and excellent work on the matter.
Unfortunately, some of our crucial concerns
remained unresolved or were not reflected in the
final text. Most importantly, this concerns the issues
of distinction, or rather the lack of any distinction,
between legal and illegal migration and, more broadly,
of unclear definitions of terms used in the Compact.
The Government of the Czech Republic therefore
decided not to join the Compact or to participate
in the Intergovernmental Conference in Marrakech
for its adoption. Lastly, our Government decided to
vote against resolution 73/195 today. Nonetheless,
we recognize the positive aspects of the text. Among
other things, we welcome its clear recognition of the
obligation of all States to duly readmit their own
nationals who have no right to stay on the territory of
another State, whether they are returning voluntarily
or forcibly, and to actively, promptly and effectively
cooperate on their return and readmission.
Finally, I want to stress that the Compact does
not establish any legal obligations for the Czech
Republic and should not result in the creation of
international customary law. Nor should it serve
national or international courts as a point of reference
for the interpretation of any legal provisions in this
area. However, we shall remain constructively and
responsibly engaged, without any political prejudice,
in further negotiations and discussions on the issue of
international migration.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): The delegation of Poland
voted against the adoption of the Global Compact for
Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration through resolution
16/28

We want to underscore that the Global Compact
for Migration does not establish any obligations for
Poland should any binding provisions be created or
adopted based on it. Poland will not be bound by any
such provisions. Nor should the Compact be treated as
a point of reference for legal clarifications in any court
proceedings. Poland objects to the possibility of any
State practice of customary soft law established based
on the Global Compact for Migration. The Compact will
have no impact on our our obligations or competences
within the European Union.
As we had already notified the United Nations,
Poland has therefore not adopted the Global Compact.
However, Poland will remain a committed partner
working on sustainable solutions for international
migration among countries of origin, transit and
destination. Despite Poland’s dissociation from the
Global Compact, we stand ready to further strengthen our
involvement in bilateral and multilateral cooperation,
in particular towards the goal of making migration a
safe, orderly and regular process, while significantly
reducing the scale of irregular migration flows and
ensuring the highest possible level of internal security.
Poland is currently a receiving country with
one of the highest levels of labour migration in the
European Union and we are open to working with all
relevant actors to improve our capacity to manage those
migration flows effectively and to provide adequate
protection for the rights of migrants, which stem from
our international obligations.
18-44630

19/12/2018

Mr. Xing Jisheng (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration
is the first framework for international cooperation on
migration developed by the international community
through negotiations. China actively participated in
the negotiation process of the Global Compact and the
Intergovernmental Conference to Adopt the Global
Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration, held
in Morocco.
China believes that international cooperation must
remain cooperative in order to achieve win-win results
for both sides and not be fought as a zero-sum game,
in accordance with the wishes of most countries of the
world. In general, China supports enhanced cooperation
and governance by the international community with
regard to migration and wishes to express the following
principled positions on the Global Compact.
First, the Global Compact is not legally binding and
does not create new international customary law or new
obligations on States under international law. It does not
affect domestic laws and policies, establish new human
rights or create any new categories of migration. The
Global Compact emphasizes the principle of national
sovereignty. Its follow-up and implementation should
fully respect the national conditions of States and their
existing laws and policies.
Secondly, it is a logical requirement that any lawbased society should strengthen migration management
and strictly distinguish between regular and irregular
migration as matters of national sovereignty in which
no external interference is permitted. Countries have
the right to develop laws and policies based on their
national circumstances on migration-related issues,
including entry, exit, stay, residence, employment and
social services, among other things.
Countries have the right to continue to improve
their migration policies on the basis of their national
conditions and priorities and in line with voluntary
and non-mandatory principles, while drawing on the
practices set out in the Global Compact, as appropriate.
Thirdly, China supports strengthening international
cooperation, promoting the sustainable development of
all countries and eliminating the root causes of illegal
migration. China supports protecting the legitimate
rights and interests of migrants, strengthening border
control and stepping up the fight against human
trafficking and irregular migration.

A/73/PV.60

China opposes the application of the principle of
non-refoulement for migrants. China supports the
establishment of a capacity-building mechanism to
help developing countries to improve their migration
management capacities.
China will interpret and implement the Global
Compact based on the positions that I have just outlined.
From the perspective of adhering to multilateralism and
strengthening international cooperation in the field of
migration, China supports the adoption by the General
Assembly of the Global Compact for Migration.
Mrs. Alfeine (Comoros): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of African
States in explanation of vote after the voting on
resolution 75/195.
As stated earlier, the African Group engaged
constructively throughout the nearly two years of the
negotiation process based on the realization that the
Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration,
the first of its kind, offers the international community
a unique opportunity to establish global governance on
international migration and set benchmarks for Member
States and various stakeholders on how to govern and
engage collectively on all aspects of human mobility,
including addressing the root causes of migration,
exploring regular migration pathways and capacitybuilding for international cooperation, examining
key emerging issues associated with trafficking and
smuggling of migrants, and combating racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, as
well as climate change.
The African Group engaged in this negotiation in
good faith with all Member States and compromised
a great deal in order to secure consensus, only to
realize with deep regret that, despite those efforts,
some countries decided not to endorse the Marrakech
Compact for Migration. Today the African Group
again chose to be on the right side of history, and is
pleased to see that an overwhelming majority of States
Members of the United Nations have proved to the rest
of the world, indeed the entire world, that they believe
in diplomacy and multilateralism.
Some may think that the Marrakech Conference
is the end, but for the African Group this is just the
beginning on the road to protecting and ensuring
the human rights of all migrants, regardless of
migration status.

18-4463017/28

A/73/PV.60

The African Group calls for robust implementation,
follow-up and review of the Global Compact for Safe,
Orderly and Regular Migration and looks forward to
engaging in 2019 in the intergovernmental consultations
to determine the modalities and organizational aspects
of the international migration review forum.
Mr. Kickert (Austria): On 30 October, the Austrian
Government decided not to join the Global Compact
for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration, endorsed in
resolution 73/195. We abstained in today’s voting and
would like to give the following explanation of our vote.
The Republic of Austria is a State under the rule of
law with a functioning judiciary. All of our judicial and
administrative decisions are rendered in full respect for
human rights, as enshrined in national laws as well as
international treaties. The Republic sovereignly decides
on the admission of migrants to Austria. A human right
to migration is unknown in Austria’s legal system.
Austria rejects the creation of a category of migrant,
which does not exist under international law. Austria
draws a clear distinction between legal and illegal
immigration, and is opposed to watering it down, which
would result from the Global Compact.
Access to the Austrian labour market, as well as the
granting of social benefits or health care, must be based
exclusively on the rules established in Austrian law. The
Global Compact may not at any point affect those legal
provisions, and any such intentions are firmly rejected.
That also applies to the creation of new entitlements or
rights for migrants through the Global Compact.
Austria rejects in particular the following points of
the Global Compact to the extent that they go beyond
existing Austrian law: the facilitation of a change of
status between regular and irregular migrant; the
facilitation of family reunification; the improved
inclusion into the labour market; the enabling of
transfers of social security rights; the provision of
basic social services; the provision of resources to
schools; access to higher education; the recognition of
non-formally acquired qualifications; the facilitation of
the establishment of businesses; access to the healthcare system; relocation options for climate refugees;
the adoption of best practices in the field of integration;
the prosecution of hate crimes; information on legal
paths to prosecution to the benefit of victims of hate
crimes; the avoidance of criminal profiling based on
race, ethnicity or religion; motivating the exposure
18/28

19/12/2018

of intolerance; the avoidance of detention; and the
prohibition of collective expulsion.
Austria objects to the Global Compact becoming
international customary law or having legal effects in
Austria as soft law or by any other means. The Compact
shall not serve national or international courts as a point
of reference for the clarification of legal provisions.
In addition, the Compact shall not lead to any shift of
competences within the European Union.
The Republic of Austria, represented by the
Austrian Federal Government, therefore did not vote
in favour of the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and
Regular Migration. Austria has declared in writing
to the United Nations and through its abstention in
the voting that it will not join the Compact. In that
context, Austria explicitly declares that the Global
Compact for Migration is non-legally-binding under
international law. The Global Compact for Migration
shall not be interpreted as opinio juris or State practice
for the emergence of customary international law, nor
shall any general principle of law evolve from it. In
such a case, Austria would have to be regarded as a
persistent objector. Should any binding provision be
created or adopted on the basis of the Global Compact
for Migration, Austria will not be bound under
international law to any such provision.
Ms. Siblini (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Migration
is a global issue that is gaining increasing importance in
our contemporary world and has many positive aspects
for countries of origin, transit and destination. It also
poses a number of significant challenges that the Global
Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration seeks
to address.
Lebanon participated with interest in the
negotiations that led to the adoption of the Compact
in the Marrakech Conference held recently, and is
pleased to be one of the countries that voted in favour
of the Compact (resolution 73/195) today, given the
large number of our citizens scattered across the
world who have contributed to improving relations
between Lebanon and their host countries, as well as to
enhancing economic development both in Lebanon and
their host countries. However, in that regard we have the
following reservations about the text of the resolution.
First, Lebanon is not a signatory to all the agreements
mentioned in the second preambular paragraph.
18-44630

19/12/2018

Secondly, we stress the importance of distinguishing
between regular and irregular migration.
Thirdly, Lebanon’s understanding of the fourth
preambular paragraph is based on the importance of
distinguishing between migrants and refugees, and we
therefore stress that the various legal frameworks that
provide support to those two categories are different.
Lebanon is not a country of refugees and has not signed
the United Nations Convention relating to the Status of
Refugees of 1951 and the Protocol relating to the Status
of Refugees of 1967.
Fourthly, Lebanon emphasizes that the Global
Compact is not legally binding and should respect the
sovereignty of States so that none of its paragraphs
contradict States’ legal and constitutional frameworks.
Fifthly, Lebanon has a reservation about the
approach to the need to fully integrate migrants in
host communities, as reflected in paragraph 13 and
objectives 16 and 22 of the Compact.
Sixthly, the facilitation of legitimate migration
included in paragraph 20, including registration in the
civil registry, does not confer the right of residency
or citizenship.
We hope that the Assembly will take note of
Lebanon’s reservations about the text of the Compact, as
well as recording and documenting them, as appropriate.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): Bangladesh voted
in favour of the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly
and Regular Migration (resolution 73/195). I would
like to reiterate my sincere appreciation to you,
Madam President, as well as to Secretary-General
Guterres, Ms. Louise Arbour, Secretary-General of
the Intergovernmental Conference to Adopt the Global
Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for International Migration, and my good friends the
co-facilitators of the Compact, Ambassadors Juan
José Gómez Camacho and Jürg Lauber, for their
invaluable contributions.
Following the adoption of the New York Declaration
for Refugees and Migrants, we have come a long way
and have now entered an era of implementation. Today
we have an opportunity to affirm our commitments
and start a fresh dialogue on our future partnerships
to enhance international cooperation to bring positive
and qualitative changes in migration governance.
Bangladesh views migration as an integral component

A/73/PV.60

of its development aspirations, as envisaged by
Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina in her vision for a
prosperous Bangladesh.
For me, as the leader of our delegation to the
Marrakech Conference, the concept of the Global
Compact, as proposed by Bangladesh in April 2016,
included four core elements: first, eliminating harm
from the migration cycle; secondly, adding value to
the migration process; thirdly, upholding the human
rights of all migrants; and fourthly, promoting
international cooperation to better govern migration. It
is imperative to establish a national migration strategy
for implementing the recommendations of the newly
adopted Global Compact, while remaining attentive
to those core elements. Capacity-building, resource
mobilization and cooperation at all levels remain
crucial to our collective endeavour to succeed.
I would like to reiterate that the adoption of the
Global Compact is not an end in itself but rather the
beginning of a new phase. It represents a paradigm
shift establishing migration as a phenomenon of
development. Indeed, it could have been bolder and
more inspirational, and we are therefore pleased to note
the provision for a review mechanism to meet every four
years. We affirm that the implementation and review
of the Compact will be State-led and -owned, though
open to the participation of relevant stakeholders,
as appropriate.
I am pleased to report that Bangladesh has already
finalized a draft national strategy on migration
governance, in consultation with all stakeholders and
with assistance from the International Organization
for Migration (IOM). My delegation is eager to play
a constructive role during the post-adoption phase,
particularly in establishing the modalities for the
international migration review forum, which will be
responsible for the review and follow-up of the Compact.
Bangladesh is ready to engage and work together with
all interested parties, including Member States that are
currently facing difficulties in endorsing the Compact.
Bangladesh welcomes the newly launched United
Nations Network on Migration for ensuring effective,
timely and coordinated system-wide support to
Member States. We appreciate the decision that the
IOM will serve as the coordinator and secretariat of
all constituent parts of the Network. We hope that the
Network will function transparently and inclusively.
On the question of operation, the Network should take

18-4463019/28

A/73/PV.60

into consideration the views and concerns of Member
States and make full use of the expertise and capacities
of its United Nations members, fully respecting their
various mandates. To support the pioneering work of
the Network, the leader of our delegation announced at
the Marrakech Conference that Bangladesh will soon
make a financial contribution to the start-up fund for
capacity-building.
Bangladesh has always believed in and practised
partnership and consulted with all stakeholders to find
solutions. As we all recognize, migration is a global
phenomenon and therefore a continuing imperative for
us to seek to broaden global support for the Compact.
My delegation firmly believes that under your able
leadership and guidance, Madam President, and that
of the Secretary-General, we will be able to narrow
the gaps in our understanding, achieve coherence
and synergies within the United Nations system and
establish practicable modalities to ensure the effective
implementation and robust follow-up and review of
the Compact.
Ms. Bird (Australia): Australia is a nation built
on migration. We are a global leader in providing
safe, orderly and regular migration opportunities. Our
success has been underpinned by sovereign control of
our borders, our managed permanent and temporary
migration programmes and a humanitarian resettlement
scheme of 18,750 permanent places, which is among the
world’s most generous.
Australia also recognizes the importance of
international cooperation in providing lawful
migration pathways and deterring irregular migration,
particularly in the Indo-Pacific. Australia and
Indonesia established and co-chair the successful Bali
Process on People Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons
and Related Transnational Crime. Australia and Pacific
island countries have established temporary migration
pathways that fill labour shortages in Australia and
provide income to the citizens of our close neighbours.
Australia’s constructive engagement in the
negotiations on the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly
and Regular Migration (resolution 73/195) reflected
our experience. We advocated policies and actions that
encouraged safe and regular migration pathways, the
sharing of responsibilities between Member States,
commitments on return and efforts to address the
adverse drivers of irregular migration. We advocated
for the right of States to determine the border security
20/28

19/12/2018

and migration policies that best suit their social and
economic circumstances.
Regrettably, the Global Compact falls well short
of those elements. It unnecessarily constrains States’
control over their borders, their right to distinguish
between lawful and unlawful migrants and their efforts
to curb the crimes of people smuggling and trafficking
in persons. Far from encouraging safe and orderly
migration, as intended, the Compact risks fostering
irregular and unlawful migration.
Given the depth of our concerns, Australia did
not vote in favour of the Compact and abstained in the
voting. Australia will nonetheless continue to play its
part, as it has for decades, in promoting safe, orderly
and regular migration.
Mrs. Zappia (Italy): In consideration of the
various sensitivities that emerged among our political
parties, the Italian Government deemed it opportune to
defer the final decision on whether to vote in favour
of the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular
Migration (resolution 73/195) to a later parliamentary
debate. That approach was confirmed today by a
relevant motion adopted by the Chamber of Deputies
of the Italian Parliament. In the light of that, Italy
abstained in the voting on the resolution today.
Ms. Bavdaž Kuret (Slovenia): Slovenia voted in
favour of the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and
Regular Migration (resolution 73/195), and I would now
like to deliver our explanation of vote after the voting.
Slovenia welcomes the Global Compact as a
historic milestone in the comprehensive management of
safe, orderly and regular migration and an achievement
of multilateralism. The Compact establishes the
first United Nations-wide framework that covers all
dimensions of international migration in a holistic and
comprehensive manner. Slovenia supports the Global
Compact in order to promote its main purpose, which is
strengthening international cooperation on all aspects
of migration, including addressing its root causes,
preventing irregular migration and the trafficking
and smuggling of human beings, and managing safe,
orderly and regular migration.
In order to tackle the root causes of irregular
migration, we should address migration comprehensively
and encourage States, international organizations
and other stakeholders to cooperate in a spirit of
partnership, solidarity and shared responsibility.
18-44630

19/12/2018

A/73/PV.60

Slovenia will implement the Global Compact in line
with the following principles.

a key role as the coordinator of all constituent parts of
the Network.

The Global Compact is a non-legally-binding
cooperative framework that contains a set of policy
options, recommendations and good practices from
which countries can draw when designing their
own migration policies, taking into account their
specific situations. The Compact does not create
new legal obligations or aspire to create customary
international law.

Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): The United Kingdom
would like to express its support for the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Denmark, on behalf
of a group of countries. I will also set out here why the
United Kingdom supports the Global Compact for Safe,
Orderly and Regular Migration (resolution 73/195).

The Global Compact respects the sovereignty
of States and their prerogative to determine national
immigration policy and laws. A clear distinction
between regular and irregular migrants will be applied
in the reading of the Compact. That distinction could
have been clearer throughout the Compact, particularly
in objective 16, on the inclusion of migrants, where the
concept of integration relates only to regular migrants
and is understood as a two-way process. In addition, the
Compact recognizes the universality of human rights
and fundamental freedoms. It does not create any new
legal categories of migrants or associated benefits, nor
does it create a human right to migrate.
The Compact primarily addresses how migration
is taking place, not the extent of migration. It clearly
recognizes the obligation of States to duly readmit their
own nationals and to actively, promptly and effectively
cooperate on their return and readmission. Assisted
voluntary return is preferable but not the only option
for migrants who, after due process, do not have a legal
right to stay.
Addressing migration at its roots is the most efficient
and sustainable solution and places the responsibility
on States to create peaceful and prosperous living
conditions by ensuring sustainable development, good
governance, the rule of law, security, human rights and
fundamental freedoms. Slovenia remains committed
to the role of international cooperation in helping to
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The implementation of the Compact is the next step
that the international community must take in order
to successfully manage global migration processes.
It will require strong political commitment and a
vigorous collaborative effort under the leadership of
the International Organization for Migration (IOM).
We call for enhanced cooperation with the United
Nations Network on Migration, with the IOM playing

Migration is a global phenomenon, but uncontrolled
migration erodes public confidence, damages
economies and places people on the move in situations
of great vulnerability. The Global Compact presents
a common approach to facilitating cooperation at the
global level in order to address the increasing challenges
of irregular migration and maximize the benefits of
legal migration. It is a milestone in the international
discussion on migration and comes at a time when the
rules-based international system and the international
community’s faith in multilateralism to address shared
issues are under pressure.
When my Prime Minister set out the United
Kingdom’s three principles for migration at the General
Assembly in 2016 (see A/71/PV.4 A), she outlined an
ambitious multilateral reform agenda that respected
the national sovereignty of States. The Global Compact
for Migration restates the sovereignty right of States to
determine their migration and immigration policies in
line with their obligations under international law. The
Compact provides a useful framework for improving
international cooperation on migration among countries
of origin, transit and destination, including by linking
migration to other important global challenges, such as
reducing poverty and strengthening good governance
and human rights.
We welcome the emphasis placed on strengthening
the global evidence base, and we particularly welcome
the contribution that the Compact can make to preventing
irregular migration and fighting human trafficking and
migrant smuggling, which result in immense human
tragedy for so many irregular migrants on the move.
The United Kingdom welcomes several significant
characteristics of the Global Compact that will also be
raised by our Danish colleague. We reiterate that the
Compact recognizes the need to address the root causes
of irregular migration, which is closely related to the
full implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. The Compact is a non-legally-binding
framework. It does not in any way create legal obligations

18-4463021/28

A/73/PV.60

for States nor does it seek to establish international
customary law or further interpret existing treaties or
national obligations.
The Compact does not create any new legal
categories of migrants or associated benefits, nor does
it establish a human right to migrate. It respects the
sovereignty of States and reaffirms their sovereign
right to determine their own migration and immigration
policies and laws. The United Kingdom does not
interpret the Compact as creating domestic policy.
The Global Compact recognizes the essential need
to manage borders and combat the smuggling and
trafficking of human beings. It clearly recognizes the
existing obligation of all States to duly receive and
readmit all their own nationals who no longer have the
right to remain elsewhere, whether they are returning
voluntarily or otherwise, which is an essential element
of a well-functioning global migration system.
As mass flows may consist of a combination of
refugees and migrants, the Global Compact for Safe,
Orderly and Regular Migration and the global compact
on refugees together reaffirm the legal and practical
distinction between refugees and migrants and the
specific legal protections available to refugees, as
enshrined in international law.
The list of actions under each commitment
constitute examples that could contribute to the
implementation of the Compact. However, it is up to
each State to decide how and whether to draw from
those examples in developing its own national policies.
We would like to clarify our position on a number
of points. First, we welcome the clear principle in the
Compact that within their sovereign jurisdiction, States
have sole authority to distinguish between regular and
irregular migratory status. We emphasize that a clear
distinction between regular and irregular migrants
will be applied in our reading of the Global Compact,
including the objectives on recruitment, access to
services and earned benefits, and others.
Secondly, in line with the fundamental principle of
State sovereignty, States are not committing to taking
national steps to increase legal pathways or to changing
their approach to categorizing and creating legal
pathways through their support for the Compact. That
includes no new obligations for States to create legal
pathways for migrants in situations of vulnerability.
Decisions regarding which legal pathway to provide
22/28

19/12/2018

at any given time are at the sole discretion of the
State concerned.
Thirdly, regarding the detention of migrants, we
refer to the European Union explanation of position
made at the adoption of the New York Declaration for
Refugees and Migrants in September 2016 (see A/71/
PV.4 B), which remains the position of the European
Union and its member States on migrant children.
Fourthly, States may maintain the right to apply
criminal law and sanctions to those who have been
smuggled into their country. While there is a need to
address vulnerability and have a proportionate legal
response, knowledge and intent of illegal entry and
border crossing may still be dealt with as a criminal
rather than an administrative offence, in line with
national legislation and international law.
Fifthly, the Compact, being a non-legally-binding
framework, in no way restricts or curtails existing
legislation or already well-established human rights,
including the right to freedom of expression. We
underline the importance that we attach to the fact that
the media in our country enjoys extensive freedoms to
debate all issues of importance to society, including the
issue of migration in all its aspects.
Sixthly, the Paris Agreement provides a global
framework for mitigating climate change, increasing
the ability of countries to deal with the impact of climate
change and aligning finance flows consistent with
low greenhouse-gas emissions and a climate-resilient
pathway. All references to climate change are taken
to be in alignment with the Paris Agreement and the
rule book adopted to support its implementation at the
twenty-fourth Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
That includes recognizing that adaptation in the country
of origin is always the priority.
Mr. Panayotov (Bulgaria): Bulgaria abstained in
the voting on the endorsement of the Global Compact
for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration (resolution
73/195). Bulgaria also refrained from taking part in the
Intergovernmental Conference in Marrakech, where
the Compact was adopted last week.
We value the Global Compact as the first
intergovernmentally
agreed
non-legally-binding
framework for cooperation at the global level to better
manage migration. We are satisfied that as a result of
a transparent and inclusive negotiation process, the
18-44630

19/12/2018

Compact reaffirms the sovereign right of States to
determine their national migration policies and laws
and to decide whom to admit into their territories.
While the Global Compact for Migration
emphasizes the difference between refugees and
migrants, confirms the obligation of all States to readmit
their own nationals and is mostly consistent in drawing
the line between regular and irregular migration, it also
contains provisions that may be subject to ambiguous
interpretation and have triggered a heated debate in
our society.
We have some apprehensions that the measure
related to the dissemination of accurate and fully
accessible country-specific information on legal and
administrative procedures and, more importantly,
on available pathways for safe, orderly and regular
migration is likely to encourage migration flows in
general. Although we understand that the proposed visa
liberalization measures should comply with specific
requirements and preconditions, they might lead to
less control over migrants in general, with serious
national security implications. The term “newly arrived
migrants” may leave room for various interpretations.
Such so-called humanitarian visas still do not exist in
our national legislation. We note that the proposal to
that end did not receive the support of the European
Commission, the Security Council or the European
Parliament during the negotiations on the draft text
of the revised European Union visa code. The very
concept that migrants should not be liable to criminal
prosecution due to having been the object of smuggling
is contrary to our law.
We recognize that the Compact seeks to establish
effective border management, including by preventing
and combating migrant smuggling and trafficking in
human beings. That commitment is coupled with the
commitment to addressing the vulnerability of the
smuggled migrants. In our reading, however, the latter
commitment goes as far as limiting the proportionate
legal response of the State when illegal entry and border
crossings take place.
In conclusion, Bulgaria appreciates all of the
Compact’s positive aspects but is not in a position to
fully adhere to certain commitments and concrete
actions associated with them. However, we remain
fully committed to continuing to implement a
comprehensive and balanced approach to migration,
especially in its regional dimension, which, in our

A/73/PV.60

understanding, fully reflects the needs for a close and
results-oriented partnership and cooperation. It goes
without saying that Bulgaria will continue to comply
with its obligations deriving from the legally binding
international instruments in the field of human rights
and international humanitarian law to which it is a
State party.
Mr. Srivihok (Thailand): Thailand voted in favour
of resolution 73/195, as we have been actively engaged
in the process of drafting the Global Compact for Safe,
Orderly and Regular Migration since the beginning and
throughout the open negotiations, in good faith and a
spirit of cooperation.
The Global Compact is the first comprehensive
global document on migration. It recognizes the
sovereign right of every State to determine its migration
policy. At the same time, it provides many useful
optional recommendations for States to choose from in
dealing with the various migration circumstances they
may have.
Transnational migration today is a global challenge
that can be tackled only through close international
cooperation. The Global Compact is a starting point for
us to forge such cooperation at a global level, which
will contribute to our joint efforts to advance a wellbalanced security, sustainable development and human
rights agenda.
We have high hopes that after being put into
practice, the Global Compact will prove its usefulness
with various tangible results. For its part, Thailand
will implement the Compact by strengthening its
existing national and regional mechanisms through
a multi-stakeholder approach. Thailand reiterates its
support for the United Nations Network on Migration
as an essential mechanism for assisting Member States
in their implementation, follow-up and review of the
Global Compact. We also look forward to participating
in the intergovernmental consultations to be held next
year to determine the modalities of the international
migration review forum.
Thailand joined the international community
in Marrakech in adopting the Global Compact for
Migration. We endorse it here today because we are
determined to work with our partners to advance the
broad aspirations and implement the objectives set out
in the Compact.

18-4463023/28

A/73/PV.60

Mr. Nielsen (Denmark): I have the honour to
deliver the following statement on behalf of Iceland,
Lithuania, Malta, the Netherlands and my own country,
Denmark. Norway also supports our statement. We
all voted in favour of resolution 73/195 today, and we
would like to thank the co-facilitators, Ambassadors
Gómez Camacho and Lauber, as well as Ms. Arbour,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
and their teams, for their tireless work throughout the
process. We also want to thank Member States for their
constructive engagement.
Migration is a global phenomenon that presents
the international community with both challenges and
opportunities. The Global Compact for Safe, Orderly
and Regular Migration presents a common approach at
the global level for addressing the increasing challenges
of irregular migration and seizing the opportunities of
legal migration. It comes at a time when multilateralism
is under pressure. In the United Nations, our
cooperation is built on national sovereignty. The
Global Compact for Migration affirms the fundamental
premise that it is the sovereign right of nation States
to determine their national migration policy in
conformity with international law. It will provide us
with a useful and timely framework for improving
international cooperation on migration, including with
the aim of effectively preventing irregular migration
and combating trafficking in human beings and
the smuggling of migrants, which currently result
in immense human tragedies for so many irregular
migrants on the move. Iceland, Lithuania, Malta,
Norway, the Netherlands and Denmark welcome the
following significant characteristics of the Compact.
The Compact provides the first global cooperative
framework on migration resulting from an inclusive
exercise involving all States Members of the
United Nations. It encourages States to increase
and strengthen their cooperation to better manage
migration. It recognizes the necessity of addressing
the root causes of irregular migration, an issue that is
closely related to the full implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. The Compact
is a non-legally-binding framework. It does not in any
way create legal obligations for States, nor does it seek
to establish international customary law or further
interpret national obligations under existing treaties. It
respects States’ sovereignty and affirms their sovereign
right to determine their national immigration policies
and laws. It recognizes the universality of human
24/28

19/12/2018

rights and fundamental freedoms and emphasizes
that all migrants are entitled to the same rights as any
individual born into this world. It creates no new legal
categories of migrants or associated benefits and does
not establish a human right to migrate. It considers it
essential to ensure that borders are managed for the
security of States, communities and migrants, and that
smuggling and trafficking in persons are effectively
combated. It clearly recognizes an essential element of
a well-functioning global migration system, which is
the existing obligation of all States to duly receive and
readmit all their own nationals who no longer have the
right to remain elsewhere, whether they are returning
voluntarily or otherwise.
Recognizing that mass flows may be composed
of a combination of refugees and migrants, the Global
Compact for Migration and the global compact on
refugees together affirm the legal and practical
distinction between refugees and migrants and the
various legal protections available to refugees, as
enshrined in international law. The actions listed
under each commitment constitute examples that may
contribute to the implementation of the Global Compact
for Migration. It is up to each State to decide how and
whether to draw from these examples. In addition, we
would like to clarify our position on a number of points.
First, we welcome the clear principle in the Compact
that States have the sole authority to distinguish
between regular and irregular migratory status within
their sovereign jurisdiction. That distinction between
regular and irregular migrants could have been more
clearly mainstreamed throughout the Compact. We
emphasize that in our reading of the Compact we will
apply a clear distinction between regular and irregular
migrants. For example, under its objective 16, on the
inclusion of migrants, the concept of integration relates
only to regular migrants. In addition, the possibility of
migrants’ receiving social security and other welfare
rights, including the portability of social security
entitlements and earned benefits, remains an issue of
national competence.
Second, the Compact primarily targets the way
migration takes place in order to promote safe, orderly
and regular migration and prevent irregular migration.
In line with the fundamental principle of State
sovereignty, States’ support for the Compact does not
commit them to taking national steps to increase legal
pathways for migration or to changing their approach
to categorizing and creating legal pathways. Decisions
18-44630

19/12/2018

regarding the legal pathways to be provided at any given
time are at the sole discretion of the States concerned.
Third, regarding the detention of migrants, we
refer to the elements contained in the European
Union’s explanation of position made at the time of the
adoption of the New York Declaration for Refugees and
Migrants in September 2016, including with regard to
migrant children.
Fourth, States may maintain their right to apply
criminal law to people who have been smuggled
into their country. While it is important to address
their vulnerability and provide a proportionate legal
response, people’s understanding of entering a country
and crossing its border illegally and their intention to
do so may still be dealt with as criminal rather than
administrative offences, in line with national legislation
and international law.
Fifth, the Compact, as a non-legally-binding
framework, in no way restricts or curtails already
well-established human rights, including the right to
freedom of expression. We underline how important we
consider the fact that the media in our countries enjoy
extensive freedom to debate all issues of importance to
society, including migration in all its aspects.
Sixth, the issuance of documents to migrants
will not in any way imply an entitlement to residency
in the country issuing them unless such rights are
specifically indicated.
Seventh, the Compact is based on international
human rights law and upholds the principle of
non-regression within that context. Within the
boundaries set by international law, national policies and
legislation may be adjusted and are not affected by the
Compact’s reference to the principle of non-regression.
Eighth, the Compact recognizes that managing
migration is a shared responsibility, including with
regard to addressing the adverse consequences of
unsafe, uncontrolled and irregular migration. We
therefore expect all partners and all countries of
origin, transit and destination to take responsibility
and demonstrate a serious commitment, based on the
Compact, to strengthening the management of both
regular and irregular migration.
Mr. Madriz Fornos (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): The Government of Nicaragua, led by
President Daniel Ortega Saavedra and Vice-President
Rosario Murillo Zambrana, welcomes the adoption

A/73/PV.60

of the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular
Migration. We acknowledge the efforts of the States
Members of the United Nations to produce a document
designed to guarantee full respect for the human dignity
of all migrants, a principle that is part of the essence of
our beautiful country of Nicaragua. Our Government
views the call to solidarity with migrants as a shared
responsibility involving four aspects — welcoming,
protecting, promoting and integrating — and like the
message that Pope Francis has sent, it means that while
we are all part of the solution to migration, it should
be clear the most developed nations are better able to
respond and therefore have a greater responsibility to
do so.
Nicaragua voted in favour of resolution 73/195.
The Compact will constitute an international reference
point for cooperation and the exchange of best practices
in order to encourage Governments and institutions
to accept their shared responsibilities for dealing
with migration.
Bearing in mind a number of questions referred
to in specific areas of the Compact, Nicaragua is
very concerned about the language in some of its
paragraphs. In that regard, we have reservations about
sub-paragraphs 23 (l), 27 (g) and 31 (e), which refer to
documents that do not enjoy international consensus
and are not based on intergovernmental negotiations.
They contain terminology, principles and guidelines
that are not based on internationally agreed language
and could therefore undermine the intergovernmental
nature of this process and the transparency necessary
to obtain consensus on it.
Nicaragua would like to reiterate its position of
principle according to which its Government, in line
with its Constitution, laws, values and principles,
affirms that every individual has the right to life, which
is a fundamental and inalienable right that begins at the
time of conception. The abortion or termination of a
pregnancy can in no circumstances be understood as a
way of regulating fertility or as a means of birth control,
as was made clear at the International Conference on
Population and Development. Any domestic legislation
in this area is Nicaragua’s sovereign concern. Our
Government of reconciliation and national unity deems
it inappropriate to use the term “gender” to justify
ideology-based interpretations of principles used to
affirm that sexual identity can be adapted to new or
different purposes.

18-4463025/28

A/73/PV.60

Mr. Hattrem (Norway): Mass migration poses a
major challenge to countries worldwide. We therefore
need a common multilateral basis so that our political
efforts can deal with migration more effectively. The
adoption of the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and
Regular Migration by the Marrakech Conference on
10 December was a historic moment, and we thank
Morocco for its hospitality.
We would first like to express our support for the
views expressed by Denmark on behalf of a number
of countries. In addition, as we stated in Marrakech,
Norway will join the Global Compact for Migration, but
owing to ambiguities in the text, we find it necessary to
submit for the record the following explanation of our
vote regarding resolution 73/195.
The Global Compact for Migration is not legally
binding and does not seek to establish international
customary law or further interpret the national
obligations of existing treaties. It affirms the sovereign
right of States to determine their national migration
policy and their prerogative to govern migration within
their jurisdiction, in conformity with international law.
The list of actions under each objective sets out examples
that may help countries to implement the Compact. It is
up to each State to decide how and whether to draw from
them. States have the authority to distinguish between
regular and irregular migratory status. The Compact
reaffirms the legal and practical distinctions between
refugees and migrants. The issuance of documents to
migrants will not in any way imply an entitlement to
residence in the country issuing the documents unless
such rights are specifically indicated.
Furthermore, effective border management, with a
view to combating human trafficking and smuggling,
is crucial to the security of States, communities and
migrants alike. As human beings, all migrants have
certain fundamental rights that must be fully respected.
However, the Compact does not create any new legal
categories of migrants, nor does it establish a human
right to migrate. Moreover, it allows countries to
reserve certain rights and welfare benefits for regular
migrants. Our position is that Norwegian legislation
and schemes associated with it function well, and
we therefore have no need to make any changes as a
result of the Compact. It is therefore our understanding
that the objective of enhancing the availability and
flexibility of pathways for regular migration cannot
be interpreted as imposing any obligation on Norway
to further expand its legislation or change its practices
26/28

19/12/2018

regarding labour migration, educational opportunities
or family immigration, since they already comply
with international law. Decisions regarding the legal
pathways that may be provided at any given time are at
the sole discretion of the State concerned.
The Compact recognizes that countries must be
able to enforce migration legislation. Norway’s position
is that it may be necessary to detain foreign nationals in
order to prevent their unauthorized entry into a country
or if action has to be taken with a view to deportation or
extradition. Minors may be detained only as a last resort
and for as short a time as possible. The Compact clearly
confirms the obligation of all countries to readmit their
own nationals if they have been staying illegally in other
countries, whether they return voluntarily or not, and
to cooperate on their readmission. Norway will work
actively to make return and readmission agreements
with the relevant countries in order to ensure that those
obligations are fully implemented.
In many countries, migrants have very limited
social security entitlements and benefits, and there are
strict rules governing their portability. Norway does
not interpret the Compact as requiring any revision of
the portability of Norwegian benefits for migrants. The
Compact also affirms the obligation to protect freedom
of expression, and we note that there is nothing in
the Compact that restricts free, fact-based reporting
on migration.
On the basis of these clarifications, Norway
will take part in the implementation of the Compact,
particularly with a view to improving migration
management and reducing irregular migration. We must
work together bilaterally, regionally and globally to
achieve safe, orderly and regular migration and combat
irregular migration. The Compact provides us with an
operational framework for cooperation in addressing
one of the main global challenges of our time.
Ms. Şebnem Manav (Turkey): As an ardent
supporter of the process for negotiating the Global
Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration since
its inception, Turkey voted in favour of today’s important
resolution 73/195. We would first like to express
our appreciation for the commendable leadership of
Ms. Louise Arbour, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, which paved the way for the
Compact’s successful conclusion. We would also like
to thank the co-facilitators, Mexico and Switzerland,
for their dedicated work, and Morocco, for convening
18-44630

19/12/2018

the Marrakech Conference. We have come a long,
successful, constructive and productive way since the
negotiations began. The Compact is a landmark step that
sets out a framework of common values, principles and
commitments on all aspects of international migration.
We welcomed the Compact’s adoption in Marrakech
as well as the Assembly’s adoption today of resolution
73/195, and we look forward to its implementation.
From the very beginning, as a country of origin,
transit and destination, Turkey has attached enormous
importance to the intergovernmental negotiations
relating to the Compact. International cooperation
on migration has never been so vital. In the light of
our unique role and experience, we have actively
contributed to the consultation, stocktaking and
negotiation phases of the process. As we emphasized
during the negotiations, our main expectation for
the Compact is that it will help to replace irregular
migration with regular migration, and in any case that
it will not worsen irregular flows.
It is also clear that the Compact will not focus on
regular migration alone but will also fill an important
gap, given that the situation of irregular migrants
currently differs from one country to another owing
to the lack of minimum standards in this area. In
the implementation phase, Turkey will make a clear
distinction between the objectives and commitments
in the Compact regarding regular migrants and those
regarding irregular migrants. We also want to take
this opportunity to emphasize that in connection with
the second preambular paragraph of the Compact,
Turkey has no obligation with regard to international
instruments to which it is not party. References to
them in the Compact cannot therefore be construed as
a change in the legal position of Turkey with regard to
such instruments.
The implementation of the Compact requires
strategic long-term commitment as well as political
will. With its wide experience of hosting refugees and
migrants, Turkey stands ready to render all necessary
support in the implementation phase. Once again, we
welcome the fact that the International Organization for
Migration will play an essential role in the Compact’s
implementation by acting as secretariat and coordinator
for the United Nations Network on Migration.
We would like to express our heartfelt
congratulations to those who have contributed to this
milestone achievement.

A/73/PV.60

Mr. Mamdouhi (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation voted in favour of resolution 73/195, on
the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular
Migration. However, I would like to make the following
points regarding the Compact.
The Islamic Republic of Iran is honoured to
be a part of the concerted international effort that
convened the Intergovernmental Conference to address
the multifaceted issues of migration. We engaged
constructively in the negotiation of the outcome
documents of the Conference, held in Marrakech this
month, with the aim of ensuring that the result would
be an accurate reflection of all the root causes and
dimensions of migration.
As a country that has faced large, mixed migratory
flows with huge economic and social effects for several
decades, the Islamic Republic of Iran is of the view that
managing international migration and implementing
the Compact, if they are to work for all, should result
in reducing the inequalities in and among countries.
Migration should be transformed from a means for
some to escape poverty to an instrument to eradicate
poverty for all. Addressing the drivers and root
causes of migration and paying special attention to
the nexus between migration and development in the
implementation phase is vital, and migration should
be considered from that perspective and facilitated in
a way that reduces inequalities among Member States.
At the same time, the tendency of migration to act
as a precursor to a brain drain for some countries and a
brain gain for others should be rectified and reversed.
The impact of migrants on host countries is a function
of their specific circumstances, such as the level of
their development and their demographic situation.
It would therefore be an invalid generalization to
depict migration as an engine of development without
taking into consideration the aforementioned factors
and variables. With a number of developed countries
avoiding acceptance of their share of responsibility
for migrants and refugees, the Compact should not
increase some developing countries’ responsibilities.
Its implementation hinges on varying international
realities, capacities and levels of development, as well
as different national policies and priorities.
The Islamic Republic of Iran, like any other State
and as its sovereign right, governs migration policies
within its jurisdiction, taking into account its own
priorities and its economic and social circumstances.

18-4463027/28

A/73/PV.60

In that context, the Islamic Republic of Iran, while
highlighting the non-legally-binding nature of the
Compact, reiterates that it considers the Compact only
a voluntary vehicle for enhancing cooperation among
States on the management of migration flows, without
in any way imposing new legal obligations other than
those to which Iran has already subscribed. Moreover,
nothing in the Compact should be construed in a way
that confuses migrants with refugees, which are two
distinct groups governed by separate legal frameworks.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): Belgium notes the various statements made by
the European countries that have endorsed the Global
Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration,
implying their support for the Compact. We also want
to point to the statements made by Secretary-General
Guterres and by Prime Minister Charles Michel of
Belgium at the Marrakech Conference. The Compact
is not legally binding and respects the sovereignty of
States Members of the United Nations. It underscores
the distinction between regular and irregular migration

28/28

19/12/2018

and offers a multilateral framework for policies on
return and reintegration, and Belgium therefore
supports it.
Ms. Vilde (Latvia): Latvia is a staunch supporter
of multilateralism and recognizes that multilateral
cooperation is indispensable to achieving global
solutions to issues such as global migration. We
appreciate the efforts invested in the negotiations
to achieve the first global cooperative framework
on migration, which addresses a wide range of
migration-related issues in countries of origin, transit,
destination and return. Based on the decision of the
Latvian Parliament, Latvia abstained in the voting on
resolution 73/195 and has not joined the Compact.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker in explanation of vote after the voting
for this morning. We will hear the remaining speakers
in explanation of vote at 3 p.m., after which we will
consider sub-item (b) of agenda item 74.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

18-44630
