S/2019/661

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 August 2019
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to paragraph 22 of Security Council
resolution 2461 (2019) and paragraph 55 of resolution 2431 (2018), provides
information on the implementation of those resolutions, including on the mandate of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and the United Nations
Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS). The report covers major developments in
Somalia during the period from 5 May to 4 August 2019.

II. Political, security and economic overview
A.

Political developments
2.
Relations between the Federal Government of Somalia and the federal member
states remained strained during the reporting period. In an effort to resume dialogue,
President Mohammed Abdullahi Mohammed “Farmajo” and leaders of the federal
member states, together with the Governor of Banaadir, met from 5 to 10 May in
Garoowe. The meeting did not result in a political agreement or consensus on a
mechanism for future consultation between the two levels of government. Following
the Garoowe meeting, federal member states reiterated their grievances, including the
lack of consultation on key political processes and federal legislation, and alleged
interference in state affairs.
3.
On the legislative front, the Speakers of the House of the People (lower house)
and the Upper House announced the resumption of cooperation between the two
houses of the Federal Parliament in a joint press conference on 12 July, effectively
ending a seven-month rift between the two legislative chambers. Despite the rift,
several bills advanced in the legislative agenda. On 20 May, the lower house began
the first reading of the electoral bill, and also adopted the petroleum bill and submitted
it to the Upper House. On 24 June, after receiving comments from the Upper House,
the lower house adopted a bill on the establishment of an anti-corruption commission,
a legislative priority to strengthen the country’s public financial management
framework.
4.
Political dynamics around federal member state elections dominated the
reporting period and contributed to tensions between the Federal Government and
federal member states. In a speech on 15 May, President Farmajo said that neither his
government nor the leaders of the federal member states should exceed term -limits,

19-13825 (E)

190819

*1913825*

S/2019/661

as term extensions have the effect of damaging the credibility of state institutions and
undermining public trust. On 25 May, the Ministry of the Interior, Federal Affairs and
Reconciliation issued a press release, entitled “General principles and procedures for
the elections of the regional states”, in which it asserted the Federal Ministry’s
authority to oversee the electoral processes in the federal member states and to certify
the results. Jubbaland, Galmudug, Puntland and HirShabelle dismissed this as
unconstitutional.
5.
In Galmudug, the Prime Minister, Hassan Ali Khayre, travelled to the state from
24 June to 3 August to engage the President of Galmudug, Ahmed Duale Gelle “Haaf”
and key stakeholders including Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a (ASWJ) to resolve the
disputed electoral calendar. The Prime Minister visited several population centres and
engaged local the local population, including elders, the business community and
young people. As a result of the Federal Government’s engagement with ASWJ,
President Haaf nullified the 2017 Djibouti power-sharing agreement between
Galmudug state and ASWJ. There is now agreement to organize a reconciliation
conference that would lead to the holding of the state’s parliamentary and presidential
elections in Dhuusamarreeb, as well as an agreement bet ween the Federal
Government and ASWJ to integrate ASWJ forces into the Somali security apparatus.
The Ministry of the Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation established a
reconciliation committee to prepare for the conference in early August. On 22 J uly, a
high-level international delegation, led by my Special Representative for Somalia,
James Swan, and the Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia, Francisco Caetano José Madeira, visited Dhuusamarreeb
and held discussions with the Prime Minister and the reconciliation committee. The
delegation encouraged the committee to hold an inclusive forum leading to a fair and
transparent electoral process. On 15 July, in Hobyo, the Habar Gidir clan conference
began, with a view to strengthening unity among sub-clans.
6.
The Jubbaland Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission published
the state electoral calendar on 4 July. The presidential election is scheduled for the
week of 24 to 30 August. On 23 July, the Commission published the list of elders who
will select the state assembly candidates, although the list continues to be contested.
Criteria for registration of presidential candidates have been issued, and nine
candidates have been registered so far including the incumbent, Ahmed Madobe, and
two women. On 17 July, a group of presidential aspirants expressed concerns about
the lack of transparency and legitimacy of the state electoral process, while
threatening to pursue a parallel election if improvements we re not made. They also
called on the Federal Government and the international community to intervene and
called for a neutral venue to conduct free and fair elections. On 31 July, the
Commission stated that electoral operations were advancing, with Jubbala nd elders
present in Kismaayo to finalize the submission of the state assembly nominees on
6 August.
7.
In South-West State, post-election clan reconciliation efforts continued between
the state authorities and clan elders. On 13 June, representatives of t he Digil-Mirifle
clan elders formed a 15-member executive committee to pursue the reconciliation
agenda with the South-West State authorities and the Federal Government, following
previously unsuccessful attempts by the Leysan sub-clan to resolve issues related to
the 2018 December state presidential election. The status of the former deputy leader
of Al-Shabaab and state presidential candidate, Mukhtar Robow, who remains in
federal custody, is still a point of contention. The authorities also pursued effor ts to
extend authority at the district level, with the reshuffle of the administration in Marka
and Bardaale districts, and with the appointment on 23 June of a new administration
in Buurhakaba district, a strategic location on the main supply route betwee n Baidoa
and Mogadishu.
2/18

19-13825

S/2019/661

8.
In HirShabelle, tensions arose when the state President, Mohamed Abdi Waare,
appointed a new Governor of Hiraan, but the previous incumbent refused to relinquish
his office and was supported by militia forces. The ensuing demonst rations in
Beledweyne led to the killing of a police officer in a dispute over the control of a
revenue collection point. After several weeks of negotiations led by President Waare,
on 13 July the former Governor handed over the office to the new appointee and
pledged to cooperate with his successor. Also, in June, in Hiraan region, clashes
between Habar Gidir and Hawadle sub-clans over grazing land and water resources
resulted in several fatalities among members of both clans.
9.
In Puntland, a visit by its Minister of Education to monitor examinations in
Badhan district heightened tensions which resulted in a clash between “Somaliland”
and Puntland security forces. Claiming underrepresentation in the “Somaliland”
government, army officers and civil servants of the Warsangali clan in Sanaag region
abandoned their posts and moved to areas under Puntland control in late May. On
3 June, “Somaliland” and Puntland exchanged 17 prisoners who had been captured in
Tukaraq in May 2018.
10. In “Somaliland”, the President of “Somaliland” lifted a two-month state of
emergency in three western districts of Sanaag region on 25 June, previously imposed
as a result of recurring inter-clan conflict in those districts. Clashes returned to the
districts from 7 to 8 July, when 18 civilians died in inter-clan violence. There was
also little progress on the resumption of dialogue between Somalia and “Somaliland”
during the reporting period. On 25 June, the Centre for Humanitarian Dialogue hosted
a meeting to review international facilitation efforts between the two parties. On
17 July, President Farmajo announced a national commission for reconciliation and
dialogue with “Somaliland” to prepare a road map for talks and lead the Federal
Government’s engagement. “Somaliland” subsequently issued a statement reiterating
its commitment to dialogue while rejecting the format put forward by the Federal
Government.
11. Strains between Somalia and Kenya over the maritime boundary dispute and
other issues continued, despite continued efforts b y regional and international
partners to de-escalate tension and foster dialogue. On 26 June the International Court
of Justice scheduled the hearing on the maritime border dispute between the two
countries for 9 September 2019.
12. In other regional developments, on 20 June, the Contact Group on Piracy off the
Coast of Somalia held its twenty-second plenary session in Mauritius. During the
plenary, Contact Group participants endorsed Kenya as the new Chair of the Contact
Group for a two-year period from 1 January 2020. On 20 July the former President of
South Africa, Thabo Mbeki, led an Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD)-United Nations visit to seek views on regional security and economic
integration. Representatives of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
troop-contributing countries met on 12 July to discuss the implications of the
AMISOM troop drawdown on the country’s peace and state-building processes.

B.

Security developments
13. The security situation remained volatile during the reporting period. Al-Shabaab
continued to perpetrate violence, including carrying out attacks targeting government
facilities and personnel, security forces, international partners and public places such
as hotels and restaurants.
14. A total of 228 incidents occurred during Ramadan, from 5 May to 3 June; higher
than in Ramadan in 2017 and 2018. Some 35 per cent of violent incidents occurred in
the Banaadir region, with southern Somalia accounting for 34 per cent, indicating that

19-13825

3/18

S/2019/661

Al-Shabaab’s operational focus did not change during the reporting period. Overall,
security incidents declined significantly in June and July. There was, however, an
increase in incidents involving improvised explosive devices in July, when there were
several high-profile terrorist attacks.
15. Al-Shabaab perpetrated several attacks by vehicle-borne improvised explosive
devices in Mogadishu. On 14 May, in Warta Nabada district, a suicide bomber drove
such a device into the district administrative office, as a result of whi ch 4 people were
killed and 10 injured. On 22 May, in Boondheere district, a suicide bomber used a
vehicle-borne improvised explosive device to target a checkpoint at a National
Intelligence and Security Agency jail. At least 17 people were killed in the b last, and
20 others were injured. On 15 June, another incident involving such a device occurred
at a checkpoint near the Federal Parliament, with nine people reportedly killed and
20 others injured. Targeting and killing of civilians continued, with at lea st 11
civilians killed in Mogadishu during the final week of May.
16. On 22 July, at the Km. 4 Junction road neighbourhood, a national staff member
of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations was injured in a
vehicle-borne improvised explosive device explosion at the checkpoint. On 24 July,
10 people were reported killed in an improvised explosive device attack at the
Banaadir Regional Administration in Mogadishu. The casualties included two district
commissioners and other senior officials. The Mayor of Mogadishu and Governor of
Banaadir succumbed to his injuries on 1 August in Qatar, where he had been taken
for medical treatment. Al-Shabaab claimed responsibility. An increasing number of
large-scale attacks within and outside of Mogadishu highlight the group’s resilience
and strong operational capability despite the ongoing intensified security measures,
including airstrikes targeting the group and joint national army-AMISOM operations
in Shabelle Hoose, which are specifically designed to counter threats to Mogadishu.
17. In Shabelle Hoose, the national army continued offensive operations, supported
by AMISOM troops and international partners, to capture territory. Al -Shabaab
continue to use “hit-and-run” ambushes and improvised explosive devices to target
public officials and partner forces in the region. Following the loss of the towns of
Bariira and Sabiid, Al-Shabaab made significant efforts during the reporting period
to test both the strategic force capability and the logistical abili ty of the national army
and AMISOM to hold ground; however, the army has remained in place and continues
to hold those strategic locations.
18. In Galmudug, the general security situation remained tense, amid political
negotiations related to the state electoral process. Al-Shabaab claimed responsibility
for the 31 May assassination of a United Nations staff member in south Gaalkacyo.
Tensions also continued in the disputed border area between “Somaliland” and
Puntland.
19. In Jubbaland, the security of clan elders and contestants participating in the state
elections process is a priority concern. On 17 June, in Kismaayo, unidentified gunmen
shot and killed a traditional elder of the Biyomaal clan in a suspected election -related
incident. Al-Shabaab carried out a complex attack on 12 July on the Medina Hotel in
Kismaayo, resulting in 33 fatalities, including a state presidential candidate and a
contractor with the International Organization for Migration, as well as 56 others
injured.
20. By comparison with the previous reporting period, a lower number of airstrikes
was recorded, with the majority taking place in Middle and Lower Juba, by
comparison with the strike rate reported in January and February. Al-Shabaab’s
attempts to mitigate the threat of airstrikes has reportedly led to an increase in its
personnel operating in urban areas. Airstrikes also targeted pro -Islamic State of Iraq

4/18

19-13825

S/2019/661

and the Levant (ISIL) elements, which may be the reason for a notable decline in the
group’s activities during the reporting period.

C.

Economic developments
21. In May, the Federal Government and the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
reached a staff-level agreement on a fourth staff-monitored programme covering May
2019–July 2020. The IMF Executive Board endorsed the programme on 1 August, as
meeting the conditionality standard of an upper credit tranche arrangement, putting
Somalia more clearly on the path to debt relief under the Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries Initiative. At least six months satisfactory performance under an upper
credit tranche-quality staff-monitored programme is one of the preconditions for
reaching a decision point under the Initiative. Other preconditions include delivery of
an approved interim poverty reduction strategy paper, as well as the mobilization of
adequate financing assurances from international donor partners to cover the IMF
share of debt relief for heavily indebted poor countries. The Government has prepared
a draft national development plan 2020–2024 to both serve as and meet the criteria
for the strategy paper, on which there have been extensive consultations among
national stakeholders, and for which consultations with international dev elopment
partners are under way.
22. The latest available figures indicate that the country’s real gross domestic
product grew by an estimated 2.8 per cent in 2018, to $4.4 billion, up from 1.3 per
cent growth in 2017. Estimates have been revised downwards from previously
published forecasts, reflecting newly available data on household consumption, based
on a more nationally representative sample, which includes broader geographic
coverage and data on nomadic populations and internally displaced people
settlements. With an annual average population growth rate of 2.9 per cent over the
last five years, real gross domestic product growth has not been sufficient to boost
real per capita income. Real per capita gross domestic product is estimated to have
declined from $316 in 2013 to $311 in 2018, according to preliminary data from the
2019 World Bank Somalia Economic Update. As a result, poverty incidence continues
to remain relatively high and widespread.

III. Support for peacebuilding and state-building efforts
A.

Establishment of a functional federal state

1.

Deepening federalism
23. Technical cooperation between the Federal Government and federal member
states continued, including in the strands of the comprehensive approach to security,
and a joint meeting of the Office of National Security and regional security offices on
21 and 22 July. On 24 June, while addressing the first batch of graduates of the Somali
National University since the State collapsed in 1991, President Farmajo said that
cooperation between the centre and peripheries was vital and he supported a federalist
system, but not a “confederation”. He said that there was a need to build a strong
central government capable of defending the country, and with reliable monetary and
immigration systems and a central foreign policy.

2.

Constitutional review
24. On 30 July, President Farmajo held a meeting with the Ministry of
Constitutional Affairs, the Constitutional Review and Oversight Commission and the
Independent Constitutional Review and Implementation Commission, to discuss

19-13825

5/18

S/2019/661

progress in the review process. The Commission completed the preliminary technical
review of the last five chapters of the Provisional Federal Constitution and submitted
them to the Parliamentary Oversight Committee on 27 June. A technical working
group, operational since May and embedded in the Mini stry of Constitutional Affairs,
with United Nations participation, has started developing some options on a range of
key political settlement issues that remain unresolved in the Provisional Federal
Constitution, in order to prepare the ground for broader consultations and future
decision-making between the federal and state leaders.
25. From 17 to 19 June, a workshop held in Mogadishu convened women ’s groups
from the Banaadir region and the federal member states to explore the constitution ’s
role in state-building and peacebuilding in Somalia, in particular from the perspective
of Somali women. The workshop resulted in a set of recommendations to foster
women’s participation in political processes throughout Somalia in the review
process.
3.

Prevention and resolution of conflicts
26. The Ministry of the Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation began the
roll-out of the National Reconciliation Framework to the federal member states. From
28 to 30 June, Ministry officials presented the framework to Sout h-West State
officials in Baidoa and discussed the development of the regional reconciliation
framework, with the support of the Ministry. Dozens of civil society representatives
pledged to contribute to the effort.
27. From 30 June to 3 July, in Gaalkacyo, the Galmudug Minister of Reconciliation
and Federalism facilitated a local reconciliation meeting between the Sa ’ad sub-clan
of the Habar Gidir and the Dir clan, both residing in remote areas of Mudug region.
The parties reached a ceasefire agreement and pledged to end hostilities.
28. From 9 to 10 July, the Ministry of the Interior, Federal Affairs and
Reconciliation and international partners held a symposium organized with the
support of the Government of Norway. Some 30 participants, including academi cs,
reconciliation experts and the business community, discussed the role of the business
community in peacebuilding, national reconciliation processes and development and
humanitarian service delivery, to foster reconciliation efforts in cooperation with the
Federal Government.

4.

Support for universal suffrage elections
29. On 20 May, the Ministry of the Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation
presented the draft electoral bill to the lower house. The bill was criticized by leaders
of the federal member states, who claimed that they were not consulted on the revised
draft by the Federal Government prior to its being tabled. The Federal Government
called on federal member state representatives to engage on the bill in the lower house
and the Upper House. The bill remains at the first reading stage. On 21 July, the
Speaker of the lower house appointed the 15 members of an ad hoc parliamentary
committee to review the draft electoral bill. The draft bill includes provisions that
contain constitutionally, politically and operationally problematic issues that require
further review, including the need for clarification on how the Upper House elections
will be conducted. There is also some uncertainty as to whether the requirement of a
minimum of 30 per cent of women in electable positions in the political parties ’ lists
will remain in the bill. In addition, a mismatch of the electoral timelines needs to be
adjusted. In parallel, the Federal Cabinet submitted proposed amendments to the 2016
political party law to the lower house, which awaits its first reading.
30. The National Independent Electoral Commission advanced technical
preparations for elections, including the finalization of the identification and

6/18

19-13825

S/2019/661

verification of potential voter registration centres in South-West State and Banaadir
region. The exercise is ongoing in other federal member states, except Puntland,
where it is on hold owing to political differences with the Federal Government. The
Commission approved a draft concept of operations and tentative budget for the 2020
voter registration exercise.

B.

Cross-cutting issues

1.

Gender equality and the empowerment of women
31. During May and June, UNSOM supported several meetings with women civil
society leaders and members of Parliament to discuss the draft electoral bill with
respect to achieving a minimum of a 30 per cent quota for women in the forthcoming
federal elections. On 30 May, UNSOM facilitated a consultative meeting of women
leaders in the Bay region of South-West State. Participants highlighted the need for
robust, gender-responsive civil education and public outreach as among the most
critical issues to support women’s participation in the 2020 electoral processes,
including as voters and candidates.
32. In Puntland, on 19 and 20 June, the state Ministry of Women Development, and
Family Affairs, together with the Puntland Development and Research Centre, held a
consultative forum on women’s political participation, which underscored the
importance of early campaigning for women candidates in Parliament in the
upcoming national elections in 2020 and 2021.

2.

Youth empowerment
33. On 15 May, a series of activities were held across Somalia to mark Somali Youth
Day. These included a peace march with 300 youth from Nor th and South Gaalkacyo.
Speaking at the Mogadishu event, which was organized by the Ministry of Youth and
Sports with support from the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), President
Farmajo called upon the 1,500 youth participants to unite for peace and prosperity in
the country.
34. In preparation for the upcoming elections, UNSOM co -hosted a consultation in
Mogadishu, from 28 to 29 July, with 55 young women and men from across Somalia,
to gain a better understanding of what hinders youth political participation. At the
meeting, programming gaps were identified and a set of recommendations made for
future programmes to support the formal and informal political engagement of young
people, including conducting electoral training, reviving the youth caucus in the
Federal Parliament, establishing a mentorship network for young women, providing
youth leadership training and strengthening the advocacy capacity of youth -led
organizations.
35. The Youth Political Empowerment project, implemented by the United Nations
Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) and UNFPA, with Peacebuilding Fund
support, continued to advocate for youth political participation in Jubbaland. Two
intergenerational forums were held in Doolow and Kismaayo in May, gathering youth,
elders and decision-makers to discuss youth engagement in the upcoming state
elections. Three youth-led campaigns were initiated to amplify youth voices after the
forums, and currently 17 youth, including two women, who are preparing to run for
state office in August.

19-13825

7/18

S/2019/661

C.

Development coordination
36. The Federal Government announced that the Somalia Partnership Forum would
be held in October 2019. The Forum convenes high-level officials for political
dialogue, taking stock of progress in the implementation of t he national development
plan and adherence to the New Partnership for Somalia. The previous Forum was held
in Brussels in July 2018.
37. The Somalia Development and Reconstruction Facility has continued to serve
as both a coordination framework and a financing architecture for implementing the
national development plan. The Federal Government initiated consultations in July
on revising the aid architecture with federal member states, international partners
including the United Nations, civil society, the private sector and members of
Parliament. The revised architecture, aligned with the new national development plan
(2020–2024), is expected to be developed in the coming months and agreed at the
next Somalia Partnership Forum.

IV. Humanitarian situation
38. Somalia is experiencing the negative effects of lower than normal gu rains
(April to June), which follows a poor 2018 deyr season (October to December), and
unusually dry conditions during the 2019 jilaal season (January to March). Except for
the 2018 gu, every rainy season since late 2015 has been below average. The 2019 gu
is the second consecutive below-average rainy season, while the country is still
recovering from the effects of the prolonged drought of 2016–17. The 2019 rains
started late throughout the country and, in most areas, resulted in cumulative below average rainfall. In some parts of the country, heavy rains over a short period also
resulted in flooding and significant damage to planted crops, land, and other resources
critical for agricultural and livestock production.
39. While the late rainfall in May and early June eased drought conditions and
improved water availability, improving livestock conditions to some extent, it was
insufficient to meet sustainable agricultural production needs. Impoverished
pastoralists with small herds risk large food consumption gaps in the months to come.
Owing to exhausted food stocks, reduced income from agricultural labour and poor
harvest prospects, many agro-pastoral families and farmers across the country are
expected to face food shortages until late 2019. The late rains have generated only
enough pasture growth to temporarily improve livestock conditions. For crop growing areas, the delayed start of gu rains significantly affected planting and
germination. As a result, the cereal harvest is projected to be 50 per cent below
average.
40. As of July, an estimated 2.2 million are people facing acute food insecurity, a
nearly 30 per cent increase compared with February projections. Deteriorating food
security, coupled with a lack of access to clean water, and severe acute malnutrition
rates among children, especially among internally displaced people, is heightening
the risk of water-borne disease outbreaks and exacerbating existing fragilities.
41. Displacement is steadily on the rise, with some 193,000 people displaced since
the beginning of the year, including over 72,000 as a result of food insecurity. In
addition, over 60,000 individuals have moved to Barlow, Awdheegle, and Afgooye,
mainly from Bariira in Shabelle Hoose, where military operations are ongoing.
Overall, more than 2.6 million Somalis are internally displaced. Since the beginning
of 2019, over 115,000 internally displaced persons have been evicted. In terms of
policy and regulatory framework, progress is being made, with drafts of the national
policy on refugee returnees and internally displaced persons, the interim protocol on
8/18

19-13825

S/2019/661

land distribution for housing to eligible refugee-returnees and internally displaced
persons, and the national eviction guidelines already submitted to the Cabinet of the
Federal Government of Somalia for review.
42. Over 800,000 Somali refugees remain displaced in neighbouring countries, in
particular in Ethiopia, Kenya and Yemen. A total of 90,058 (as at 13 July) Somali
refugees have returned through the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees voluntary repatriation programme, mainly from Kenya, as well as
Yemen, Djibouti and Libya. In early July, some 1,300 Somali refugees left Eritrea an d
arrived in Ethiopia.
43. The deterioration in the humanitarian situation comes at a time when resources
are limited, forcing aid agencies to curtail relief efforts. The collective actions of the
food security cluster had reached only 1.4 million people with food assistance as at
June, against a target of 2.2 million and down from an average of two million people
between July and December 2018. The 2019 humanitarian response plan was only 40
per cent funded as at late July. On 20 May, aid agencies launched a drought impact
response plan to provide critical life-saving aid to 4.5 million people. On 12 July, a
revised drought impact response plan was issued jointly by the Federal Government
and the humanitarian country team, which appeals for $686 million to respond to
drought-induced needs.
44. To facilitate a response to drought conditions across the Horn of Africa, on
5 June, the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Mark Lowcock, announced a Central Emergency Re sponse Fund
allocation of $45 million, of which $30 million was allocated to Somalia. The Federal
Government has prioritized its own scaling up of the drought response, in
collaboration with aid agencies, and initiated efforts to tackle the cyclical
reoccurrence of drought through the recovery and resilience framework, which targets
investments inter alia towards water management infrastructure, agricultural
productivity and natural resource management.
45. The operating environment remains challenging. In 2019 to date, some 49
humanitarian personnel were directly affected by security incidents. Of these, 2
humanitarian workers were killed, 1 injured, 11 abducted, 5 arrested and temporarily
detained, and 2 expelled by authorities for alleged infractions. Bur eaucratic
constraints and limited logistics infrastructure continue to hinder humanitarian
agencies’ ability to reach those in need. The United Nations humanitarian country
team adopted an access strategy in May to provide guidance on how to expand, reach
and engage with authorities and all parties to conflict to enhance aid delivery.

V. Human rights and protection
A.

Human rights
46. During the reporting period, 322 (as at 21 July) civilian casualties were recorded
by UNSOM: 76 per cent (245 casualties) were attributed to Al-Shabaab, less than
1 per cent (2 casualties) to AMISOM and 7 per cent (23 casualties) to State security
forces. The Ramadan period saw a 7 per cent increase in the number of civilian
casualties as compared with the previous year.
47. In all, five death sentences were pronounced, and three executions were carried
out following death penalty convictions. In May, the Garoowe District Court in
Nugaal region found three defendants guilty of raping and killing a 12 -year-old girl
in Gaalkacyo, sentencing them to death. Targeted assassinations of participants in the

19-13825

9/18

S/2019/661

electoral process continued, including both delegates and clan elders, with 10
assassinations recorded and claimed by Al-Shabaab.
48. Two journalists were killed in an Al-Shabaab-coordinated attack in Kismaayo
on 12 July. Four individuals were arrested in connection with issues related to
freedom of expression and freedom of assembly, among them three journalists, and
two media stations were banned for 12 days, before the ban was reversed.
“Somaliland” police arrested a reporter in Laascaanood district, Sool region, for
allegedly interviewing residents demonstrating against the arrest of a Member of
Parliament, while in Hargeysa, one freelance journalist was sentenced to three years’
imprisonment for defamation and circulation of false news. Additionally, 557 inmates
convicted of minor crimes in “Somaliland” were pardoned as part of the celebrations
of 18 May. Puntland authorities also pardoned 121 inmates on the occasion of
Ramadan.
49. On 20 June, President Farmajo signed the Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities, which was ratified on 31 July. On 24 June, Deqa Yasin, the Minister
for Women and Human Rights Development, gave her first speech before the Human
Rights Council since Somalia became a member in January 2019. The Minister
reiterated the country’s commitment to foster a culture of respect for human rights as
a basis for post-conflict peacebuilding, described Somalia’s progress to promote and
protect human rights and urged increased coordination on those issues with the United
Nations.
50. The Independent Expert on the situation of human rights in Somalia conducted
a 10-day visit to Mogadishu and Hargeysa, starting on 15 July. He met with UNSOM,
AMISOM and representatives of the Federal Government and civil society
organizations to discuss the human rights situation in the country and advocate for
action to be taken to promote and protect human rights in Somalia.

B.

Children in armed conflict
51. There was an 8 per cent decrease in the number of grave violations committed
against children, as compared with the previous reporting period. The country task
force on monitoring and reporting on grave violations against children in armed
conflict verified 426 grave violations affecting 301 children (271 boys and 30 girls),
one attack on a hospital, one attack on a school and two incidents of denial of
humanitarian access. A total of 187 children were victims of recruitme nt and use, 172
children were abducted, 51 were victims of killing and maiming and 11 were victims
of sexual violence. The violations were attributed to Al -Shabaab (88 per cent),
unknown armed elements and clan militia (7 per cent) and federal and state ar med
forces (5 per cent). Seven incidents of deprivation of liberty affecting seven boys were
attributed to Somali Police and Jubbaland forces.
52. UNSOM, in conjunction with the Federal Government, conducted child
protection training for 135 members of the Somali security forces (105 men, 30 women)
and 75 government officials (52 men, 23 women). A new global campaign to protect
children affected by conflict was launched at the national level, with the Federal
Government recommitting itself to strengthening child protection measures. A total of
392 children (380 boys, 12 girls) were separated from armed forces and armed groups
and handed over to UNICEF partners for rehabilitation and eventual reintegration.

10/18

19-13825

S/2019/661

C.

Prevention of sexual and gender-based violence
53. Somalia marked the International Day for the Elimination of Sexual Violence in
Conflict, on 19 June. UNSOM supported civil society to mark the day under the
national theme “Stand with rape survivors, fulfil their rights”, reflecting the global
theme on the importance of the survivor-centred approach. Key recommendations
adopted by the participants include strengthening access to justice and the passing of
the sexual offences bill.
54. On 25 June, the UNSOM-chaired monitoring, analysis and reporting
arrangements working group held a meeting, convened at the technical level. The
technical working group reviewed cases of conflict-related sexual violence from the
first half of 2019 and noted the underreporting of incidents owing to a lack of access
to conflict-affected areas, cultural and social factors that discourage reporting and
limited coverage of policing and justice services throughout the country. The
prevailing patterns of unidentified armed men in uniform raping women without
being held to account was noted, as there are very few cases in which alleged
perpetrators are arrested and convicted.
55. My Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Pramila Patten,
visited Somalia from 13 to 19 July and engaged with authorities at the federal and
state level on the prevention and response to sexual violence in conflict. She also
engaged with social workers supporting female defectors under a disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration project with other stakeholders, including civil
society, advocating for additional support for national commitments on sexual
violence in conflict.

VI. Transition plan implementation
A.

Transition planning
56. The comprehensive approach to security coordination at the technical level
continued throughout the reporting period, leading to increased coordination between
military planning (strand 2.A); police and other rule of law initiatives (strands 2.B
and C); and stabilization activities (strand 3) in support of the national army-led
operations in Shabelle Hoose. With support from AMISOM and other international
partners, military operations and stabilization activities coordinated across various
Federal Government ministries and South-West State authorities continued in the
vicinity of Sabiid and Bariira, targeting strategic villages with bridges across the
Shabelle River. This was followed by military operations along the coastal strip
resulting in the securing of Ceel Sallini and Dhanaane villages.

B.

International cooperation – comprehensive approach to security
Strand 1
Enabling operations of the African Union Mission in Somalia and enhancing
Mission effectiveness
57. During the reporting period, UNSOS continued to contribute towards enhancing
AMISOM effectiveness. UNSOS provided AMISOM with secure voice
communications in the field, as well as a mobile application that reduces the response
lead-time in cases where casualty and medical evacuations are required. In addition,
UNSOS continued to enhance AMISOM signals capabilities through the
establishment of field technology training facilities in Mogadishu and all sector

19-13825

11/18

S/2019/661

headquarters. Training in information and communication technology continued to be
provided for AMISOM components, the national army and the Somali Police Force.
58. UNSOM delivered formal training to a total of 2,537 AMISOM troops, thereby
enhancing the skills of AMISOM personnel in finding and destroying improvised
explosive devices during convoys. UNSOM also provided specialized training and
equipment to AMISOM route search explosive ordnance disposal teams and the
improvised explosive device detection teams in various sectors. UNSOM surveyed
913 km of road to assess road conditions and identify vulnerable points and areas at
risk of a potential attack.
Strand 2
Strengthening Somali security institutions
59. The Federal Government began verification of the biometric registration of all
national army personnel, to be completed by 31 December. The exercise will capture
human resources and medical data to ensure the prompt payment of personnel,
identify training gaps and provide a baseline for personnel to be demobilized under
the pensions and gratuity bill, which is currently under consideration in Parliament.
The United States of America resumed support for pilot national army units following
agreement on transparency and accountability measures. Integration of ASWJ forces
into the national army began in Galmudug.
60. On 15 May, the federal Minister of Justice convened a meeting involving strands
2 and 4 of the comprehensive approach to security, targeted at providing justice and
corrections services in transition locations in Shabelle Hoose. As a result, the Federal
Government and international partners developed an intervention plan to assess and
identify entry points for delivery of justice services in newly recovered areas, with
further consultations ongoing.
61. The technical Committees for the implementation of Somalia ’s new policing
model in Galmudug, South-West State and Jubbaland updated their 2020 state
policing priorities. The second joint AMISOM-United Nations training course for 200
police recruits in Jawhar, funded by the joint police programme, commenced on
27 May. The programme also approved $2.8 million in support of state police forces
in Puntland.
62. On 18 June, UNSOM and international partners attended the IGAD -coordinated
Maritime Security Coordination Committee, with agreement reached that the
finalization of the Maritime Code of Somalia should be accorded a high priority, as it
will support the governance structures for the country’s maritime domain.
63. UNSOM facilitated the clearing of 12,500 square metres on five proposed
Somali Police Force forward operating bases near Mogadishu, as part of the
Mogadishu security plan’s mitigation measures against mortar attacks.
Strand 3
Stabilization and Community Recovery and Extension of State Authority
and Accountability
64. Leading the Federal Government interministerial task force, the Ministry of the
Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation and South-West State authorities
coordinated stabilization initiatives in Shabelle Hoose in support of the transition
plan. The initiatives included the establishment of initial governance and community
recovery efforts in areas recovered from Al-Shabaab, with assistance from the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland early recovery initiative , the United
States Agency for International Development and the European Union. The
implementation of community reconciliation and district council formation activities,
12/18

19-13825

S/2019/661

under the national stabilization strategy, continued in Galmudug, HirShabelle, South West State and Jubbaland. At the community level, UNSOM facilitated 53 discussion
sessions for a total of 341 participants to promote dialogue on peace and tolerance.
Strand 4
Preventing and countering violent extremism
65. Preventing and countering violent extremism committee structures have been
established at the state level, mirroring the Office of the Prime Minister coordination
structure with federal ministries. South-West State and HirShabelle have already
developed road maps for preventing and countering violent extremism
implementation.
66. UNSOM and IOM continued to support the Federal Government ’s national
programme for the treatment and handling of disengaged combatants. As at July, the
three rehabilitation centres for low-risk Al-Shabaab defectors had recently provided
support to 70 individuals in Mogadishu, 27 in Baidoa and 96 in Kismaayo. On
20 June, 126 former Al-Shabaab members graduated from the Baidoa Rehabilitation
Centre after completing the required programme, which includes for mal education,
vocational training and psychosocial support.

C.

Compliance with the human rights due diligence policy
67. The United Nations-AMISOM joint working group on the human rights due
diligence policy met in May and discussed the progress on the implementation of the
agreed mitigation measures to address human rights and international humanitarian
law violations. While a decline in alleged human rights violations by AMISOM, from
94 allegations received in 2017 to 21 in 2018, was noted, the nee d to further
strengthen the prevention and response measures, including the AMISOM Board of
Inquiry, was underscored. A presentation on the action taken by AMISOM to monitor
air asset mitigation measures was made. A further joint assessment to support
implementation of those measures, in view of the expected new air assets, was carried
out on 8 July. Recommendations made to AMISOM included further human rights
training and recommendations on standard operating procedures and on incident
reporting. UNSOM also supported other entities through training and briefing
sessions to strengthen implementation of the measures within the framework of their
support to Somali security forces.

VII. Logistical support for the national army and
Mission operations
A.

Support for Mission operations
68. As mandated by Security Council resolution 2472 (2019), UNSOS continued to
provide logistics support to AMISOM personnel deployed in 77 locations in south central Somalia. In support of the transition plan, UNSOS provided support to
AMISOM Burundian troops to hand over Afmadoow in sector 6 to Jubbaland securi ty
forces, while Kenyan troops executed an operational evacuation of the bases at Busar
and Fafadun, in order to push forward to Bura Hache and Guerille in sector 3.
Consequently, Burundian troops were relocated from Afmadow to Maslah, 20 km east
of Mogadishu.
69. UNSOS responded to perennial challenges in providing potable water to
national army and AMISOM by drilling boreholes in the forward operating bases and

19-13825

13/18

S/2019/661

in the Shabelle Hoose operational area, and through the provision of chlorine
purification tablets, jerrycans and water tank services.
70. UNSOS has also addressed challenges affecting maintenance of equipment,
through the establishment of warehouses and vehicle maintenance workshops in all
the sectors, which will strengthen its ability to maintain equipment and support
AMISOM mobility.
71. In support of the national army-led transition-related operations in Shabelle
Hoose, which commenced in April, UNSOS provided logistics support to Ugandan
troops taking part in the operations. The support included field defence stores, fuel,
medical and casualty evacuations, movement of personnel and equipment and mission
enabling units.

B.

Support for Somali national armed forces operations
72. UNSOS continued to provide logistics support to 10,900 eligible national army
troops in 21 different locations in all AMISOM sectors, including to the ongoing
national army-led joint operations in Shabelle Hoose. The support included field
defence stores, rations, fuel, water tanks, first aid kits, very high frequency (VHF)
radios, chlorine tablets, mosquito nets and air medical evacuations.

VIII. United Nations presence in Somalia
73. United Nations entities continue to be present in the following locations in
Somalia: Baidoa, Beledweyne, Boosaaso, Dhooble, Doolow, Gaalkacyo, Garoowe,
Hargeysa, Jawhar, Kismaayo and Mogadishu. Progress continues on the
establishment of the United Nations office in Dhuusamarreeb. As at 25 July 2019,
there were 603 international staff and 1,367 national staff deployed throughout
Somalia.
74. Following the 1 January 2019 mortar attack on the United Nations compound in
Mogadishu, located within Aden Abdulle International Airport, UNSOS continues to
enhance security measures at the Airport and all AMISOM bases and has to date
completed reinforcement works at four of the five access gates to the Airport, and
reinforced office and accommodation infrastructure for UNSOS, UNSOM and
AMISOM. My Assistant Secretary-General for Africa, Bintou Keita, visited Somalia
from 12 to 17 June to engage with UNSOM staff and discuss United Nations support
with the Federal Government, international partners and civil society. She a lso
conducted a one-day visit to Kismaayo. My Under-Secretary-General for Operational
Support, Atul Khare, visited Somalia from 6 to 8 July, and discussed issues of security,
logistical support for AMISOM and the national army, joint coordination on the
implementation of the status-of-mission agreement and environmental responsibility
in peacekeeping. He also conducted a site visit to Jawhar, accompanied by the Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission, where he
engaged with the AMISOM sector 5 contingent.
75. During the reporting period, consultations continued between UNSOM and
UNSOS leadership and the Somali authorities to address challenges resulting from
the imposition of taxes and other fees, in contravention of the stat us-of-mission
agreement. Following the establishment of the joint coordination office in March,
there has been some progress on the processing of visas for United Nations personnel
who do not hold a United Nations laissez-passer. Challenges remain, however, with
the Federal Government and federal member states still imposing visa fees and taxes

14/18

19-13825

S/2019/661

on United Nations contractors. Payments for taxes and other fees, made under protest,
continue to burden the UNSOS budget, diverting funds away from mandated support .
76. The United Nations continued to support the Federal Government in its efforts
to raise revenue from local businesses. The United Nations has thus been cooperating
with the Federal Government and AMISOM to map out all contractors and
subcontractors operating within the Aden Abdulle International Airport, to determine
a list of United Nations-exclusive contractors. This will help to ensure that contractors
and subcontractors fulfil their tax obligations to the Federal Government.

IX. Observations
77. In the past three months, Somalia has made progress on political, economic and
security matters, while facing continued challenges that, if not addressed soon, could
jeopardize the gains achieved thus far. The progress necessary to achieve the
country’s priority benchmarks of federal elections, strengthened security and debt
relief will be increasingly difficult without the resumption of dialogue among the
leaders of the Federal Government and federal member states. The window for
achieving critical progress on those issues is narrowing. I urge the Federal
Government of Somalia, federal member states, the two chambers of the Federal
Parliament and all stakeholders to engage in a spirit of consensus and cooperation,
while making every effort to accelerate political discussions on key issues as an
immediate priority.
78. Regional electoral processes will continue to attract political attention for the
remainder of the year and must not delay dialogue between the Federal Government
and federal member states. I urge all parties concerned to ensure transparency of
processes and avoid any recourse to violence. It is important that the selection of new
members of the Jubbaland assembly and election of the state president is due to follow
a fair, transparent and acceptable process. I am encouraged by the dialogue in
Galmudug to bring all parties together. I urge all stakeholders to take forward broad based and inclusive reconciliation, leading to a transparent and peaceful electoral
process in Galmudug. It is ultimately important that these regional electoral processes
contribute to a renewed dialogue between the Federal Government and the federal
member states for the overall benefit of the country.
79. The efforts of the Federal Parliament to advance the legislativ e agenda,
including the anti-corruption commission bill, in recent months is encouraging. This
momentum should be sustained. I welcome the announcement of the resumption of
cooperation between the lower house and the Upper House, and the spirit of dialogue
that has prevailed to resume the serious legislative work required of Parliament. It is
important that bills are enacted into law in a timely manner, in order for Somalia to
meet its aspirations.
80. Nowhere is the need for legislative progress more urgent than to advance the
legal framework for the national elections in 2020 and 2021. I urge the Federal
Government and federal member states to reach consensus on a political framework
covering key electoral issues. It will also be important that the electoral bill is adopted
by Parliament and reflects the amendments that the National Independent Electoral
Commission deems necessary to carry out its work. This will also demonstrate clear
political commitment to national elections, which, together with more cl arity on the
Government’s elections financial contribution, will help to garner donor interest and
confidence. The inability to attract adequate and timely financial support for the
conduct of electoral activities may become an additional obstacle to holdi ng the
elections on time. Establishing electoral security coordination mechanisms will also
be important for proper electoral planning and operations. In this regard, I encourage
19-13825

15/18

S/2019/661

Member States to contribute funding to the electoral process. I commend the
Commission for advancing technical preparations for the voter registration process.
81. I encourage the political participation of women and their effective role in
decision-making at all levels. I urge the Federal Government, the Federal Parliament,
federal member states, civil society and the international community to increase their
action towards the enhanced participation of women in the political reform agenda,
through clear gender-focused provisions in the electoral legal framework for the
elections in 2020 and 2021, and advancing the ability to meet the 30 per cent quota
of women in Federal Parliament in 2020 and 2021.
82. The Federal Government has enhanced security measures in Mogadishu.
Al-Shabaab continues to demonstrate its ability to adapt its tactics, however,
including in evading aerial strikes. Senseless acts of terrorism must not derail the
progress towards reconciliation and political stability. I welcome the progress in
coordinating transition-related operations in Shabelle Hoose and am encouraged by
the increased focus on coordination between the Federal Government and South -West
State authorities as demonstrated during these operations. Importantly, they have been
conducted with strengthened joint planning at all levels, including on stabi lization.
The Federal Government must redouble efforts towards developing predictable and
sustainable modalities to generate Somali military forces. This includes the
acceleration of transition-related operations and the integration of existing forces.
This will be a key condition for maintaining current gains and achieving further
progress under the national security architecture and towards the Somalis assuming
the lead for their security in 2021.
83. I remain concerned about civilian casualties and urge all parties to respect
international human rights law and international humanitarian law in the conduct of
hostilities. The continuation of targeted killings of persons involved in the electoral
process of 2016 remains an issue of particular concern, especially as preparations for
the elections in 2020 and 2021 get under way. I urge the Federal Government to end
impunity for these assassinations to avoid undermining future political progress.
Violations by authorities against freedom of expression and freed om of assembly
continue, and they could increase in the period leading up to the federal elections.
84. I welcome the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities and the steps being taken to strengthen the legal framework for the
protection of human rights, including the development of the relevant legislation on
disability, and on the rights of the child. I urge the Federal Government, Federal
Parliament, federal member states and civil society to enhance the participation of
marginalized communities, internally displaced people and people with disabilities in
the political reform agenda. I once again encourage the Federal Government to
finalize the process of establishing the Independent Human Rights Commission.
85. The deterioration in the humanitarian situation comes during a time of resource
constraints, forcing aid agencies to limit or reduce relief efforts. I commend the
Federal Government for demonstrating leadership by prioritizing the scaling up of its
drought response and collaboration with aid agencies, as well as efforts to tackle the
cyclical nature of these events. The 2019 humanitarian response plan is only 40 per
cent funded, as at late July. I urge donors to increase efforts to support the delivery of
life-saving assistance and protection. I also remain deeply concerned about the
challenging security environment and the continued impact of military operations,
clashes among armed groups and the presence of non-state armed actors on civilians,
as well as the restrictions on key access roads needed for the delivery of humanitarian
assistance and commercial supplies. I welcome the stronger role being taken by state
and local authorities in monitoring and implementing humanitarian programmes. I
call for respect for humanitarian principles in these undertakings.
16/18

19-13825

S/2019/661

86. In a rapidly evolving regional context, it is all the more important that countries
in the Horn of Africa act in a spirit of mutual cooperation. I encourage all the parties
to address possible differences through constructive dialogue, in the interest of
enhanced regional relations, which will ultimately harness the immense potential of
all people in the Horn region.
87. I thank the African Union, AMISOM, IGAD, the European Union, Member
States, non-governmental organizations and other partners for their continued support
for peacebuilding and state-building in Somalia. I pay tribute to AMISOM and Somali
security forces for the sacrifice that they continue to make for the achievement of
long-term peace and stability in Somalia.
88. I am pleased that the partnership between Somalia and the United Nations
remains strong. I remain committed to deepening this partnership for the benefit of
the Somali people, in support of the country’s continued progress. I appreciate the
warm welcome extended by the Federal Government of Somalia to my new Special
Representative, James Swan, since his appointment on 30 May. I also express my
deep appreciation for my Deputy Special Representative, Raisedon Zenenga, for his
leadership in the challenging months prior to Mr. Swan’s arrival; and to all United
Nations staff in Somalia for their continued commitment and excellent work under
arduous conditions.

19-13825

17/18

S/2019/661

18/18

19-13825
