XIII
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS
OF THE FOURTH COMMITTEE
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTEES SUR LES RAPPORTS
DE LA QUATRIEME COMMISSION

218 (III). Transmission. des renseignements en application de l' Arti-

218 (III). Transmission of information
under Article 73e of the Charter

(II) and 143 (II) adopted by thP General Assembly on 3 November 1947 2 require adaptation
and amplification,

cle 73e de la Charte
L 'Assemblie genbale,
Considerant que I' experience prouve la necessite d'adapter et de developper la resolution 66(1)
du 14 decembre 19 4 6 1 et les resolutions 142
(II) et 143 (II) du 3 novembre 1947 2, telles
qu'elles oht ete adoptees par l'Assemblee generale,

1. lnmtes the Members transmitting information under Article 7 3 e of the Charter to send to
the Secretary-General the most recent information which is at their dispoo,al, as early as possible
and at the latest within a maximum period of six
month<; following the expiration of the administrative year in the Non-Self-Governing Territories
concerned;

1. Invite les Membres qui transmettent des
renseignements en vertu de !'Article 73e de la
Charte, a envoyer au ·secretaire general les rrnseignements les plus recents dont ils disposent
aussit6t que possible et, au plus tard, clans un
delai maximum de six mois apres !'expiration de
l'annee administrative clans les territoires non
autonomcs en cause;

2. Recommends that the Members, in transmitting information on the basis of the Standard
Form, should notify such changes in statistics
and such other appreciable changes, including
the progress achieved in accordance with development programmes, as have occurred in the
previous year and as affect the matters covered
by Article 7 3 e of the Charter, bearing in mind
that information already furnished on a previous
occasion need not he repeated but that reference
may be made to the appropriate sourcrs;

2. Recommande que les Membres, lorsqu'ils
transmettent des renseignements sur la base du
Schema, fassent connahre les modifications intervenues clans les donnees statistiques et tous
autres changements notables, y compris les progres realises clans l'execution des programmes de
developpement; ces modifications se referent a
l'annee precedente, et concernent les problemes
vises a l'Article 73e de la Charte; il n'est pas
necessaire de repeter les renseignements fournis
anterieurement, il suffira de faire reference aux
sources appropriees;

3. lnmtes the Secretary-General to extend the
use of supplemental information in future years
and considers that, in order to provide a means
of assessing the information transmitted under
Article 7 3e, the Secretary-General should be
authorized to include in his summaries and
analyses all revelant and comparable official
statistical information, within the categories referred to in Article 7 3 e of the Charter, which
has been communicated to the llnited Nations or
to the specialized agencies;

3. Jnvi,te le Secretaire general a faire plus
largement usage a l'avenir de la documentation
supplementaire et, pour lui permettre d'apprecier les renseignements transmis en vertu de
l'Article 7 3e, considere que le Secretaire general
doit etre habilite a inserer, clans ses resumes et
analyses, tous renseignements statistiques officiels ayant un caractere de pertinence, dont le
caractere permettrait d 'etablir des comparaisons,
lorsque les statistiques communiquers aux Nations Unics OU aux institutions specialisees s'appliquent aux questions visees a !'Article 7 3e de
la Charte;

4. Invites the Secretary-General to prepare for
the General Assembly, and for any special
committee which the General Assembly may
appoint :
(a) Full summaries and analyses of the infor-

4. lnmte le Secretaire general a preparer a
!'intention de l'Assemblee generale, et de tout
comite special que l'Assemblre generale pourrait
nommer :
a) Des resumes et analyses complets des ren-

The General Assembly,
Considering that, in the light of experience,
resolution 66 (I) adopted by the General Assembly on 14 December 194 6 1 antl resolutions 142

1 See Resolutions adopted by the General Assembly during the
second part of its first session, page 124.

1 Voir les Resolutions adoptees par l"Assemblee ge11erale pendant
la scconde partic de sa prcmiere session, pa1:e 12 4.
• Voir les Documenls officiels de la deuxiem;, session de l',lssemblee gbuirale, Resolutions, pa(!t>S 48 Pt :i5.

• See Official Records of the second session of the General Assembly,
Resolutions, pages !18 and 55.

80

mation transmitted during 1949 and thereafter
at three-year intervals, showing the progress
made over the three-year period in respect of
economic, social and educational conditions;

(b) In the intervening years annual supplements, showiug such changes in statistics and
imch other appreciable changes, including information on the progress achieved in accordance
with developments programme, as have occurred
in .the previous year, together with relevant statistirs for the previous two years, as well as
analyses of different aspects of economic, social
and educational conditions to which attention
may have been drawn in previous years;
(c) Annual summaries of any material which
the Members may have voluntarily transmitted
undPr the optional category of the Standard
Form;

seignements transmis au cours de l'annee 19/i 9;
par la suite, ccs resumes et analyses,_ etablis to~s
les trois ans, montreront les pro3res accomphs
au cours de la periode triennale clans les domaines economique, social et de !'instruction;
b) Entre temps, des documents annuels complementaires qui montreront les modifications
dans les donnees statistiques et les autrcs changements notables, y compris les progres realises
dans l'execution des programmes de developpement, intervenus au cours de l'annee precedente;
ces documents presenteront en meme temps les
statistiques applicables aux deux dernieres annees
et des analyses des aspects divers de la situation
economique, sociale et de !'instruction, sur lesquels l'attention aurait etc attiree au cours des
annees precedentes;
c) Des resumes annuels de toute documentation
que les Membres auraient volontairemeut transmisc sur la partie facultative du Schema;

5. /rwite, the Secretary-General to distribute
the documents referred to above as far as practicable in accordance with the attached schedule;

5. Invite le Secretaire general a distrihuer les
documents auxquels se referent les precedents
paragraphes, en respectant dans loute la mesure
du possible les dates prevues au plan annel.e;

6. Decide, that the Standard Form for the
guidance of Members in the preparation of information should be retained for the coming year,
but that the Secretary-General,

6. Decide que le Schema destine a servir de
guide aux Etats Membres pour la preparation
des renseignements a transmettre doit ~tre conserve pour l'annee prochaine; toutefois, le
Secretaire general :

(a) In communicating this Form to the Members concerned, should inform them of the comments made in the Special Committee in connexion with the contents of the Form and the
information received ;
(b) Should endeavour as far as practicable to
take account of these comments in the preparation
of his summaries and analyses; and
(c) Should invite the Members concerned
which have not hitherto provided the general
information forming the optional category of the
Standard Form nevertheless to supply suc·h
information in relation to the geography, history,
people of, and h.uman rights in the Territories
concerned.

a) En communiquant ce Schema aux Membres
interesses, les informera des commentaires faits
au cours des debats du Comite special au sujet
du contenu du Schema et des renseignements
recus;
b) S'efforcera de tenir compte, dans toute la
mesure du possible, de ces commentaires dans la
preparation des resumes et des analyses; et
c) lnvitera les Membres interesses qui n'ont
pas fourni jusqu'ici les renseignements generalU'.
prevus a la partie facultative du Schema, a transmettre cependant les renseignements relatifs a la
geographie, a l'histoire, aux habitants et aux
droits de l'honune pour les territoires en cause.

Schedul,e

Plan pour fu transmission du remeignement11

Information receivPd before 1 June : summaries to he communicated by the Secretary-General
before 15 July.
Information received in the month of lune :
summaries to he communicated before 31 July.
ru1atyses to be communicated by 31 July if
practicable, and in any even not later than 15
August.

Renseignements re-;us avant le 1 •• juin : resumes a communiquer par le Secretaire general
avant le 15 juillet.
Renseignements rei;us au cours du mois de
iuin : resumes acommuniquer avant le 31 juillet.
• Analyses a communiqucr le 31 juillet si possible, et, en tout cas, au plus tard le 15 aodt.

Cent-cinquante-cinquieme aeance pl.eniere,
l,e 3 novembre 19 48.

Hundred and .fifty-filth plenary meeting,
S November 1948.
81
