S/2006/318

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 May 2006
English
Original: French

Letter dated 23 May 2006 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit herewith a letter addressed to you by Mr. Jaap de
Hoop Scheffer, Secretary General of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (see
annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring this letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

06-36058 (E) 260506 260506

*0636058*

S/2006/318

Annex
Letter dated 18 May 2006 from the Secretary General of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization addressed to the Secretary-General
[Original: English]
In accordance with Security Council resolutions 1386 (2001) and 1510 (2003),
I attach a report on the operations of the International Security Assistance Force
covering the period from 1 December 2005 to 30 March 2006. I would appreciate
your making this report available to the Security Council.
(Signed) Jaap de Hoop Scheffer

2

S/2006/318

Enclosure
[Original: English]

Quarterly report to the Security Council on the operations of
the International Security Assistance Force
Introduction
1.
In its resolution 1510 (2003) the Security Council requested the leadership of
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) to provide reports on the
implementation of its mandate. This is the ninth such report by NATO and it covers
the period from 1 December 2005 to 30 March 2006.
2.
As at 24 March 2006, ISAF had 8,121 personnel from 26 NATO countries and
467 from 10 non-NATO countries. These numbers are due to increase with the
upcoming ISAF expansion to region South.
Overall security situation
3.
The threat continues to be diverse and differs significantly across the regions
of Afghanistan. It is expected that the opposing militant forces will continue
targeting ISAF, Operation Enduring Freedom and the Afghan National Security
Forces. The trend over the past few months towards greater use of improvised
explosive devices and suicide attacks is expected to continue, but caution should be
applied to attributing all of this to the opposing militant forces. Also of note is the
threat generated by illegal armed groups. Throughout Afghanistan, such groups
operate, prompting and reacting to tribal and ethnic tensions, political friction and
criminal activity. Much of the tension is a result of the narcotics trade and this will
remain a significant threat to security. and stability for the foreseeable future.
Security situation in ISAF areas of operation
4.
Kabul. Kabul remains a primary strategic and operational focal point in
Afghanistan, owing to the large concentration of international agencies and
multinational forces.
5.
Regions North and West. Regions North and West will continue to be areas
influenced by rival factions, power brokers and criminal groups, but there are also
indications of increased Taliban and Hezb-e lslami Gulbuddin activity.
6.
Security situation outside ISAF areas of operation. In regions South and
East, the Operation Enduring Freedom currently faces a multitude of threats,
including residual Taliban groups, Hezb-e lslami Gulbuddin elements, and foreign
fighters. Cross-border operations and infiltrations along the border with Pakistan
will continue. In these regions the opposing militant forces currently retain the
capability and the intent to engage the Operation Enduring Freedom forces and the
Afghan National Security Forces, in addition to provincial and local-level
Government of Afghanistan officials and workers. This makes it extremely difficult
for both aid and reconstruction efforts to make progress and for the Government of
Afghanistan to exert its influence. As ISAF expands it is more than likely that the
opposing militant forces will test ISAF resolve and seek to determine its ability to
counter their attacks.

3

S/2006/318

Report on the ISAF mission
7.
ISAF has continued executing its assistance mission in the north, west, and
capital regions of Afghanistan through the conduct of normal framework operations.
Joint security patrols with both the Afghan National Army and, to a lesser extent,
the Afghan National Police have increased, while ISAF is firmly following the
principle of Afghan National Security Forces being at the forefront.
8.
The ISAF response to the Afghan events surrounding the “cartoon
demonstrations” that occurred early in February 2006 in Kabul, Herat, Chagcharan,
Pol-e Khomri and Maimana was successful. Of note is the incident on 7 February
2006 when the personnel of the Maimana Provincial Reconstruction Team were
attacked by an aggressive mob of 200 to 300 people. The crowd using small arms,
grenades and improvised incendiary devices broke through the main entrance to the
Team compound. The Team personnel showed great restraint and professionalism
during the incident. Using warning shots, stun grenades, rubber bullets and riot
control gas they managed to keep the rioters from entering the buildings. The ISAF
Northern Quick Reaction Force moved to reinforce the Maimana Provincial
Reconstruction Team, while the Afghan National Police eventually became more
engaged, reportedly firing into the crowd. It is important to note that the Afghan
National Police in Pol-e-Khomri, Herat and Kabul played a significant part in
establishing calm during demonstrations.
9.
Figures over the past months clearly pointed to an increased number of
incidents involving improvised explosive devices throughout the country, both in
absolute terms and as a proportion of all incidents. As an example, on 17 March
2006, the last vehicle of a German patrol was struck by a remotely controlled
Improvised Explosive Device in Feyzabad. Initial reports indicated that the device
comprised 200 to 300 grams of TNT or similar military explosive placed inside a
pressure cooker. These attacks are not only targeting ISAF and Operation Enduring
Freedom forces. On the same day, an Improvised Explosive Device struck against an
Afghan National Police vehicle en route to Kandahar and eight police officers were
reported killed.
10. The high proportion of incidents involving Improvised Explosive Devices
started with the National Assembly and Provincial Council election period but
continued over the winter. While the threat from Improvised Explosive Devices is
theatre-wide, regions South and East have known far higher reported activity. These
are regions with intricate interests between the operation militant forces and drug
traffickers. Against the prospect of ISAF expansion in these two regions, the buildup phase will be critical. It is expected that ISAF will have to deal with the
Improvised Explosive Device threat at a level rather similar to that which Operation
Enduring Freedom forces currently experience.
11. Since 2005, the operation militant forces have resorted increasingly to suicide
attacks. Several incidents were registered throughout the country during the first
three months of the year. While it is still assessed that suicide attacks run counter to
Afghan culture, so far about one third of suicide attackers are suspected to be
Afghan nationals. The use of suicide attackers may indicate that hardliners have
taken control within the Operation Militant Forces.

4

S/2006/318

Security sector reform status
12. Disbandment of illegal armed groups. The disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process is transiting to the follow-on, Afghan-led process of
disbandment of illegal armed groups. The disarmament and demobilization phase
officially ended on 7 July 2005 while the reintegration process is scheduled to
continue until 30 June 2006. ISAF continues to monitor reintegration in order to
best ensure the overall success of the Disarmament, Demobilization and
Reintegration programme. Militias or individuals that did not enter and comply with
that process are now referred to as illegal armed groups. The implementation of the
three-phase disbandment concept started with voluntary compliance preceding the
successful National Assembly and Provincial Council elections. The Government of
Afghanistan is now negotiating compliance and Government officials suspected of
links to illegal armed groups continue to be monitored for their involvement. The
next phase will see the “top 4” commanders of illegal armed groups in each
province targeted for compliance with the disbandment process.
13. Counter-narcotics. The international community considers the drug trade to
be Afghanistan’s principal problem while counter-narcotics is a complex campaign
involving several agencies working in eight pillars.1 Without undertaking any direct
military action against narcotics targets, the ISAF contribution to counter-narcotics
covers a wide spectrum: it continues to participate in working groups and meetings
in all pillars and at all levels. The ISAF Theatre Psychological Operations element,
in coordination with the Minister for Counter-Narcotics and the United Kingdom
Embassy, has produced billboards, radio interviews and television spots. One
billboard campaign carried a message from the Supreme Ulema of Afghanistan,
stating that everything connected with the opium trade is immoral and anti-Islamic;
ISAF produced approximately 2,500 posters carrying this message. ISAF
headquarters produced a counter-narcotics booklet funded by the United Kingdom
Embassy to aid recognition of narcotics-related material during routine operations.
An information package is also being produced for the Provincial Reconstruction
Team and regional area commanders that explains the alternative livelihoods
programme. Long-term success depends on a combination of factors that lie outside
ISAF control. The key challenges for the future will be to overcome the endemic
corruption within the Government of Afghanistan and deliver accessible and viable
alternative livelihoods programmes.
14. Afghan National Army. The capacity, capabilities and effectiveness of the
Afghan National Army continue to grow but, as at March 2006, almost all units are
still at a relatively low level of training. A total of 24 infantry and 16 combat
support and combat service support Kandaks have been trained. Afghan National
Army units are able to conduct operations up to company level, but only with
support from the coalition forces and the United States embedded training teams. On
the other hand, situational awareness and training support and coordination have
been improved. For instance, engineer training has enhanced the effectiveness of
Afghan National Army units and improved the perception of the population through
the completion of some road improvement projects and upgrades of the Kabul entry
points.
__________________
1 The eight pillars are (1) building institutions, (2) information campaign, (3) alternative

livelihoods, (4) interdiction and law enforcement, (5) criminal justice, (6) eradication,
(7) demand reduction and (8) regional cooperation.

5

S/2006/318

15. Afghan National Police. The effectiveness of the Afghan National Police is
still assessed as low. Consequently the Afghan National Army will play a major role
in the provision of security to Afghanistan until police effectiveness improves.
Corruption and links with local criminal organizations, together with lack of logistic
support, a high illiteracy rate and inconsistent pay still hinder the reliability of the
Afghan National Police. As a consequence, the people of Afghanistan still hesitate
to see the police as an access to justice or a solution to problems. The Ministry of
the Interior accelerated the basic police-training programme and set the goal of
having a fully trained Afghan National Police and Afghan Border Police with a
combined force of 62,000 police officers deployed nationwide by the end of 2010.
Now the challenge will be to raise the level of their abilities. ISAF continues to
concentrate on military specialties such as search procedures, checkpoints, and
weapons handling. Provincial Reconstruction Teams, where police advisers are
present, will also continue to provide opportunities for training of the Afghan
National Police.
16. Judicial reform. Judicial reform activities continue in coordination with Italy
as the partner country. ISAF is striving to increase its assistance to judicial reform
by encouraging its Provincial Reconstruction Teams to collect and assess data
related to judicial shortfalls in order to assist the Government of Afghanistan and
lead nation in the allocation of resources and development of infrastructure.
17. ISAF air operations. Of major importance in this mountainous landlocked
country, the ability of ISAF to manoeuvre and sustain operations, airfield
capabilities and flight safety shows steady improvement. Mazar-e-Sharif now has a
runway-lighting system installed. Herat has a formally established Class D airspace
and is subject to runway repair work to retain its full strategic airlift capability.
Kabul International Airport achieved precision approach capability and is awaiting
formal certification by the appropriate authorities.
Future ISAF operations
18. Expansion. The execution directive for operation plan 10302 (Rev. 1)
supporting ISAF expansion will become effective on 4 May 2006. The revised
operation plan provides guidance for expansion into region South, then East. Also
on 4 May, the Allied Rapid Reaction Corps headquarters will take over the ISAF
headquarters rotation from Italy, which is ending its tenure. Also part of ongoing
expansion preparations is the NATO decision to transform the regional area
coordinators into regional commanders in the north and the west; this is planned for
1 June 2006. The Kabul Multinational Brigade will also transition to regional
command capital early in August.
19. Operational mentoring and liaison teams. The revised operation plans
establish this concept of partnering between ISAF units and Afghan National Army
units. Starting with NATO expansion into the south, ISAF will enhance its role in
Afghan National Army training through the establishment of the operational
mentoring and liaison teams throughout the ISAF area of operations. The previous
strategy has been significantly broadened. ISAF will now assist with bringing the
Afghan National Army to full self-sufficiency through operational mentoring,
facilitating continuation training and supporting army units to increase their
capability and reach. This will include the coordination of Afghan National Army
operations with those of ISAF to achieve synergy, using the Operational Mentoring

6

S/2006/318

and Liaison Teams as the primary vehicle by which this will be achieved. The
development of the Afghan National Army will be supported by such teams at the
Kandak, brigade and corps level. The teams are therefore critical to the development
of the full operational capability of the Afghan National Army. The willingness of
States to provide seasoned and efficient Operational Mentoring and Liaison Teams
in sufficient quantity must be strongly encouraged as it is directly linked to the
NATO objective of empowering Afghan security forces to take full responsibility
for security throughout the country.
20. Programme Takhim-e-Solh (reconciliation). The Government of Afghanistan
is moving ahead with its national reconciliation initiative known by its Afghan name,
Programme Takhim-e-Solh. The terms of reference establishing the responsibilities of
the Programme’s commission were released on 23 January 2006. Professor
Mujaddedi, former President of Afghanistan and head of the Programme, has
formally invited the Commander of ISAF to participate in a two-day conference on
support to the Programme from the Provincial Reconstruction Teams (Kabul, 10 and
11 April). Professor Mujaddedi has repeatedly called for a more robust engagement
of NATO/ISAF in support of the Programme, especially in the light of the future
expansion of ISAF to the south.
Summary
21. ISAF continues to make solid progress towards mission accomplishment.
However, there are significant challenges that will need to be overcome in the
coming months, both in terms of expansion and in meeting security threats. The
enhanced coordination being achieved between ISAF and Operation Enduring
Freedom, while maintaining separate operations, forms the basis for successful
further expansion into regions South and East.
22. Having a new Constitution, an elected President, National Assembly and
Provincial Councils in place signals the successful implementation of the Bonn
Agreement. As these fledgling institutions remain fragile, the international
community agreed at the London Conference on 30 and 31 January 2006 to commit
itself to providing resources and support to the Government of Afghanistan for the
next five years in order to provide assistance in realizing the overarching goals of a
stable country with a growing economy fully integrated into the global community.
These aims were endorsed at the London Conference through the signing of the
Afghan Compact. A Coordinating and Monitoring Board will work to ensure
implementation of the reconstruction and development aims set out in the document.
The Compact’s objectives are directly linked to the accomplishment of the ISAF
mission and to the eventual exit of NATO.

7
