Resolutions adopted on the reporlll of the Sixth Committee

2. Invites participating States to submit to the Secretary-General not later than 15 February 1968, for
circulation to Governments, any additional comments
and draft amendments to the draft articles prepared
by the International Law Commission that they may
wish to propose in advance of the Conference;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Conference the summary records relating to the consideration of this item at the twentv-serond session of
the General Assembly, together with all other relevant
documentation.
1621st plenm-y meetinq,
6 December 1967.
2312 (XXII). Declaration on Territorial Asylum
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1839 ( XV II) of 19 December 1962, 2100 (XX) of 20 December 1965 and 2203
(XXI) of 16 December 1966 concerning a rleclarati011
on the right of asylum,
Considering the work of codification to he undertaken by the International Law Commission in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1400 ( X 1V\
of 21 November 1959,
Adopts the following Declaration :
DECLARATION ON TERRITORIAL ASYLUM

The General Assembly,
Noting that the purposes proclaimed in the Charter
of the United Nations are to maintain internationai
peace and security, to develop friendly relation<, among
all nations and to achieve internatiunal co-operation in
solving international problems of all c·onomic, social,
cultural or humanitarian charactc:r anct in promoting and
encouraging respect for human right~ and for fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race,
sex, language or religion,
Mindful of the Universal Declaration of 1l111n;•'1
Rights, which declares in article 14 that:
"1. Everyone has the right to seek and to <c!tJ<lY
in other countries asylum from persecution
"2. This right may not be invoked in tl,e , ;N'
of prosecutions genuinely arising from non-politica I
crimes or from acts contrary tu the purposes and
principles of the United Nations'.',
Recalling also article 13, paragraph 2. of the lT ni
versa! Declaration of Human Rights. which st;ites.
"Everyone has the right to le<11·e any country.
including his own, and to return to his conntry",
Recognizing that the grant of asylum hy a State to
persons entitled to invoke article 14 of 1he Universa:
Declaration of Human Rights is a peaceful and hum;rnitarian act and that, as such, it cannot be regarded :t-.
unfriendly by any other State,
Recommends that, without prej11dice to exis1i11g instruments dealing with asylum and the statlls of refugees
and stateless persons, States should base thernse]vr's
in their practices relating to territorial asylum on the
following principles :
Article 1
1. Asylum granted by a State, in tl11" e,c,·,·:;;,• of its
sovereignty, to persons entitled to invoke artick 14 of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. including
persons struggling against coloniali,m. ,li:dl k r-Pspectt-ct
by all other States.

81

2. The right to seek and to enjoy asylum may not be
invoked by any person with respect to whom there
r,re serious reasons for considering that he has committed a crime against peace, a war crime or a crime
against humanity, as defined in the international instrum~nts drawn up to make provision in respect of such
cnmes.
3. It shall rest with the State granting asylum to
evaluate the grounds for the grant of asylum.

Article 2
l. The situation of persons referred to in article 1,
paragraph 1, is, without prejudice to the sovereignty
of States and the purposes and principles of the United
Nations, of concern to the international community.
2. ,i\!here a State finds difficulty in granting or continuing to grant asylum, States individually or jointly
or through the United Nations shall consider, in a spirit
of international solidarity, appropriate measures to
lighten the burden on that State.
Article 3
1. No person referred to in article 1, paragraph 1,
shall be subjected to measures such as rejection at the
frontier or, if be has already entered the territory in
which he seeks asylum. expulsion or compulsory return
to any State whrre lw may be subjected to persecution.

2. Exception may he ma<le to the foregoing principle ,mly for ,1verriding reasons of national security
or in order to safeguard the population, as in the case
nf a 111:1ss influx of persons.
3. Should a State decide in any case that exception
to the principle stated in paragraph 1 of this article
would he justified, it shall consider the possibility of
granting to the person concerned, under such conditions
as it may deem appropriate, an opportunity, whether by
way nf provisional asy 1nm or otherwise, of going to another State.

Article 4
States granting asylum shall not permit persons who
h:1 ve received asylum to engage in activities contrary to

the purposes and principles of the United Nations.

1631st plenary meeting,
14 December 1967.

2313 (XXII). United Nations Programme of
Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of lntema•tional Law

The General Assembly,

Rec,1llinr1 its resolutions 2099 (XX) of 20 December l %5 and 2204 ( XXI) of 16 December 1966 regarding tlw United Nations Prognmme of Assistance in
tht Te:tching. Study, Dissemination and Wider Appr~ci:tt1un of Tnternational Law,
N u'mq with apprrcration the report of the SecretaryCeneral on the implementation of the Programme7 and
1;1(' rccommencL~tions_ made to the Se:retary-~eneral by
t1w /,dv1sorv Committee on the Umted Nat10ns Pro-~r:1mu,, of ,\,,·i,tancc in the Teaching, Study, Dis" n,ir1.. Tw.-ntv-suC'nd Sn.rio11, ,-Jnnc.:res, agenrla item 90,
,\,,rnrnent A/6816.

82

General A1eembly-Twenty-seeond Seaion

semination and Wider Appreciation of International
Law, which are contained in that report,
Emphasizing that, in ensuring the execution of the
Programme, the United Nations should bear in mind
the need to continue its efforts to encourage and coordinate the activities of the States and international
organizations concerned in assisting the promotion of
the teaching, study, dissemination and wider appreciation of international law,
Considering that in the conduct of the Programme
it is desirable to use as far as possible the resources and
facilities which may be made available by the international organizations concerned, Member States and
others, in accordance with the procedures and rules
of United Nations technical assistance programmes
or other relevant rules and consistent with the purposes and direction of the Programme,

Considering that in the organization and conduct of
regional seminars and training and refresher courses
due regard should be paid to reflecting United Nations
efforts towards the codification and progressive development of international law and, in so far as appropriate, the legal thinking of the principal legal
systems of the world,
1. Authorizl's the Secretary-General to carry out in
1968 the activities specified in his report, and in particular the provision of :
(a) Fifteen fellowships at the request of Governments of developing countries;

( b) The advisory services of experts, if requested
by developing countries, within the framework of existing technical assistance programmes or from such
voluntary contributions as may be received for that
purpose;
(c) A set of United Nations legal publications to
up to twenty institutions in developing countries;
2. N ates with thanks the offer of Ecuador to provide facilities for the regional seminar to be held
in Latin America in 1968 ;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization for its
participation in the United Nations Programme of
Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and
Wider Appreciation of International 4w, in particular for its co-operation in the conduct of the regional
training and refresher course held in Africa in 1967;
4. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research for its activities
in the field of international law, in particular for its
decision to conduct regional seminars in international
law, beginning with a regional seminar to be held in
Latin America in 1968, and for undertaking to conduct studies relating to the codification and progressive
development of international law within the framework
of the United Nations;

5. Reiterates its invitation to Member States, interested bodies and individuals to make voluntary contributions towards the financing of the Programme
and expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have made voluntary contributions for this
purpose;
6. Approves in principle, subject to further consideration by the Advisory Committee on the United

Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching,
Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law before the twenty-third session of the
General Asse1J1bly, the Secretary-General's recommendations regarding the execution of the Programme
after 1968;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-third session on the
implementation of the Programme during 1968 and,
following consultations with the Advisory Committee,
to submit recommendations regarding the execution of
the Programme in 1969;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-third session an item entitled "United
Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching,
Study. Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law".
1631st plenary m.eeting.
14 December 1967.
2323 (XXU). Installation of mechanical mean•
of voting: amendments to rules 89 and 128
of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly

The General Assembly,
Noting that the introduction of voting by mechanical
means makes desirable certain amendments to its rules
of procedure,
Decides, with effect from 1 January 1%8, but without prejudging the question of the installation of
mechanical means of voting in the committee rooms, to
amend rules 89 and 128 of its rules of procedure as
follows:
(a) In rule 89:
(i) Designate the ex1stmg text as paragraph (a);
(ii) Add a new paragraph ( b) as follows:
" ( b) When the General Assembly votes
by mechanical means, a non-recorded vote
shall replace a vote by show of hands or by
standing and a recorded vote shall replace a
roll-call vote. Any representative may request a recorded vote. In the case of a
recorded vote, the General Assembly shall,
unless a representative requests otherwise,
dispense with the procedure of calling out
the names of the Members; nevertheless, the
result of the voting shall be inserted in the
record in the same manner as that of a roll-call
vote."
(b) In rule 128:
(i) Designate the existing text as paragraph (a);
(ii) Add a new paragraph (b) as follows:
" ( b) When the committee votes by mechanical means, a non-recorded vote shall replace
a vote by show of har:ds or by standing and a
recorded vote shall replace a roll-call vote. Any
representative may request a recorded vote.
In the case of a recorded vote, the committee
shall, unless a representative requests otherwise, dispense with the procedure of calling
out the names of the members; nevertheless,
the result of the voting shall be inserted in
the record in the same manner as that of
a roll-call vote."
1635th plenary meeting,
16 December 1967.
