VII.

32/38.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Offers by Member States of study and
training facilities for inhabitants of NonSelf-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/32 of 29 November 1976,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
on offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories, 63
prepared under General Assembly resolution 845 (IX)
of 22 November 1954,
Bearing in mind the continued need to provide educational and training facilities at all levels for the inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member
States which have made scholarships available to the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
3. Invites all States to make or continue to make
generous offers of study and training facilities to the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories, particularly those in southern Africa, and, whenever possible,
to provide travel funds to prospective students;
4. Requests the administering Powers to ensure the
widespread and continuous dissemination in the Territories under their administration of information relating to offers of study and training facilities made by
States and to pwvide all the necessary facilities to
enable students to avail themselves of such offers;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-third session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
6. Draws the attention of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples to the present resolution.
83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977
32/116.

Question of Southern Rhodesia
A

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Southern Rhodesia
(Zimbabwe),
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,64
Taking into account the Maputo Declaration in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia and
the Programme of Action for the Liberation of Zimbabwe and Namibia,u" adopted by the International
63 A/32/277.
64 Official Records

of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/32/23/Rev.l), vol. I, chaps. I,
II and IV-VI, and vol. II, chap. VII.
65 A/32/109/Rev.1-S/12344/Rev.1, annex V. For the printed
text, see Official Records of the Security Council, Thirtysecond Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1977.

175

Conference in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabw~
and Namibia, held at Maputo from 16 to 21 May 1977,
as well as the Lagos Declaration for Action against
Apartheid,n 6 adopted by the World Conference for
Action against Apartheid, held at Lagos from 22 to
26 August 1977,
Having heard the statement of the representative of
the administering Power, n7
Having heard the statements of the representatives
of the national liberation movement who participated in
an observer capacity in the consideration of the item, 08
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the
programme of action for the full implementation of
the Declaration, as well as all other resolutions relating
to the question of Southern Rhodesia adopted by the
General Assembly, the Security Council and the Special
Committee,
Bearing in mind that the Government of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the
administering Power, has the primary responsibility
for putting an end to the critical situation in Southern
Rhodesia (Zimbabwe) which, as repeatedly affirmed
by the Security Council, constitutes a threat to international peace and security,
Reaffirming that any attempts to negotiate the future
of Zimbabwe with the illegal regime on the basis of
independence before majority rule would be in contravention of the inalienable rights of the people of the
Territory and contrary to the provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations and of resolution 1514 (XV),
Condemning the deliberate sabotage by the illegal
racist minority regime of the numerous, intensive efforts
being made to secure a negotiated settlement in Zimbabwe on the basis of majority rule,
Bearing in mind the resolutions on Zimbabwe adopted
by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of
the Organization of African Unity at its fourteenth
ordinary session, held at Libreville from 2 to 5 July
1977,(i!)

Stressing the grave responsibility of the international
community to take all possible measures in support of
the people of Zimbabwe in tl1eir liberation struggle and
in minimizing the hardship and suffering of Zimbabweans in that regard,
Indignant at the arbitrary imprisonment and detention
of political leaders and others, the massacre of freedom
fighters and the continued denial of fundamental human
rights, including in particular the wanton beating, tor~ure and murder of innocent villagers, arbitrary crimmal measures of collective punishment and measures
designed to create an apartheid State in Zimbabwe,
Commending the firm determination of the people
of Zimbabwe, under the leadership of their national
liberation movement, to achieve freedom and independence, and convinced that their unity and solidarity
are fundamental to the rapid attainment of that objective,
66 A/CONF.91/9 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.77.XIV.2 and corrigendum), sect. X.
67 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtysecond .Session, Fourth Committee, 27th meeting.
68 Ibid., 27th to 29th and 35th meetings.
69 See A/32/3 I 0.
