S/PV.9333

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9333rd meeting

Tuesday, 30 May 2023, 10.40 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Baeriswyl . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Switzerland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault
Mr. Biang
Mr. Issahaku
Mrs. Shino
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-15026 (E)
*2315026*

S/PV.9333

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.40 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the Syrian Arab Republic and Türkiye
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Geir Pedersen,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria;
Ms. Ghada Eltahir Mudawi, Deputy Director of the
Office for the Coordination on Humanitarian Affairs;
and Ms. Morgane Aveline, Middle East Regional
Program Director, Norwegian Refugee Council.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Pedersen.
Mr. Pedersen: Last month, when I briefed the
Security Council in person (see S/PV.9313), I said
that new diplomatic activity in the region could be an
opportunity. If seized, it could act as a circuit breaker
in the quest for a political solution in Syria — if there
is constructive engagement on Syria’s part and if key
regional and international groups and players can
work together. This past month has seen the pace of
diplomatic activity quicken, with a meeting in Moscow
of the Foreign Ministers of Iran, Russia, Syria and
Türkiye; a meeting in Amman of the Foreign Ministers
of Egypt, Jordan, Iraq, Saudi Arabia and Syria;
resolutions adopted in Cairo and Jeddah by the League
of Arab States; the establishment of an Arab ministerial
liaison committee to follow up on the implementation
of the statement adopted in Amman and continue direct
dialogue with the Syrian Government; and the Arab
League summit in Jeddah, in which the President of
Syria participated.
There have also been meetings in Brussels on
Syria between European and American officials. I
note that in dialogue with the Syrian Government, the
meetings in Amman, Jeddah and Moscow considered
issues related to resolution 2254 (2015), including
humanitarian aid and access, the safe, dignified and
2/23

30/05/2023

voluntary return of refugees, the restoration of Syria’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity, efforts to counter
listed terrorist groups and post-conflict reconstruction.
The importance of a political solution was underlined
and there have been appeals for reconvening the
Constitutional Committee and working for national
reconciliation. Calling attention to those themes and
points could present a real opportunity to move forward.
That is the key message I have brought during
my intensive engagement during the reporting period.
After consulting a wide range of stakeholders when I
was in New York last month, I visited Iran, to meet the
Iranian Foreign Minister and other senior officials, and
Türkiye for senior-level engagements. I met with the
Jordanian and Egyptian Foreign Ministers in Geneva,
spoke to the Saudi Foreign Minister by phone and
was in touch with a range of other players. I spoke
on the phone with Syrian Foreign Minister Mekdad
and saw President Jamous of the Syrian Negotiations
Commission in Istanbul.
In those engagements, I made it clear that I
appreciate the dangers of a continuation of the status
quo for both the Syrian people and for the regional and
other actors that want to curb the instability created
across Syria’s borders, including from narcotics, and
that continue to host millions of Syrian refugees. I
have long sought to bring about reciprocal, concrete
and verifiable confidence-building measures to unlock
progress on implementing resolution 2254 (2015). I can
only welcome the intensified regional consultations
and work in the same direction. My goal is to enhance
the coordination, complementarity and coherence
of the efforts under way, and I welcome the fact that
the regional actors have also clearly stated the same
goal. After all, even minimal progress on some issues
pertaining to resolution 2254 (2015) will require the
confidence and resources of many different players,
as well as serious actions. It is vital that the recent
diplomatic gestures be matched by meaningful action.
Let us remember that the Syrian people have continued
to suffer on a massive scale. While they have observed
the recent diplomatic developments, they have not yet
seen any real improvement in their lives, whether they
live in or outside Syria. Nor have they seen renewed
signs that the intra-Syrian political process will actually
resume and start to move forward. Only if those two
things change — confidence-building on the ground
and a genuine political process — will we be able to
say that the current opportunity has been seized.
23-15026

30/05/2023

The situation in the Middle East

Understandably, there has been much focus on
the question of Syrian refugees and the internally
displaced as well. We continue to uphold and further
the principle of the safe, dignified and voluntary return
of refugees. I want to share with everyone the voices
of Syrian refugees themselves, as expressed in the
annual surveys by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees of refugees in Jordan,
Lebanon, Iraq and Egypt. The latest was published last
week. It tells us that most Syrian refugees still hope
to return one day, and a sizable number hope to return
within five years. But, this year, as in previous years,
only a small fraction indicated their intention to return
in the next 12 months. Why is that? The top two factors
cited by refugees were a lack of livelihoods and work
opportunities, on the one hand, and a lack of safety
and security, on the other. Other issues that were also
major concerns were inadequate basic services and
housing, on the one hand, and fears about military
service, conscription, recruitment, arrests, detention,
harassment and retaliation, on the other.
Why is that also important for confidence-building
and the political process? It is important because it
tells us that if the Syrian Government were to start
to address the protection concerns of the displaced
more systematically, working closely with the United
Nations, and if donors were to help the United Nations
do more to address the concerns that all Syrians have
about their livelihoods, that would help accomplish
what we all say we want to do — build confidence
and begin to change the realities on the ground for all
Syrians and not only the displaced. It could help bring
about movement towards a safer, calmer and more
neutral environment in Syria, and it could help alleviate
hardship inside the country. A United Nations presence
and access in all the relevant areas would of course be
an essential component in all of that. We also continue
to stress the importance of generosity in responding
to funding requests related to Syrian refugees and of
avoiding inflammatory rhetoric about them.
Let me also strongly emphasize that addressing the
fate of the detained, the disappeared and the missing
is a core issue for moving forward in Syria. It is hard
to see how there could be genuine confidence-building
without some progress on that issue, which has an impact
on nearly all Syrians and is fundamental to families and
communities and to repairing Syria’s social fabric. We
continue to call on all parties in Syria to take concrete
and meaningful steps on this file, which would do so

S/PV.9333

much to change the dynamics, if done at scale and in
the right way. We also continue to urge Member States
to support the United Nations efforts towards the
establishment by the General Assembly of an institution
dedicated to the search for missing persons, as per the
recommendation of the Secretary-General.
Let us remember that for the Syrian people, the
economy continues to reach new lows. The Syrian
lira reached its lowest level ever in the past month and
inflation is on the rise. And the recent earthquake’s
impact has worsened the country’s economic crisis.
There are reports of a further increase in poverty,
including an assessment by the International Labour
Organization of approximately 170,000 workers
losing their jobs. The cumulative effects of a decade
of war and conflict, corruption, the Lebanese financial
crisis, the coronavirus disease, sanctions, illicit drug
trafficking and the war in Ukraine mean that the
economic morass of the Syrians has never been more
acute. Changing that must also be a key priority of any
confidence-building process.
Let me also underline the heightened importance
of resuming a credible intra-Syrian political process,
starting with reconvening the Constitutional Committee.
A way must be found to overcome the non-Syrian issues
that have arisen and to resume the Committee’s work
and see it develop in a positive direction. I appreciate
the ideas of many on ways out of the impasse and it is a
priority to seek to resolve the challenges. In that spirit,
I am in close touch with the relevant authorities in a
renewed effort to overcome obstacles and reconvene
the Constitutional Committee in Geneva.
Meanwhile, too many Syrians are still affected by
violence. This month alone saw ongoing exchanges of
rocket and mortar fire across front lines, air strikes
from Israel, Turkish drone strikes, air strikes attributed
to Jordan against drug smugglers, the first proGovernment suspected air strike in Idlib in more than
five months and attacks by listed terrorist groups.
Yes, there is a broad military stalemate, but
violence continues to cause civilian deaths on all
sides and the renewed escalation of hostilities is not
off the table. The engagement of all actors to sustain
calm and work on a nationwide ceasefire remains of
vital importance. Let us also remember that the level
of humanitarian suffering has never been higher, as
my colleague from the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs will, no doubt, shortly inform the

23-150263/23

S/PV.9333

The situation in the Middle East

30/05/2023

Council. Deputy Special Envoy Rochdi convened the
Humanitarian Task Force again during the reporting
period, appealing for humanitarian access via all
modalities, whether cross-line or cross-border, as well
as resources to meet emergency humanitarian needs,
including early recovery and livelihoods.

independence, unity and territorial integrity and meets
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people.

Let me reiterate my welcoming of the Syrian
Government’s extension of the Bab Al-Salam and
Al-Rai crossings for three more months to allow for the
continued much-needed aid from the United Nations. Let
me also remind the Council of the Secretary-General’s
call for a 12-month extension of the Security Council’s
authorization to operate the cross-border mechanism.

Ms. Mudawi: The humanitarian crisis in Syria
must remain a global priority. The reasons are clear.
After 12 years of conflict, the vast majority of the
Syrian population continues to face daily challenges to
meet the most basic food, health, water, sanitation and
hygiene and shelter needs. A staggering 15.3 million
people require humanitarian assistance throughout
the country, representing nearly 70 per cent of the
Syrian population.

Meanwhile, we continue to consult with the broadest
spectrum of the Syrian people, including through the
Civil Society Support Room, which convened in Geneva
this month in the form of thematic working groups. At the
core of its message was the need for a safe environment
and a comprehensive and sustainable political process,
in line with resolution 2254 (2015), which would create
the conditions for Syrians to return home. The SyrianSyrian dialogue is an essential element to rebuilding
social cohesion and identifying entry points that unify
all Syrians. Likewise, the Women’s Advisory Board met
virtually this month and with wider networks of Syrian
women and continues to share with us the concerns and
aspirations of all Syrians.
Last month, I said that we were entering a period
of renewed probing and testing in a new context, with
enhanced regional engagement and many ideas that
have long been on the table, along with some new ones.
There are now common and concrete points on which
the many players are focused that could be meaningfully
discussed and advanced. If substantive issues begin to
be addressed, even if incrementally, that new dynamic
could create much needed momentum. I therefore
look forward to engaging the Syrian parties, the Arab,
Astana and Western players, and, indeed, all members
of the Council, in the spirit of promoting coordination,
coherence and complementarity on Syria and eliciting
positive progress, step for step and step by step, in a
reciprocal and verifiable manner, consistent with my
mandate in resolution 2254 (2015).
Alongside that, it is time to see the Syrians engage
in dialogue and return to discussing their own future
together in the Constitutional Committee. I will continue
to work to facilitate a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned
political resolution that restores Syria’s sovereignty,
4/23

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Pedersen for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mudawi.

For the first time in the history of the crisis, people
across every subdistrict in Syria are experiencing
some degree of humanitarian stress. Some 12 million
people — more than 50 per cent of the population — are
currently food insecure, and a further 2.9 million are
at risk of sliding into hunger. In addition, recent data
show that malnutrition is on the rise, with stunting
and maternal malnutrition rates reaching levels never
seen before.
The earthquake compounded that already bleak
humanitarian situation. More than 330,000 people
remain displaced, and thousands more have lost access
to basic services and livelihoods. The situation is still
critical for families who remain in collective shelters,
camps and informal settlements. Protection concerns,
including gender-based violence, and mental health
needs are on the rise. With the water crisis ongoing,
the risk of cholera and other water-borne diseases lurks
around the corner as the hot season approaches.
The United Nations and partners continue
large-scale efforts to respond to the most urgent
humanitarian needs. In the coming months and years,
support from donors and the Council will be crucial
in addressing ongoing essential needs, including
the early-recovery response. The preliminary Syria
earthquake recovery needs assessment has estimated
that there to be almost $9 billion in damage and
losses, and $14.8 billion in recovery needs over the
next three-year period. In this context, and despite a
challenging operating environment, the United Nations
and its partners continue to deliver life-saving aid
and protection services to people throughout Syria,
wherever they are located, by every means possible.
23-15026

30/05/2023

The situation in the Middle East

I welcome the decision by the Government of Syria
to extend, until 13 August, the emergency measures
implemented since the earthquakes to facilitate the
delivery of humanitarian assistance, including access
for shipment and relief teams via the Al-Rai and Bab
Al-Salam border crossings. These border crossings have
been a vital complement to the massive cross-border
assistance operation through Bab Al-Hawa, expanding
reach and lowering costs. Using all three crossings, the
United Nations and our humanitarian partners have
rapidly scaled up the cross-border response. More than
2,330 trucks loaded with aid from seven United Nations
agencies have crossed into north-west Syria since the
earthquakes struck.
The people inside Syria have welcomed the
opportunity to speak directly with the United Nations.
Many have expressed deep fears for themselves
and for their children’s future. In north-west Syria,
humanitarians will expand the hotline for the prevention
of sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment to answer
requests for support, receive complaints and ensure we
are listening carefully to what affected people need.
The vital importance of sustained cross-border
access into north-west Syria was already clear before the
earthquakes. It has only become clearer and more urgent
now. As the Secretary-General has said, a 12-month
extension of the Security Council’s authorization of
the cross-border mechanism is indispensable. It is a
matter of life and death for millions of people in northwest Syria.
We continue to make progress on early-recovery and
livelihood programming, with funding shared equally
between Government-controlled areas and north-west
Syria. This has become even more important following
the February earthquakes in helping the people of Syria
recover their livelihoods and their ability to provide
even the basic necessities of life for themselves and
their families.
The situation in Syria is too fragile, the needs are
too great and too many lives are at stake not to ensure
sustained humanitarian access via every possible
modality, including cross-border and cross-line
missions. In the north-east, the cross-line mission to
Tel Abyad was completed last week. The third crossline mission to the Ras Al-Ayn–Tel Abyad area is a
welcome step. Unfortunately, efforts to restart the
vital cross-line missions to north-west Syria are still
being delayed. In line with international humanitarian

S/PV.9333

law, all parties must allow and facilitate the rapid and
unimpeded passage of humanitarian relief for civilians
in need and ensure humanitarian workers the freedom
of movement to perform their work.
I am also concerned by the recent closure of the
border crossings between Iraq and Syria and its
potential impact on the vulnerabilities in north-east
Syria. Any disruption to the availability of essentials
will only deepen needs and worsen the situation of
people living in those areas.
I reiterate that there are more people in need of aid
in Syria than at any other time in the conflict. Yet we
are witnessing dangerously dwindling resources for the
humanitarian response. The revised 2023 humanitarian
response plan requires $5.4 billion to assist 14.2 million
people throughout Syria, across all areas of control.
Five months into the year, it is less than 10 per cent
funded. The ramifications of this shortfall are very real:
the World Food Programme, for example, is warning
that at the current rate, 2.5 million people are at risk of
losing food or cash assistance from July onward.
We hope the upcoming seventh Brussels
Conference, hosted by the European Union on
14 and 15 June, will see the generous pledges and swift
disbursements of the funding required to support the
Syrian people and neighbouring countries generously
hosting so many refugees. I call for greater solidarity
and urgently increased humanitarian funding to save
lives and prevent further suffering.
Syrians need the support of the international
community now more than at any time in the past 12
years. While efforts continue towards achieving a lasting
political solution, we must ensure that the urgent needs
of women, men and children of Syria — life-saving
aid and early recovery — are made a priority and
adequately resourced and funded. They are counting
on the Council’s support to stay the course.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Mudawi for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Aveline.
Ms. Aveline: I thank you, Madam President,
for this opportunity to share the stories and plight of
Syrians affected by over 12 years of crisis.
I have just returned from Syria where I heard
women, teachers and young Syrians desperately calling
for a better future — one that is filled with hope — and

23-150265/23

S/PV.9333

The situation in the Middle East

a dignified life. These testimonies of Syrians across
Syria are often shared with the Norwegian Refugee
Council (NRC). For example, a parent recently shared
with us the uncertainty felt by families and children in
camps, saying,
“The future for people here is to live through the
day. No one thinks about tomorrow. People live
from day to day.”
Those families, like the more than 15 million Syrians
in need of assistance, are constantly struggling to cope
with the multiple crises facing the country.
Council members have all been well briefed about
the tragic statistics that have worsened in Syria, and
they are well aware that humanitarian needs are now
at their greatest in Syria since the start of the crisis.
They are also all aware that the economy and public
services are already at the point of collapse, pushing
more families into poverty. These facts are well known;
however, the current response to these challenges
remains severely inadequate.
It has now been over three months since the
earthquakes devastated parts of Syria and added an
additional layer of suffering to an existing crisis.
Witnessing first-hand the worsening trauma in Aleppo
after the earthquakes was unbearable.
The donor funding support for early recovery
in earthquake-affected areas of Syria was welcome.
However, this support needs to be extended to all
the conflict-affected communities in Syria in need
of rehabilitation and recovery. This support needs to
be provided to communities that want to send their
children to safe schools, need access to electricity to
keep warm, and need a clean and sustainable water
supply and dignified shelter.
International donor support for early recovery and
rehabilitation of civilian infrastructure is a consistent
call made by many Syrians we meet daily. I can
assure you, Madam President, from a programming
perspective, that it is possible to implement long-term
rehabilitation in a principled and conflict-sensitive
way. Actors such as the NRC, inter alia, have proven
this across Syria. Instead of relying on temporary fixes,
now is the time to prioritize long-term, sustainable and
dignified access to essential services and to foster selfreliance and durable solutions.
It is always painful to be reminded of our collective
failure in making substantial progress on durable
6/23

30/05/2023

solutions for the millions of displaced Syrians over the
span of more than a decade. Basic services, property
rights and security concerns hinder durable solutions
for displaced Syrians.
I recently have heard from a woman who has returned
to rural Damascus about how she cannot legally own
her own home in the absence of her husband, because of
the persistent legal and cultural barriers that she faces.
That is representative of the situation of women across
the country. Many other barriers to return to Syria
remain, and the conditions are not conducive for a safe
and sustainable return.
Recent announcements and practices in host
countries have raised concerns about forced returns and
future deportations of Syrian refugees. That once again
reinforces the urgent need for a systematic monitoring
of return movements to better protect returnees. The
protection of refugees in host countries and the principle
of non-refoulement need to also be respected now more
than ever. Better donor funding, as well as appropriate
governmental policy approaches in host countries and
in Syria, would provide displaced Syrians with the
resilience, rights and protection they need and deserve.
This meeting comes at a crucial me for long-term
access pathways in Syria. Progress towards improved
assistance, protection, recovery and durable solutions
will remain possible only with sustained and predictable
access, including via the reauthorization of resolution
2672 (2023).
We welcome recent progress in humanitarian
access, including the Council’s historic action for assets
freezes in sanctions regimes and the reopening of border
crossings in Syria. Those developments provide vital
access to reach people in need. However, they must be
complemented by renewing humanitarian safeguards
in sanctions and authorizing the United Nations crossborder response in Syria. That mechanism ensures
response continuity, transparency, oversight and access
to funding for Syrian non-governmental organizations.
Disruptions to cross-border access risk cutting off
4.5 million people in north-west Syria from an efficient
assistance modality.
The cross-border resolution must be renewed
for a minimum of 12 months and the bilateral access
agreements should be extended and expanded. It is also
essential to scale up cross-line assistance in a principled
manner and waive administrative impediments. We
must depoliticize access modalities and the broader
23-15026

30/05/2023

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9333

Syrian humanitarian response, allowing all actors to
work efficiently and in principled way.

early-recovery projects remain crucial for restoring
basic services.

For too long the response in Syria has been marred
by political decisions, while the people of Syria continue
to suffer. Let us collectively build on the policy gains
made recently and strive for a more dignified and
needs-based humanitarian response for Syrians.

In the last week’s annual Council open debate on the
protection of civilians (see S/PV.9327), the importance
of compliance with international humanitarian law was
emphasized as a means to alleviate the humanitarian
consequences of armed conflicts and lay groundwork for
sustainable peace, stability and prosperity. Respecting
international humanitarian law is not optional; it is
a legal obligation. Protecting civilians and civilian
infrastructure during armed conflict is vital. Deliberate
attacks on and the destruction of objects indispensable
for the survival of the civilian population, such as health
centres and schools, are prohibited and detrimentally
impact health and livelihood, thereby undermining
protection, especially of women, children and persons
with disabilities.

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Aveline for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank Special
Envoy Pedersen and Ms. Ghada Eltahir Mudawi for
their comprehensive briefings and updates. I also thank
Ms. Morgane Aveline for her insightful presentation.
I welcome to this meeting the delegations of the
Syrian Arab Republic, the Islamic Republic of Iran
and Türkiye.
I will deliver this statement on behalf of Brazil
and Switzerland, as co-penholders of the Syrian
humanitarian file.
The humanitarian situation in Syria remains dire.
Severe challenges are felt across various facets of life:
food insecurity, limited access to water, inadequate
sanitation, overcrowding in shelters and displacement,
inadequate access to health services coupled with
economic strain significantly elevate the risk of disease
outbreaks. The recurring displacement as a result of the
protracted conflict further compounds the hardships of
internally displaced persons, impeding their access to
basic services.
We welcome the fact that the United Nations
can continue delivering much-needed humanitarian
assistance through the border crossing of Bab Al-Salam
and Al-Rai, as recently reauthorized by the Syrian
Government for another three months. The expanded
access, which has allowed well over 2,000 tracks to
cross north-west Syria since the earthquakes, is having
a positive impact on the efforts to support Syrian people.
Yet, in view of the high levels of humanitarian need,
predictability remains key. All aspects of resolution
2672 (2023) must continue to be implemented. We
recall that all aid modalities, including cross-line and
cross-border modalities, should be used. We urge all
parties to eliminate barriers to cross-line and crossborder humanitarian deliveries across Syria, ensuring
unobstructed access for aid workers. Moreover,

Food insecurity was also addressed during the
annual open debate. Armed conflicts impair social
and economic networks, erode resilience and disrupt
market and supply chains, intensifying long-term food
insecurity. According to the World Food Programme,
more than half of Syria’s population of 12.1 million
people, suffer from food insecurity. Roughly, 5.6 million
people receive monthly World Food Programme food
assistance. It is deeply regrettable that, owing to a
severe lack of funding and supply chain disruptions, the
World Food Programme will most likely have to stop
supporting 2 million Syrians with food assistance from
July onwards, which corresponds to 40 per cent of its
caseload. To address Syria’s huge humanitarian needs,
the United Nations and its partners require adequate
funding for the 2023 humanitarian response plan, and
all components of the plan should be financed. That
is important for the survival of the Syrian population
and a sustainable recovery to enhance livelihoods and
expand access to basic services.
The earthquakes have exacerbated the pre-existing
considerable protection needs. It is essential that those
concerns are recognized and adequately considered
in the humanitarian response. They include issues of
legal identity, housing, land and property rights and the
safeguarding of vulnerable individuals, such as those
with disabilities, those at risk of sexual and genderbased violence and children.
It is important not to overlook the specific needs and
vulnerabilities faced by women and the perilous coping
mechanisms they are sometimes forced to resort to. It

23-150267/23

S/PV.9333

The situation in the Middle East

is crucial to address those risks, integrating women’s
specific needs into humanitarian response strategies,
striving for their empowerment and protection and
recognizing their significant role in peacebuilding.
At the same time, women in Syria have once
again taken over the role of first responders. It is time
that their efforts and capacities are acknowledged,
thus enabling them to actively participate in
humanitarian
programming,
negotiation
and
decision-making processes.
In conclusion, we highlight the importance of
keeping the humanitarian imperative at the centre of
our debates. Our shared responsibility is to provide the
Syrian people with the chance to escape this cycle of
suffering and build a better future.
I will now speak in my national capacity regarding
the political aspects of the conflict.
This year marks 12 long, arduous years since the
beginning of the Syrian crisis, a conflict that continues
with no solution insight. Brazil remains convinced that
only a Syrian-owned and -led United Nations-facilitated
political process, with due regard to the preservation
of Syria’s territorial integrity, will bring lasting peace.
A military solution remains elusive and deleterious for
Syria’s future.
In that regard, resolution 2254 (2015) remains key.
It provides a clear road map for this political process.
We express our gratitude to the Special Envoy for his
steady efforts to implement its provisions, including
his continuous engagement with all stakeholders.
The resumption of a meaningful dialogue aimed at
reconciliation should be a priority for our stakeholders.
We call for the reconvening of the small body of the
Constitutional Committee, with renewed political will.
A comprehensive ceasefire is also urgent.
Brazil condemns all forms of terrorism and attacks
by foreign forces. The path towards reconciliation
is full of challenges, but we agree with the Special
Envoy — tackling outstanding issues gradually could
ensure a more steady course to a peaceful resolution.
Brazil welcomes Syria’s recent readmission to
the League of Arab States and its participation in the
Arab League Summit in Jeddah. Moreover, the posture
of the Syrian Government in response to the recent
tragic earthquakes can open other avenues for further
cooperation, thus contributing to a more positive
dynamic in the Syrian file.
8/23

30/05/2023

Furthermore, Brazil welcomes the historic
agreement signed in March by Saudi Arabia and Iran
aiming to re-establish diplomatic relations between the
two countries. The agreement can perhaps yield a new
dynamic in the region to foster dialogue as a tool for
promoting stability in the Middle East.
In conclusion, Brazil calls on all parties to put the
needs of civilians first in the search for a viable solution
to this terrible conflict. The preservation of human life
and dignity should be at the heart of our efforts. The
people of Syria deserve nothing less than a peaceful,
stable and prosperous country to live in.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Special Envoy Pedersen and
Ms. Mudawi for their informative briefings. I would
also like to appreciate and thank Ms. Aveline for her
sobering update about the needs on the ground. We are
grateful for all she does alongside so many humanitarian
workers to assist the Syrian people in their time of need.
Recent public attention has focused on the evolving
relationship between Syria and its neighbours, but this
obscures a simple fact. The situation within Syria has
not fundamentally changed for the better. For more
than 12 years of war and the recent earthquake, the
humanitarian crisis in Syria has reached new heights.
More than 6.8 million Syrians remain displaced
within Syria, and another 5.3 million live as refugees
in neighbouring countries. And as we speak, Syria
continues to export instability to neighbouring States
and remains a safe haven for extremists and terrorist
groups. In short, the Syrian crisis remains a staggering
human tragedy and a threat to regional and international
peace and security.
The Al-Assad regime has cynically tried to seize
on the outpouring of international support following
the earthquakes to reclaim its place on the world stage,
but merely sitting at the same table as other regional
leaders does nothing to help the people of Syria.
And while the United States welcomed this month’s
announcement that the United Nations will continue
to have access to Bab Al-Salam and Al-Rai border
crossings through 13 August, the truth is that human
suffering does not occur in three-month increments
and the devastation caused by the earthquakes will take
much longer than another three months to alleviate. If
the Al-Assad regime wants to help the Syrian people, it
should act immediately and announce that it will keep
23-15026

30/05/2023

The situation in the Middle East

the Bab Al-Salam and Al-Rai crossings open through at
least August 2024 or as long as it takes.
And even if the Al-Assad regime does the right
thing, it is frankly no substitute for actions by the
Council, which has a responsibility to respond to the
dire humanitarian needs of the Syrian people. As we
heard, the Secretary-General said that a 12-month
extension is indispensable, and it is a matter of life and
death for the Syrian people. Due to its scale and scope,
the United Nations humanitarian response requires
longer timelines for planning and implementation,
particularly of early-recovery projects, and the cost
savings associated with the 12-month timeline are
significant and ever more essential at a time of
decreasing humanitarian contributions, given vast
global needs.
Immediately after the earthquake in February, we
saw just how insufficient one border crossing point was,
given was given the scale of the humanitarian challenge.
And we saw what happened when that one crossing,
Bab Al-Hawa, temporarily closed. Think of the lives
that could have been saved had the United Nations been
able to use several crossings to immediately surge the
delivery of assistance into north-western Syria. Going
forward, the United Nations must have multiple access
options available.
For that reason, the United States will work with
the penholders to seek a 12-month authorization of all
border crossings — Bab Al-Hawa, Bab Al-Salam and
Al-Rai — through a Security Council resolution in
July. We encourage all Council members to back that
resolution, which will provide confidence, predictability
and desperately needed support for humanitarian
workers, the United Nations and the Syrian people.
At the same time, we also encourage additional
progress on cross-line assistance to all areas of Syria.
We support all modalities to ensure the delivery of
assistance through the most efficient and safe means.
We welcome the completion of the cross-line delivery to
Ras Al-Ayn and Tell Abyad on 24 May, and we remain
concerned about the lack of progress on long-delayed
cross-line missions to Rukban.
Before I conclude, I also want to discuss the
political situation. The Jeddah Declaration from the
Arab League Summit stressed the need for the regime
to take effective, practical steps to resolve the conflict
in line with resolution 2254 (2015). We expect the
members of the League of Arab States to hold Syria

S/PV.9333

to the commitment it made to the United Nations
framework at the Summit. One practical step the regime
can take is to release the more than 130,000 detainees it
holds in its prisons and torture chambers and to provide
an accounting of those who have disappeared or died.
The United States also calls on other actors to release
and provide more information on the unjustly detained,
including those taken by terrorist groups such as Da’esh
and Al-Nusra Front. Although the Al-Assad regime
claims it is ready to work with actors in the region to
receive refugees, we see no indication that the regime is
committed to ending its harassment, arbitrary detention,
torture and ill-treatment of returnees. Moreover, the
regime, along with Russia, has continued to launch air
strikes that impact camps for the internally displaced
in northern Syria. We must also press the Al-Assad
regime to create the conditions for the safe, voluntary
and dignified return of refugees. And the countries
that have generously hosted millions of refugees must
refrain from prematurely pressing them to return.
Finally, the Council must speak with one voice
on the need for the Syrian regime to return to the
Constitutional Committee. Until there is political
progress towards a durable resolution of the conflict,
the United States’ sanctions will remain in place. And to
those who blame sanctions for Syria’s current state, let
us be serious. Al-Assad shattered Syria with his brutal
war and heinous human rights violations. The United
States will continue to hold the regime accountable for
its abuses, including torture and killings. At the same
time, however, we will continue to help to provide
desperately needed humanitarian assistance to the
most vulnerable, and we ask that others provide more.
Syrians should not be forced to live day by day, as we
heard from Ms. Aveline. We will continue to work
with the Council and all Member States to build a
more reliable future for the Syrian people, particularly
women and children.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I have the
honour to make this statement on behalf of the three
African members of the Security Council (A3), Ghana,
Mozambique and my own country, Gabon.
We thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and
Deputy Director Ghada Mudawi for their informative
briefings. We also listened attentively to Ms. Morgan
Aveline’s briefing. We welcome the participation of
the representatives of the Syrian Arab Republic, the
Islamic Republic of Iran and the Republic of Türkiye in
today’s meeting.

23-150269/23

S/PV.9333

The situation in the Middle East

30/05/2023

For the past 12 years, Syria has been in the grip
of a security and humanitarian crisis whose impact on
the population was exacerbated by the earthquake that
struck the country on 6 February. The A3 welcomes
the Government of Syria’s decision to extend the
emergency measures, including the opening of two
new crossings at Bab Al-Salam and Al-Rai for three
months, from 13 May to 13 August. Those measures
have enabled United Nations agencies to continue
delivering humanitarian aid in north-west Syria to
populations in need. That is a particularly encouraging
development when we consider the impact of the crossborder mechanism. As of 23 May, 2,285 truckloads of
aid had been transported since 6 February, with the help
of 7 United Nations agencies, via those two additional
border crossings and the Bab-Al Hawa crossing. A total
of 106 cross-border missions have been carried out in
north-west Syria since the first inter-agency convoy
crossed into Idlib on 14 February.

class and the crisis of confidence among its various
key actors have undermined the chances of fulfilling
that dialogue currently taking place within the
Constitutional Committee, whose inclusive architecture
has nevertheless raised hopes. We urge all the parties to
set aside their differences at a time when humanitarian
urgency must prevail.

Aid delivery across the front lines remains marginal,
however. The A3 has continued to closely monitor the
United Nations engagement with the parties aimed at
reversing that trend, because the population’s needs,
which are urgent and growing steadily, far exceed
the current response capacities. Proactive measures
must be taken to ensure that 2.5 million people do
not become food insecure by July. It is important to
emphasize that some of the challenges facing Syria
have to do with reliable access to sufficient supplies of
clean water throughout the north of the country, against
a backdrop of the coronavirus disease and cholera
pandemics, as well as a total collapse of social and
basic services and an increase in protection concerns
such as gender-based violence and psychological
disorders, particularly among women. The A3 notes
with interest that the $398 million funding goal for the
Syria earthquake flash appeal has been met. We hope
that the seventh Brussels conference in support of the
future of Syria and the region, scheduled for 14 and
15 June, will attract similar international support.

The A3 is concerned about the persistence of
hostilities, particularly in northern Syria. We reiterate
our call for an immediate ceasefire. We also reiterate
our call on all the parties to the conflict to respect
their obligations under international humanitarian law,
in particular by ensuring that no civilians or civilian
objects are harmed during military operations. The A3
also remains concerned about the presence of foreign
military forces, which could undermine regional and
international security, and we reiterate that Syria should
not be used as a battleground for geopolitical rivalries.

On the political front, national unity must prevail
if a political solution that will enable the Syrian people
to regain peace and security is to be achieved. The
political solution is the main path to peace in Syria.
It requires a cessation of hostilities, the restoration of
State authority over the entire territory of Syria and an
inclusive good-faith dialogue involving all segments
of Syrian society, including women, young people and
minority groups. The fragmentation of Syria’s political
10/23

We also encourage regional players to play their
roles and provide support in the pursuit of peace and
stability. A strong, good-faith commitment on the part
of neighbouring countries is fundamental to achieving
that. In that regard, we welcome Syria’s participation in
the summit of the League of Arab States held recently
in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. We reaffirm the importance
of keeping in mind the fact that resolution 2254 (2015)
remains the main road map for achieving the desired
political solution to the Syrian crisis, and it should
be done with respect for the Syrian Arab Republic’s
national sovereignty and territorial integrity.

In conclusion, the A3 reiterates its support for
Mr. Pedersen in his quest for the only possible solution,
which is a political one, to the conflict that is tearing
Syria apart, and for which the country’s people are
paying the heaviest price. All of the parties involved and
the international community as a whole should operate
within a strictly humanitarian framework, without any
politicization, and in the interests of the Syrian people.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen,
Deputy Director Ghada Mudawi and Ms. Morgane
Aveline for their briefings.
The increasing restoration of Damascus’s ties
with its regional environment is of key importance
to the political settlement process in Syria. We
welcome the decision taken on 7 May by the Council
of Foreign Ministers of the League of Arab States
at its extraordinary session in Cairo to restore the
23-15026

30/05/2023

The situation in the Middle East

participation of the Syrian Arab Republic in meetings
of the Council of the Arab League and in all of the
structures of the League — and we welcome in
particular the participation of President Bashar
Al-Assad in the League’s summit, given that Syria is
one of its founding States. That long-awaited step was
a logical outcome of the process of Syria’s reintegration
into the Arab family — a scenario for which Russia
has always consistently advocated. We have worked for
many years with regional players, encouraging them to
restore full-fledged relations with Damascus.
The decision of the Council of the League of Arab
States demonstrated the desire of the countries of the
Arab world to strengthen the coordination of actions
to resolve current regional and international issues,
reaffirming their willingness to pursue an independent
policy on the world stage based on their own fundamental
interests. In that context, we hope that the Arab countries
will step up their support to the Syrian Arab Republic
in its post-conflict reconstruction endeavours.
There has also been positive momentum in the
normalization process between Syria and Türkiye. On
10 May, a quadrilateral Astana format meeting was
held in Moscow between the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of Russia, Iran, Syria and Türkiye, during
which participants reaffirmed their commitment to
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria and to
fighting terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
and underscored the need for increased international
assistance to Damascus, including for the voluntary,
safe and dignified return of Syrians to their homeland
and for post-conflict recovery.
Unfortunately, instead of supporting the efforts of
regional actors, who have clearly demonstrated their
ability to single-handedly resolve issues within the
Arab family, our Western colleagues continue to exert
pressure, including by force, on the Syrian authorities
and the countries of the region, dissuading them from
engaging in dialogue with Damascus.
In that context, we should like once again point
to the destructive policy of the United States, which
is apparently no longer satisfied with merely pumping
weapons into the illegal armed formations they have
created in the trans-Euphrates and Al-Tanf regions.
According to our information, Washington has started
to establish a so-called Free Syrian Army around
Raqqa, with the participation of local Arab tribes and
militants from Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and

S/PV.9333

other terrorist organizations. The aim is clear: to use
those fighters against the legitimate authorities of the
Syrian Arab Republic to destabilize the country.
We note with concern the intensification of Israeli air
strikes against Syrian territory, including by violating
the airspace of neighbouring countries. In April alone,
there were approximately 10 random strikes, which not
only destroyed civilian infrastructure — including the
Aleppo airport and Latakia port — but also killed and
injured civilians. We condemn such violent acts, which
violate the sovereignty of Syria and its Arab neighbours.
It is deeply regrettable that there has been no reaction
whatsoever from the leadership of the United Nations.
At the same time, arbitrary special mechanisms
continue to be churned out to investigate incidents
and protect human rights in Syria, with a structure
for missing persons next in line. Such entities, the
non-consensual creation of which is being pushed by
a group of States in the General Assembly and Human
Rights Council, have no added value. Gathering
compromising materials on the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic at the behest of Washington and
Brussels with a view to future judicial proceedings
only pushes the prospects of a political settlement in
Syria further away.
On the political track, we continue to support the
mediation efforts of Special Envoy Pedersen to advance
the process of a Syrian settlement in strict compliance
with resolution 2254 (2015) and without any external
interference. In that connection, we consider it
important that the Special Envoy adhere strictly to his
mandate, which is based on facilitating intra-Syrian
dialogue — the optimal format for which we believe
is the Constitutional Committee. At the same time, we
believe that decisions in principle on the parameters for
future rounds of intra-Syrian consultations should be
made by the Syrians themselves.
We share the alarming assessment that the
humanitarian situation in Syria, exacerbated by the
earthquake in February, continues to deteriorate. The
existing needs of 15 million people, in addition to the
fuel and water crises and the cholera outbreak, have
been compounded by widespread destruction and a new
wave of internally displaced persons. Meanwhile, the
United Nations is woefully short of funds for even the
most basic operations. Only 9 per cent of the annual
humanitarian response plan for Syria for Damascuscontrolled territories has been funded for the five

23-1502611/23

S/PV.9333

The situation in the Middle East

months of 2023. For that reason, inter alia, the World
Food Programme will be forced to reduce its food aid
coverage by 70 per cent.
Here we would like to address the advocates of
the obsolete cross-border mechanism, who have been
fervently advocating for its extension by one year. They
have argued for the need for the long-term planning
of United Nations humanitarian operations, but how
can humanitarians make any plans for Governmentcontrolled territories when the humanitarian plan for
Damascus is so catastrophically underfunded? Their
arguments are therefore flagrant blackmail, a violation
of all humanitarian principles and another blatant
display of double standards.
Moreover, the problems caused by the plundering
of Syrian grain and oil resources by the United States,
as well as the illegal unilateral sanctions by the Western
bloc of States suffocating the country’s economy, are
not going anywhere. We therefore once again appeal
to the United Nations leadership as a whole and to
the new Resident Coordinator in Syria, Mr. Adam
Abdelmoula, to report without delay on the impact of
the unilateral restrictions on the humanitarian situation
in the country. That is all the more pertinent given
that Mr. Abdelmoula’s predecessor reiterated that
commitment during the April round of the informal
interactive dialogue on Syria.
The Syrian Government’s unprecedented decision
to open two border crossings with Türkiye at Bab
Al-Salam and Al-Rai and then to extend them by
three months until 13 August, in addition to the Bab
Al-Hawa crossing point, in accordance with resolution
2672 (2023), has unfortunately not received due credit.
On the contrary, it appears as though that decision has
undermined the prospects for humanitarian supplies
to the insurgent north-west from Damascus. Since
July 2021, only 10 convoys have been able to cross
the contact lines into Idlib, the most recent being in
early January — therefore, none since the devastating
earthquake. A total of just 152 trucks have been
dispatched. It is extremely worrisome that this is
happening despite the acute needs of the population in
the affected areas.
The United Nations leadership has also failed
to react. At the same time, in statements in support
of the cross-border mechanism, we have repeatedly
heard from the Secretary-General and his UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs about a
12/23

30/05/2023

moral imperative that we must follow in preserving the
cross-border mechanism. That is a rather strange moral
imperative, given that it applies only to the terrorists
in Idlib. As for the rest of the country, that moral
imperative is nowhere to be seen.
At the same time, more than 1,700 trucks have
entered from Türkiye through three checkpoints
between February and April, while the United Nations
has sent more than 100 inter-agency missions to the
enclave. The United Nations emergency humanitarian
appeal for the north-west of Syria, which is not under
Damascus’ control, has raised a whopping $400 million
for 5 million people and is already fully funded.
The United Nations mandate for the use of the
cross-border mechanism for humanitarian assistance,
as I have already mentioned, expires on 10 July. We
see no reason at all to extend it. The United Nations
has already proven that, with contact and coordination
with the national Government, it can work without
a Council resolution, which should finally cease to
exist. In addition, it is high time for the issue of the
return of Syrian refugees to now be dealt with in a
practical manner.
On the subject of refugees, another so-called
donor conference for Syria is scheduled to take place
in Brussels in June. Once again, representatives of the
Syrian authorities have not been invited. In fact, the
West continues to criminally freeze the Syrian refugee
crisis in neighbouring countries, condemning people
to live in tents, even in winter. Helping to resolve
the country’s internal issues, building reserves for
independent development and restoring at least the
basic infrastructure are what is really expected from
the donors. Efforts to respond to Syria’s humanitarian
needs must be based, without preconditions, on the
interests of the Syrian people.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Special Envoy
Pedersen, Ms. Mudawi and Ms. Aveline for their remarks.
We are now well into the thirteenth year of the
tragic Syrian conflict. More than 500,000 Syrians have
been killed, half of the country’s pre-war population
is displaced, and credible reports indicate that 90 per
cent of Syrians are now destitute and much of the
infrastructure destroyed. As we heard, the economy is
in shambles. Millions of Syrians need urgent assistance,
with hundreds of thousands of them living in makeshift
tents. Over 100,000 people are still unaccounted for,
forcefully disappeared, detained or missing. Violence,
23-15026

30/05/2023

The situation in the Middle East

including from terrorist groups, has not stopped. Despite
their precarious conditions, millions of refugees must
now cope with another anxiety: the spectre of a forced
and undignified return to Syria, a country disfigured by
conflict. It comes as no surprise that fewer than 1 in 10
Syrians want to return to Syria voluntarily nowadays.
As we heard, Syria’s humanitarian demands are
the biggest in the world, and the situation is worsening,
including in the aftermath of the earthquake.
We commend all the donors that are providing
indispensable aid. We are in awe of the tireless
efforts of local and international relief workers — and
Ms. Aveline gave us a taste of what it takes to help
Syrians nowadays — who pursue their noble mission
of assisting everyone wherever possible in Syria and
providing them with a lifeline, especially women and
children. The extension of the border crossings at Bab
Al-Salam and Al-Rai until August is clear recognition
of the vital need for unfettered access for humanitarian
aid to all Syrians. We urge the Syrian regime to keep the
crossings open for as long as they are needed. We believe
that the cross-border authorization for Bab Al-Hawa
remains indispensable to securing humanitarian access
and providing life-saving aid to more than 4 million
people in north-west Syria.
More than 130,000 Syrians arbitrarily deprived
of their liberty have been forcibly disappeared.
Albania has continued to highlight that critical issue
in the monthly discussions in the Security Council,
asking for concrete action on it. We welcome the draft
resolution being submitted to the General Assembly
on the establishment of a new institution to determine
the whereabouts of the missing. We call on all States
Members of the United Nations to acknowledge the
purely humanitarian character of that initiative and to
refrain from any form of politicization. Its sole aim is
to provide closure for all Syrians who have remained
without news about their loved ones, and whatever
their cases may be, to provide those loved ones with
a dignified burial. Those are matters that we should
all agree on, and we should never succumb to the
temptation of scoring political points off the backs of
the aggrieved.
We all know that the Syrian tragedy will continue
to unfold before our eyes if there is no proper, genuine
and inclusive political process. The root cause of all
the suffering in Syria is political and can be alleviated
only by a just and lasting political solution. We deplore
the impasse in the Constitutional Committee and the

S/PV.9333

regime’s apparent lack of good faith regarding enabling
the political transition that Syria desperately needs, in
line with resolution 2254 (2015), which after nearly a
decade remains unimplemented, despite the tireless
efforts of the Special Envoy.
A few weeks ago, Syria was readmitted to the
League of Arab States. We would like to believe that the
regime will see it not as a concession, or as acceptance
that its scorched-earth strategy in the war has worked,
but rather as a hand extended by its Arab neighbours
to all of the Syrian people. We sincerely hope that the
new development will help create a new impetus and
the conditions for the full implementation of resolution
2254 (2015), so that we can see the start of a Syrian-led
transition towards a free, democratic and prosperous
Syria for all Syrians. In our view, it will require that
the regime commit seriously to political reforms, take
responsibility for war crimes, ensure the safe return of
some 6 million refugees and the dismantling of a drugproducing and smuggling network that has turned Syria
into a narco-State, with serious regional implications.
That will help the country and its reconstruction.
We continue to believe that justice and rights are
indispensable to ensuring lasting peace in Syria and
everywhere. Ending impunity for serious crimes by
ensuring that their perpetrators are held accountable
for their violations will therefore lay the foundations
for reconciliation and a future that is different from and
better than the terrible past in Syria.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): Our thanks go to Special
Envoy Pedersen, Ms. Mudawi and Ms. Aveline for
their briefings.
The politics in the region have shifted notably with
the decision of the League of Arab States to readmit
Syria amid a reduction in tensions in the Middle East.
Japan appreciates the efforts by Arab countries to
improve the situation in Syria, in particular the Jeddah
Arab League summit and the meeting held earlier this
month in Amman between the Foreign Ministers of
Syria, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Iraq. In the
changing regional dynamics, what remains important
is that the Syrian Government take specific actions to
improve the humanitarian situation and implement its
obligations under resolution 2254 (2015). In that regard,
Japan will continue to call directly on the Syrian
Government to take constructive and tangible action.
Syrians remain desperately in need of aid. On top
of the devastation of war, many are still suffering from

23-1502613/23

S/PV.9333

The situation in the Middle East

the damage caused by the earthquakes earlier this year.
Japan recently announced an additional $14.3 million in
assistance to build earthquake resilience by conducting
damage assessments of buildings and restoring critical
infrastructure in Aleppo and Latakia. As a country that
has suffered through many earthquakes in the past,
Japan truly understands the feelings of the Syrians
affected and is willing to consider additional assistance
that responds to the needs on the ground. It will be
vital to ensure smooth humanitarian access to the
devastated areas. In that context, we welcome the Syrian
Government’s three-month extension of its approval for
the two additional crossings at Bab Al-Salam and Al-Rai
for emergency humanitarian assistance, including
earthquake relief. Resolution 2672 (2023) on the crossborder aid mechanism should again be extended in July
so that all aid modalities, including early-recovery and
cross-line assistance, can continue. As members of the
Security Council, we should continue to address the
urgent humanitarian needs of the Syrian people.
The Syrian Government should not be granted
immunity for what it has done to its own people, even
given the new regional dynamics. That is particularly
true with regard to the issue of missing persons, as the
fate of more than 100,000 people remains unknown.
With that in mind, Japan has heard the calls, including
from the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy, to
establish an independent institution to determine the
fate of the missing. We support the objectives of such
an institution and are ready to engage constructively to
ensure that it will be accountable and effective.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I thank Special Envoy
Pedersen, Deputy Director Mudawi and Ms. Aveline for
their remarks today. Their testimonies are a sobering
reminder of the attention that we must continue to pay
to Syria.
As we just heard from our briefers, the depth and
scale of humanitarian needs all over Syria are barely
within comprehension. Millions of Syrian men, women
and children continue to suffer in the brutal conflict.
Meanwhile, the United Nations and its humanitarian
partners continue to try to meet the staggering needs
within Syria, despite the modest resources they are
allocated and the major challenges they face in a
complex emergency humanitarian setting.
As we have said many times before, Syria is first and
foremost a protection crisis. Half of Syria’s population
is still dealing with hunger, with malnutrition rates
14/23

30/05/2023

on the rise. More than 600,000 children under the age
of five are already stunted, leaving them contending
with irreversible physical and psychological damage.
Around 55,000 people are stuck in the spiralling
disaster of the Al-Hol camp in north-east Syria, with
an estimated two-thirds of the camp’s children under
five years of age. Only half of the pregnant women
and new mothers in all the displacement camps have
access to maternal health services and emergency care,
while 8.5 million people are in need of assistance as
a result of gender-based violence and the so-called
widow camps in the north-west are largely neglected
and under the radar. With no clear plan or strategy in
sight for rehabilitation, repatriations or returns, we are
witnessing a lost generation of women and children
expand before our eyes.
Against that backdrop, Malta commends the work
of the United Nations in reaching an agreement with
the Syrian regime in Damascus to extend the opening
of the humanitarian border crossing points at Bab
Al-Salam and Al-Rai for another two months. We
are also looking forward to the holding on 15 June of
the seventh Brussels Conference on supporting the
future of Syria and the region, and we hope it will
make a substantial contribution to addressing Syria’s
humanitarian needs. As July approaches, we hope that
we will see agreement in the Council on the extension
of the cross-border mechanism at Bab Al-Hawa. The
people of Syria and the humanitarians who support
them need steady and predictable humanitarian access
into and throughout the country.
A United Nations-facilitated political process in
line with resolution 2254 (2015) is the only way forward,
and we support the reconvening of the Constitutional
Committee in Geneva. Progress requires a multilateral,
coordinated and inclusive effort that also engages
Syrian civil society and women peacebuilders. No one
party alone can secure a political solution or achieve
just and lasting peace. Meanwhile, the Council must not
forget that millions of Syrian lives have been torn apart
and changed forever by the actions of the Al-Assad
regime over the past 12 years. We must not forget their
continued suffering. We must not forget the forcibly
disappeared or those who remain arbitrarily detained. In
that respect, Malta supports the work of all mechanisms
designed to pursue justice and accountability in Syria
for the atrocities committed over the past decade. We
take note of the Secretary-General’s recommendation
that the General Assembly establish a new institution
23-15026

30/05/2023

The situation in the Middle East

to address the issues of ongoing arbitrary detentions,
missing persons and forced disappearances.
As Syria enters a time of great change, the Council
must be steadfast in support of the work of the Special
Envoy and ensure that Syria’s future does not resemble
its recent, fearful and violent past.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and Deputy Director
Mudawi for their briefings. I also listened carefully to
the statement by the representative of civil society.
Syria was recently readmitted to the League of Arab
States, marking its first reunion with the Arab family
in 12 years. That not only gives a fresh impetus for
the Arab countries to gain strength through solidarity
but also provides a new opportunity for a political
settlement of the Syrian issue. As a sincere friend of
the Arab world, China welcomes and commends that
development. We hope that all the parties can take
advantage of this opportunity to strengthen dialogue
and actively support the work of Special Envoy
Pedersen to advance the political process in Syria so
that it can make progress as soon as possible. China has
consistently supported the solidarity and revitalization
of Arab countries, while actively endorsing Syria’s
return to the League of Arab States and engaging the
parties concerned through its own channels. Countries
outside the region should fully respect the will of the
States of the region and their peoples, refrain from
obstructing the process of dialogue and reconciliation
among countries in the Middle East and strive to create
conditions that are conducive to a political settlement
of the Syrian issue.
China welcomes the Syrian Government’s
extension of the use of border crossings at Bab
Al-Salam and Al-Rai one more time. At the same
time, we call on the party in control of north-western
Syria to stop obstructing the cross-line aid operations.
The Secretariat should make comprehensive and
detailed reports to the Security Council on the specific
difficulties for cross-line aid operations and should
propose solutions. Israel must immediately cease
attacks on all civilian facilities in Syria, including its
airports. Energy supplies are bottlenecks that constrain
humanitarian relief and economic recovery in Syria
and should be advanced as a priority for early recovery.
Explosive remnants of war continue to cause civilian
casualties in Syria and should be incorporated into
the early-recovery process as soon as possible. Illegal

S/PV.9333

unilateral sanctions are a severe obstacle to Syria’s
economic recovery and livelihood improvements and
should be lifted immediately, unconditionally and fully.
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault (France) (spoke in French):
I thank Mr. Geir Pedersen, Ms. Mudawi and Ms. Aveline
for their briefings.
I would like to focus on two points. An unconditional
exoneration of Bashar Al-Assad will not bring about the
lasting peace to which Syrians aspire. His regime and
its allies are responsible for a war with unprecedented
consequences — more than 500,000 dead, more than
130,000 missing, the displacement of 12 million Syrians
and the regime’s use of chemical weapons against the
population on at least nine occasions. In addition to the
war crimes and crimes against humanity committed in
Syria, the United Nations has documented the systematic
use of torture and sexual violence in detention centres
at the hands of the regime. As well as being at the head
of a system of widespread corruption, the regime and
Iranian militias are now the world’s leading producers
and exporters of the drug Captagon, making Syria the
heart of a global drug trade worth billions in profits and
constituting a source of instability for the entire region.
Against that backdrop, as our Minister for
Foreign Affairs reminded us on 23 May, the fight
against impunity remains a priority for France. Those
responsible for war crimes and crimes against humanity
must be held accountable for their actions. European
sanctions are designed specifically in order to restrict
the room to manoeuvre for perpetrators of such crimes,
as well as the sources of funding for the repressive
Syrian apparatus.
For France, there can be no lasting return to
stability in Syria and the region without a political
solution that meets the legitimate aspirations of all
Syrians and enables them to live in peace in their
country. The parameters of the political process are well
known. The Council unanimously adopted resolution
2254 (2015), which lays the foundation for the lasting
peace to which the Syrians aspire. That road map is
being ignored by the regime, which refuses to make any
commitment on the political front. In that context of
deliberate obstruction, we reiterate our full support for
the mediation led by Geir Pedersen and will continue
our demands with regard to the political process. The
regime must make tangible gestures so that a genuine
political process can begin.

23-1502615/23

S/PV.9333

The situation in the Middle East

The absence of a political solution increases the
suffering of Syrians. The humanitarian situation in
Syria is catastrophic primarily because the regime
has committed large-scale crimes against civilians for
more than 12 years. The regime took the opportunity
provided by the earthquakes of 6 February to try
to divert international attention from its abuses,
and the earthquakes further exacerbated an already
deteriorating situation. We must guarantee the delivery
of aid using all the means at our disposal. We call for
extending the use of the Bab Al-Hawa crossing point in
July for 12 months. The earthquakes have also shown
that it is essential to have several cross-border access
points in order to deliver aid as effectively as possible.
Humanitarian operations in Syria remain complex due
to the fragmentation of the country and the nature of
the regime.
The humanitarian needs remain immense. Since
the beginning of the conflict, the European Union
and its member States have been the main donors of
international aid to people affected by the conflict in
Syria. A seventh Brussels Conference on supporting
the future of Syria and the region will be held on
21 June to mobilize the international community once
again and to honour our commitment, particularly with
regard to hosting refugees. Their future lies in Syria.
Regrettably, the regime’s active policy of demographic
engineering and the many political, economic and
security obstacles that continue to be put in refugees’
way make any dignified, safe and voluntary return to
Syria impossible at present.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Special Envoy, Geir Pedersen, and the
Deputy Director of the Office for the Coordination on
Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Ghada Mudawi, for their
briefings. I especially thank Ms. Morgane Aveline,
the representative of civil society, for the information
she provided. I also welcome the presence of the
Permanent Representatives of Syria, Türkiye and Iran
in this Chamber.
Ecuador acknowledges the Syrian Government’s
political will to maintain the Bab Al-Salam and Al-Rai
border crossings, a decision that will allow the continued
distribution of humanitarian aid to north-west Syria.
We also express our intention to support the renewal
of the mandate set forth in resolution 2672 (2023) to
keep the Bab Al-Hawa border crossing operational
and thereby ensure that United Nations agencies and
other humanitarian organizations may continue to
16/23

30/05/2023

reach those who depend on humanitarian assistance for
their survival.
My delegation is concerned about the persistence
of violent attacks that endanger the lives and safety of
civilians and the destruction of strategic infrastructure
essential to livelihoods, in violation of international
humanitarian law. The number of air and ground
incursions, bombardments and rocket attacks continues
to escalate.
Ecuador deplores any indiscriminate use of
violence and insists on urging the parties to silence their
weapons. We reiterate the need not to give up on efforts
to find an inclusive and sustainable political solution to
the crisis in Syria. The role of neighbouring countries
and the international community is crucial in achieving
this goal. We encourage Special Envoy Pedersen to
continue negotiations to engage regional countries
and strategic partners to strive to achieve national and
regional reconciliation, in accordance with resolution
2254 (2015).
We acknowledge the work of the United Nations
teams and partner organizations on the ground. In
particular, we commend the results of early-recovery
projects, livelihood support and cash grants, which
together have contributed to improving the living
conditions of a million people.
However, humanitarian indicators continue
to deteriorate. Statistics from the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs warn of
4.1 million people in need of humanitarian assistance
in north-west Syria, 3.3 million at severe risk of food
insecurity, and more than 1 million children at risk of
not being reintegrated into the education system. As in
any conflict, women, people with disabilities, boys and
girls bear a disproportionate impact of the humanitarian
crisis and its consequences for their physical and
mental health.
We note with alarm the number of people displaced
as a result of the war and whose situation has been
exacerbated after the earthquakes. Some 350,000
Syrians do not have permanent housing, and the shelters
do not provide conditions of security and stability.
We are also concerned about the problems and
needs faced by Syrian families in trying to know the
fate and whereabouts of their missing and arbitrarily
detained relatives. My delegation will support any
initiative promoted in the United Nations to provide
23-15026

30/05/2023

The situation in the Middle East

adequate support for the victims, survivors and families
of missing persons.
Ecuador emphasizes the urgent need to
find a negotiated political solution to the Syrian
crisis — a solution that allows for transitional justice,
national reconciliation, development cooperation and,
above all, an end to the suffering and despair of the
Syrian people. We call once again for the political
will of the Syrian Government and the commitment of
countries of the region and the international community.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank Mr. Geir Pedersen and Ms. Ghada
Mudawi for their valuable briefings. I also thank
Ms. Aveline for her briefing.
Over the past several weeks we have witnessed
important steps taken by Arab States to end the suffering
of the Syrian people caused by the protracted crisis.
That includes the return of the Syrian Arab Republic
to its seat in the League of Arab States, as agreed upon
at the Jeddah and Amman meetings. As a result, Syria
participated in the Arab summit recently held in the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, which was marked by an
atmosphere of optimism and a focus on strengthening
cooperation and joint Arab efforts aimed at addressing
the region’s crises, including the Syrian crisis.
Those efforts are also consistent with shared Arab
interests and fraternal relations that bring together the
Syrian people and all other Arab peoples. In that regard,
we underscore that a political solution is the only way
to end the Syrian crisis and that Syria’s return to the
Arab League is only the starting point, representing an
important step on the Arab-led track towards achieving
peace, in close coordination with the Special Envoy and
the United Nations.
For the first time in the history of the devastating
war that has profoundly affected Syria, developments
on the political track that offer hope for progress are
emerging on the horizon. Those developments have
resulted from initiatives of Arab States, and it is
essential that all actors work to support and strengthen
those efforts through a realistic approach — one that
is primarily aimed at ending the war, establishing
peace and addressing the war’s humanitarian, security
and political consequences for Syria, the region and
the world. We also hope that the various regional
and international efforts will contribute to security
and stability in Syria, thereby preserving Syria’s
independence, unity and territorial integrity.

S/PV.9333

In the context of our aspirations for a better future
for Syria, we stress the need to continue making progress
in the fight against Da’esh, especially considering the
decrease in attacks over recent months. The group
will not stop attempting to seize territory and spread
violence and extremist ideologies, not only in Syria but
across the entire region.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, we must
acknowledge that this acute crisis requires finding
sustainable solutions aimed at resolving it. Despite
international efforts, the level of need on the ground
far exceeds the volume of assistance. According to the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
more than 90 per cent of Syrians live below the poverty
line today. We therefore underscore the need to focus
on early-recovery projects, the reconstruction of
infrastructure and the rehabilitation of public facilities,
while considering ways to revive the economy. We
welcome the measures taken by the Syrian Government
to alleviate the acute humanitarian situation, which
include extending the delivery of aid through the Al-Rai
and Bab Al-Salam crossings for an additional three
months in response to the increased needs resulting
from the recent earthquake.
As for cross-line assistance, we reiterate our deep
concern that, since the onset of this disaster, assistance
convoys to north-west Syria have been unable to pass
due to obstruction by terrorist groups. We continue to
stress the need to ensure that aid reaches all regions
in Syria without hindrance, in accordance with
international humanitarian law and resolution 2672
(2023). Similarly, we look forward to the extension of
the cross-border mechanism into Syria through next
July, which remains an essential lifeline for millions
of Syrians.
In conclusion, we underscore the aspirations of
Syrian refugees to live in dignity and safety, especially
considering the difficult conditions they have endured.
That requires looking into the means available to
facilitate their voluntary return to their homeland.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I join others in thanking Special Envoy Pedersen,
Ms. Eltahir Mudawi and Ms. Aveline for their
informative briefings.
It is clear, from the Special Envoy’s remarks, that
the last month has seen significant developments in
Syria, so now is the time to redouble our efforts for an
inclusive and accountable end to the conflict, so that

23-1502617/23

S/PV.9333

The situation in the Middle East

Syrians enjoy peace, Syria no longer exports instability
to the region and refugees can return in safety and with
dignity. Resolution 2254 (2015) provides the framework
to deliver sustainable and lasting peace for the people
of Syria.
Last week, the United Nations and international
community came together to focus on the protection
of civilians (see S/PV.9327). That includes 15.1 million
people in need because of the impact of 12 years of
war, including 4.1 million people in the north-west of
Syria who faced a crisis on top of a crisis when the
devastating earthquake hit in February.
We welcome the extension of access across Bab
Al-Salam and Al-Rai earlier this month, and we applaud
the United Nations efforts there, but last-minute
agreements for short-term periods are not workable.
As the Secretary-General has said and the Special
Envoy reminded us today, humanitarians need to plan
effectively with predictable access in order to deliver
the indispensable, as Ms. Mudawi said, assistance to
people who are, as she said, in life-and-death need.
So the extension of the Council’s mandate for Bab
Al-Hawa for at least 12 months, as all three of our
briefers said today, is critical. But the people of Syria
deserve more than that. They deserve answers on the
whereabouts of loved ones who have been detained and/
or are missing. As the Special Envoy said, that is a core
issue that affects all Syrians on all sides of the conflict.
And progress on that issue is essential for rebuilding
trust with the Syrian people and putting in place the
conditions needed for refugees to safely choose to go
home. We also need effective action to stem the illegal
captagon trade, to demonstrate that regional stability
comes above the billion-dollar income the regime
currently derives from it.
For a stable region, we need a sustainable end to
this conflict. Resolution 2254 (2015) is the framework
to deliver that lasting peace for the people of Syria. We
call on the Syrian regime to engage meaningfully in
that process.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement on the political situation in Syria in my
capacity as the representative of Switzerland.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, I endorse
what our Brazilian colleague said on behalf of our
two countries. I would like to thank Ms. Aveline and
18/23

30/05/2023

Ms. Mudawi for their briefings. I also thank Special
Envoy Geir Pedersen for his briefing.
Switzerland is following with interest the current
regional dynamics in relation to Syria. We welcome
the willingness expressed at the meeting of the League
of Arab States on 7 May in Cairo to work together
to implement Security Council resolutions. We
welcome the fact that the States parties to the League’s
ministerial committee, which was established on that
occasion, wish to support the step-by-step approach,
with a view to a just and comprehensive solution to the
conflict in Syria, in accordance with resolution 2254
(2015). That demonstrates once again the relevance of
that resolution to achieving a political solution to the
conflict that ensures peace and security for Syria and
the region.
In that regard, coherence among the various
international efforts under the aegis of the United
Nations is essential. Switzerland calls on the countries
of the region to intensify the coordination of their
efforts with those of the Special Envoy. We remain at
their disposal to support those efforts and to facilitate
all types of talks and initiatives aimed at promoting a
lasting peace under the aegis of the United Nations,
notably through the Geneva platform. In that respect,
we welcome the determination expressed in the Amman
communiqué of 1 May to work “on the resumption of
the activities of the Constitutional Committee as soon
as possible”.
The same communiqué also refers to the need to
resolve the issue of detainees and missing persons.
Resolution 2254 (2015) and the Special Envoy explicitly
stress the importance of that as a confidence-building
measure in the peace process. Switzerland calls on
the parties to put an end to the practices of arbitrary
detention and enforced disappearance and to allow
specialized humanitarian organizations access to
all places of detention in Syria. Enabling the many
families concerned to get answers about the fate of
detainees and missing persons is necessary to restore
confidence within society and open the door to a lasting
political solution.
Last week’s open debate (see S/PV.9327) clearly
attested to the need to protect civilian populations
suffering the consequences of armed conflict, including
children. Since the beginning of the conflict in Syria,
civilians have been the first victims of violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights. In the
23-15026

30/05/2023

The situation in the Middle East

face of those violations, Switzerland reiterates its full
support for the Human Rights Council’s Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic and the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, whose
work is indispensable in combating impunity and
preventing further violations.
The concerted pursuit of a credible political
process, anchored in resolution 2254 (2015), is capable
of restoring hope to Syrian society as a whole, in
particular women and the younger generation. After
more than 12 years of armed conflict, they deserve to
live in peace and security.
Beyond its commitment to protecting Syrian women
and men from armed violence and arbitrary restrictions
on their fundamental rights, Switzerland will continue
to support their aspirations to participate fully, equally
and inclusively in the decisions that shape their future.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The League of Arab States summit, which was
recently held in the city of Jeddah in the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia, was a great achievement, as it restored the
glory of the collective Arab position and the momentum
of joint Arab action. Most importantly, the Arab States
affirmed their support for Syria in maintaining its
sovereignty and territorial integrity and in overcoming
the difficult circumstances it is experiencing as a
result of the terrorist war it faces, the unjust economic
sanctions imposed on it and the repercussions of the
devastating earthquake that struck the country.
In another context and within the framework of
the Syrian Government’s endeavour to restore its
sovereignty over its entire territory and to put an end
to the illegal military presence of foreign forces on
Syrian territory, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Expatriates participated in the quartet meeting held in
Moscow on 10 May, which brought together the Foreign
Ministers of Syria, Russia, Iran and Türkiye. The
statement issued by the Quartet at its meeting affirmed
its commitment to Syria’s sovereignty and territorial

S/PV.9333

integrity and the fight against terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations. It also called for an increase in
international assistance to Syria for the reconstruction
of the country and to facilitate the voluntary, safe and
dignified return of Syrians to their homeland.
In contrast to those positive trends, the United
States of America and its Western allies continued their
hostile statements and provocative measures against
Syria, aimed at interfering in its internal affairs. They
continued their concerted efforts to obstruct any attempt
at achieving security and stability in Syria. They have
also used terrorist elements to achieve that goal. The
statements made by those States in today’s meeting
and in previous meetings are a clear demonstration
of the above. We did not hear today the opinion of the
representative of the United States of America on her
country’s continued violation of Syria’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity, as American forces are still
illegally present on Syrian territory. Moreover, they
continue to support separatist militias in north-eastern
Syria and plunder Syrian oil and wealth. The latest of
such acts was the smuggling of 42 tanks loaded with
hundreds of tons of Syrian oil from fields in the Jazira
Region through illegal crossings, heading towards
United States military bases on Iraqi territory.
The American crocodile tears on Syrian suffering
will not erase the fact that the wrongful American
policies in Syria are the reason for that suffering, which
is the result of its harsh, immoral and illegal sanctions
against the Syrian people. The United States talks about
the huge number of Syrian refugees and displaced, as
if it were not the cause for such displacement and for
the masses of refugees. The United States has actually
exported terrorist elements into Syria in order to
undermine its security and stability. American forces
have also committed war crimes in Raqqa, which led to
the loss of thousands of Syrian lives and the destruction
of infrastructure.
The United States of America resorts here to lecture
about respect for the Charter of the United Nations and
international humanitarian law in an attempt to deceive
and conceal its own violations of the Charter and the
resolutions of the Security Council and all rules and
provisions of international humanitarian law.
At the same time, Israel and its extremist authorities
continues to export its internal crises through
inflaming the situation in our region and to commit
more acts of aggression and perpetrate crimes and

23-1502619/23

S/PV.9333

The situation in the Middle East

gross violations of international law and the provisions
of the United Nations Charter. Once again, on 1 May,
the Israeli occupation forces carried out an air strike
against Aleppo International Airport. Bombs of great
destructive capacity were used, causing a number of
martyrs and injured persons, and rendering the airport
unusable. As a result, the United Nations was unable to
use the airport to provide humanitarian services.
Just two days ago, Israel launched yet another
air strike from the occupied Syrian Golan, targeting
certain points in the surroundings of Damascus, which
led to material losses. The Syrian Arab Republic
condemns in the strongest terms all those crimes and
illegal practices. We call on the Security Council to
break its deafening silence and fulfil its responsibilities
under the Charter to put an end to all these aggressive
policies, hold the perpetrators accountable and compel
them to compensate the Syrian people.
Turning to the humanitarian issue, the Syrian
Government continues its efforts to improve the
humanitarian situation of the Syrian people and to face
the effects of the unprecedented earthquake disaster
that struck Syria on 6 February and the tragedy it left
behind at the national level. Accordingly, the President
of the Republic issued decree no. 7 on the first of this
month, establishing a national fund to support those
affected by the earthquake. The fund seeks to provide
them with financial support and help them overcome the
ensuing physical, material or moral harm. This decree
represents a major pillar for the basic trends and the
national action plan that were approved by the Syrian
Government late last month to address the impact of the
earthquake from various aspects. That would lead to
moving our efforts from the emergency response phase
of relief work to the recovery phase.
In the context of the Syrian Government’s efforts
to facilitate the arrival of humanitarian aid to those
in need throughout Syria, especially in north-western
Syria, and aware of the continuing need to meet the
emergency needs resulting from the devastating
earthquake and to continue working to recover from
its impact on various sectors, the Syrian Government
decided to extend its voluntary initiative to grant the
United Nations permission to use the Bab Al-Salam and
Al-Rai border crossings for an additional three months,
ending on 13 August, in order to ensure the delivery
of humanitarian aid to the Syrian civilians in need in
those areas.
20/23

30/05/2023

The Syrian Government also confirmed that it
will continue to issue visas, facilitate field visits and
provide the necessary facilities to the United Nations
and partners in humanitarian and development work. In
that context, Syria stresses the following points.
First, the United Nations, its representatives and
staff must not communicate with terrorist organizations
and affiliated illegal entities in north-western Syria. We
call for allowing the International Committee of the Red
Cross and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent to supervise
the distribution of humanitarian aid in those areas.
Second, we stress our aspiration for international
donors to assume their responsibilities and fulfil
their pledges by providing the required funding for
United Nations activities and programmes. That will
enable the implementation of projects included in the
humanitarian response plan and the strategic framework
for cooperation between Syria and the United Nations,
in turn revitalizing the economy, supporting the
dignified and voluntary return of displaced persons
to their homeland and achieving the 2030 Sustainable
Development Goals. In that regard, Syria condemns
all Western calls for refugees not to return to their
homeland and homes under false pretexts.
Thirdly, there is a need for an immediate, full and
unconditional lifting of the illegal unilateral coercive
measures imposed on the Syrian people. Those measures
are immoral, contrary to international humanitarian
law and a major impediment to humanitarian and
development work. Syria also stresses that the alleged
exemptions announced by the United States of America
and the European Union from those measures are
nothing but cheap propaganda. They did not achieve
any tangible results. Instead, some in the Council are
proud of imposing additional sanctions and declare
publicly that they will not back down from them.
In conclusion, the Syrian Arab Republic affirms
that it will not normalize its relations with those who
occupy its lands, and that the political solution that we
seek requires the elimination of terrorism and an end to
interference in its internal affairs and to the destructive
initiatives of some well-known States, including their
attempts to institute additional international politicized,
biased mechanisms aimed at obstructing that solution
and to restore colonial legacies that are irretrievably
gone. We stress that reviving our country’s economy,
which will be crucial to improving the Syrian people’s
humanitarian and living situations, requires lifting the
23-15026

30/05/2023

The situation in the Middle East

unjust sanctions and the suffocating siege imposed on
Syria by the United States and the European Union.
There is also a need to support the Syrian State and its
institutions in its relief and development efforts in order
to achieve early recovery and ensure the rehabilitation
and reconstruction of damaged infrastructure and
civilian facilities.
I would like to draw the Council’s attention to the
fact that the interpretation from Arabic into English
was not accurate regarding the extension of the use of
the two crossing points for a period of three months,
which ends on 13 August, not in February, as the
interpreter said.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Ms. Ershadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): We thank
the briefers for their updates and informative briefings.
As those briefings highlighted, despite the diligent
efforts of the United Nations, the humanitarian situation
in Syria continues to present challenges. The current
level of funding allocated for the Syrian humanitarian
response has fallen far below what is needed. The
severe shortfall severely hinders the ability of the
United Nations to provide adequate assistance to those
in need. Furthermore, the persistent imposition of
unilateral sanctions remains a significant impediment
to improving Syria’s humanitarian and economic
situation. Those unlawful measures have further
exacerbated the challenges faced by the Syrian people,
severely hampered the Government’s capacity to deliver
critical services to those in need and even delayed the
return of refugees and internally displaced people.
A comprehensive approach is crucial to effectively
addressing the humanitarian and economic crisis
in Syria. It should encompass several key elements,
including security, sufficient funding, ensuring
the impartial distribution of aid and removing
counterproductive sanctions. That will not only save
lives but can also lay a foundation for the restoration
of infrastructure, the rebuilding of communities
and the revitalization of the economy. In addition,
prioritizing early-recovery projects that address
the immediate needs of all Syrians affected by the
ongoing crisis is essential. The projects should aim to
provide comprehensive support and assistance to those
affected, facilitating their path towards recovery and
resilience. At the same time, substantial efforts should

S/PV.9333

be directed at enhancing the delivery of humanitarian
aid across all regions of Syria. That includes a specific
focus on improving cross-line aid delivery, as outlined
in resolution 2772 (2016).
We want to express our appreciation to the
Government of Syria for its unwavering commitment to
supporting the United Nations and other international
organizations in facilitating the delivery of relief and
support to the crisis-affected areas. We particularly
commend the Government of Syria for its decision to
extend its permission to use the Bab Al-Salam and
Al-Rai border crossings for an additional three months
until 13 August, which is enabling the crucial delivery
of humanitarian aid to Syrian civilians in need,
particularly in northwestern Syria.
Terrorism remains a significant threat to Syria and
the wider region, and it must be addressed decisively.
We are concerned about terrorist activities in the areas
under occupation. The illegal presence of military
forces in Syria is the primary source of insecurity
in the country and must end if we are to create an
environment conducive to resolving the crisis. The
fight against terrorism must be carried out in full
respect for Syria’s national sovereignty, territorial
integrity and independence, and must not be used as
a pretext to violate those fundamental principles of
international law.
Turning to the political track, we continue to extend
our support to the Special Envoy’s sincere efforts and
commend his active engagement with all the parties
involved in resolving the Syrian crisis. We welcomed
his visit to Tehran on 15 May, during which he held
discussions on the ongoing humanitarian and political
situation in Syria with Iran’s Foreign Minister and other
relevant Iranian authorities. Iran stands firmly behind
a speedy resumption of the Constitutional Committee
meetings, and we are committed to supporting that
process. Moreover, Iran, in collaboration with Russia
and Türkiye, its partners in the Astana format, remains
firmly committed to working for long-term and
sustainable normalization in Syria. In that context, we
fully endorse and support a continuation of the SyrianTurkish dialogue, recognizing it as a crucial component
of such broader efforts. It is noteworthy that on 10 May,
the Foreign Ministers of Russia, Iran, Syria and
Türkiye convened in Moscow to engage in discussions
regarding the re-establishment of inter-State relations
between Syria and Türkiye. The talks comprehensively
addressed various aspects, with a firm emphasis on

23-1502621/23

S/PV.9333

The situation in the Middle East

30/05/2023

upholding Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity
and the need to fight terrorism. We would also like to
highlight the two-day official visit by Iran’s President
to Syria, the first visit there by an Iranian President in
more than 13 years. During the visit, the two Presidents
signed a comprehensive agreement in Damascus on
long-term and strategic cooperation between our
two countries.

Syria continues to be a source of deep concern. The
international community has been responding to the
worsening needs, mostly through the United Nations
cross-border assistance. We welcome the extension
of the two additional border crossings, Bab Al-Salam
and Al-Rai, for another three months. That is a step in
the right direction in broadening the delivery of muchneeded humanitarian aid.

We are pleased to note the recent positive
developments in Syria’s diplomatic relations, both
within the region and internationally. The return of
Syria to the League of Arab States and the resumption of
relations with our brother Arab countries are significant
strides in the efforts to help Syria’s security, stability
and prosperity. Those constructive approaches reaffirm
the effectiveness and legitimacy of Iran’s policy and
those of its allies in the region in defending the national
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria, as well
as backing the legal Government of Syria during the
country’s 12 years of crisis. We hope that Western
countries will soon reassess and rectify their policies
towards Syria, which will contribute to the restoration
of stability, peace and prosperity in the region.

In six weeks’ time, the Council will take a
decision on the renewal of resolution 2672 (2023). As
an immediate neighbour to Syria and the main partner
of the United Nations the on cross-border mechanism,
we believe that, under the current circumstances, the
Security Council’s reauthorization is essential so that
this lifeline — the only viable method — can continue
to deliver humanitarian assistance at the scale and on
the scope needed.

The international community’s failure to address
the Israeli regime’s ongoing acts of aggression and
terrorist attacks on Syria’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity is deeply concerning. Those reprehensible
acts, like the terrorist attacks on 28 May targeting
Damascus and its surrounding areas, which were
deliberately aimed at civilian infrastructure, are
flagrant violations of international humanitarian law
and the principles enshrined the Charter of the United
Nations, and a grave threat to regional peace and
stability. We strongly condemn those heinous crimes
and emphasize the urgent need for swift and decisive
action to hold that lawless regime accountable.
Lastly, in her statement the representative of
France made an unjustified reference to my country
and a groundless claim against it that we categorically
reject. We expect France, as a permanent member of
the Security Council, to behave more responsibly
and refrain from labelling other Member States
without evidence.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Türkiye.
Mrs. Özgür (Türkiye): As we heard from
Deputy Director Mudawi, three months after the
devastating earthquakes the humanitarian situation in
22/23

We also have a responsibility to provide
predictability to humanitarian actors to ensure that
humanitarian funds and other resources can be used
in the most rational and efficient way. That requires
a longer-term perspective, planning and humanitarian
programming, rather than the three- to six-month
periods that humanitarians have had to operate on
recently. Hence, we call on the Security Council to
renew the United Nations cross-border mandate for at
least 12 months, with multiple border crossings.
We welcome the fact that the United Nations flash
appeal for Syria following the earthquake has been
fully funded, as it was instrumental in supporting postdisaster humanitarian efforts. However, recent reports
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs on critical funding gaps, including in the Syria
humanitarian response plan, outline the alarming
situation we may be faced with in upcoming months.
Therefore, it is time to carefully consider how to
improve the financing of vital humanitarian needs on a
sustainable footing.
While we continue to provide uninterrupted
humanitarian assistance without losing pace, we also
need to focus on how to gradually reduce dependency
on humanitarian aid. That is why the early-recovery
activities carried out in line with resolution 2672 (2023)
are significant. A longer-term Council renewal of the
resolution in July will also ensure the continuation of
early-recovery projects, which require more time to
implement and achieve results. In order to complement
those humanitarian efforts, we also continue to
23-15026

30/05/2023

The situation in the Middle East

encourage all parties to facilitate regular crossline missions.
Türkiye is among the countries most affected by
the 12 years of conflict in Syria. We have felt its various
repercussions in security, economic and social aspects.
With a view to ensuring stability and security in Syria,
we have spearheaded numerous initiatives since the
beginning of the conflict and continue our efforts
today with the same understanding. As per resolution
2254 (2015), achieving political stability, eliminating
the threat of terrorism emanating from Syria and
maintaining the territorial integrity and political unity
of that neighbouring country, as well as preparing the
ground for the voluntary, safe and dignified return
of Syrians, in coordination with the United Nations,
remain top priorities for Türkiye.
Through the quadrilateral engagement process that
we launched in that understanding, meetings were held
between our Foreign and Defence Ministers, and it was
agreed to prepare a road map under the coordination
of our Deputy Foreign Ministers. Those contacts will
continue in the period ahead. We are carrying out the
process without preconditions and in good faith. It is

S/PV.9333

not possible to resolve all issues in an instant, as it will
need to be a long and phased process. Nevertheless, the
sides having found common ground in the fight against
terrorism has laid foundations that can be built upon.
We advocate for the settlement of the Syrian conflict
through a political process in line with resolution 2254
(2015) and the legitimate rights and demands of the
Syrian people. We believe that, if political stability
is achieved, it can pave the way for the resolution of
other interrelated issues. With that thought in mind,
we continue our efforts towards breaking the political
impasse and convening the Constitutional Committee.
We support the ongoing efforts of Special Envoy
Pedersen towards that objective.
Before I conclude, let me underscore that the recent
engagement process does not in any way whatsoever
mean a change in Türkiye’s determination to eliminate
terrorism from its borders. The terrorist organization
Kurdistan Workers’ Party/People’s Protection Units and
its offshoot, the so-called Syrian Democratic Forces,
pose a major threat to both Türkiye and Syria and have
no place in the future of the region.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

23-1502623/23
