S/2012/367

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 May 2012
Original: English

Letter dated 25 May 2012 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit the attached letter dated 10 May 2012, which I
have received from His Excellency Mr. Jean Ping, Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, conveying the responses of the Republic of the Sudan and the
Republic of South Sudan to the 24 April 2012 communiqué of the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

12-35297 (E) 310512

*1235297*

S/2012/367

Annex
Letter dated 10 May 2012 from the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission addressed to the Secretary-General
As you know, the communiqué of the Peace and Security Council (PSC) of the
African Union (AU) of 24 April 2012 elaborated a “Roadmap” addressing the
outstanding post-secession issues between the Republic of Sudan and the Republic
of South Sudan and other related issues, with clear timeframes to which the Parties
are expected to adhere. Through resolution 2046 (2012), adopted on 2 May 2012,
the United Nations Security Council endorsed the PSC communiqué.
The immediate priority of the Roadmap is addressing the hostilities along the
border between the two countries. The steps include an immediate cessation of
hostilities, withdrawal of forces from the territory of the other country, the setting
up of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM), the
operationalization of the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone (SDBZ), the convening of
the Ad Hoc Committee to consider allegations and counter-allegations by the
Parties, and the holding of a meeting of the Joint Political Security Mechanism
(JPSM), to pave the way for the resumption of wider negotiations for the resolution
of all issues within the stipulated timeframe.
Immediately after the PSC meeting, I wrote to the Presidents of the Republics
of Sudan and South Sudan, formally submitting to them the communiqué and
seeking their cooperation in its implementation. I pledged the full support of the AU
in efforts to end the fighting and normalize relations between the two countries. In
addition to the letter I sent you to seek your support and that of the Security
Council, I addressed similar communications to other AU partners. In the meantime,
the High-level Implementation Plan (AUHIP) began preparing a plan of action for
the implementation of all aspects of the communiqué. I am pleased to note that, in
this exercise, the AUHIP has been supported by your Special Envoy, Mr. Haile
Menkerios, and by the United Nations Interim Security Force in Abyei (UNISFA)
Force Commander, General Tesfay Tadesse.
The Government of South Sudan responded to my letter, confirming its
acceptance of the communiqué and the Roadmap. In response, I issued a press
statement welcoming its acceptance and looking forward to its full cooperation. The
Government of Sudan thereafter sent a letter in which it announced its acceptance in
principle of the communiqué, while stating that some elements, nonetheless,
required further consultations. I also issued a press statement noting that the
communication of Sudan was a positive step in the right direction. I am hereby
attaching all the relevant correspondence for your information. I am also pleased to
note that, on 10 May 2012, the UNISFA Force Commander confirmed the
withdrawal from Abyei of South Sudan Police Service, as called for in the
Roadmap.
As indicated in the PSC communiqué and the Security Council resolution, the
AUHIP has a pivotal role to play in the implementation of the Roadmap and the
resumption of negotiations on all aspects of the relationship between Sudan and
South Sudan. To this end, the Chairperson of the AUHIP, former President Thabo
Mbeki, has held extensive consultations with the parties and with the UNISFA Force
Commander, to put in place all the necessary steps to ensure that the JPSM, when
convened, will be successful and will result in substantive outcomes.

2

12-35297

S/2012/367

In particular, President Mbeki has been seeking the acceptance by both sides
of the map that would define the boundary between the two states for the purposes
of the deployment of the JBVMM and the establishment of the SDBZ. Acceptance
of the map is key to a cessation of hostilities, and is a necessary condition for the
normalization of relations and the creation of conditions conducive to negotiations
on all outstanding issues. Given that the location of the boundary is at the heart of
current tensions and fighting between the two states, this is proving to be a difficult
task, but I am pleased to note that progress is being made. The outcome of the
preparatory process, and the actions of the Parties on the ground, will be reported by
the AUHIP in the coming days, and I would like at this point to turn to the issue of
reporting.
There is a unique opportunity created by the international consensus on Sudan
and South Sudan at this point in support of the communiqué of the 319th meeting of
the PSC, which was reflected in Security Council resolution 2046 (2012). Reporting
on progress to both the PSC and the Security Council provides a unique opportunity
to sustain and consolidate this consensus and facilitate assessment of compliance by
both countries. In this respect, the AUHIP will play a key role. The Panel intends, in
drafting its report, to consult closely with the relevant United Nations officials and
with other stakeholders, as appropriate. The reports of the Panel will be transmitted
to both the AU PSC and the United Nations Security Council.
I would appreciate it if you could circulate this letter to the Security Council
members, prior to their scheduled review of the implementation of resolution
2046 (2012), which is due in the coming days.
I would like to take this opportunity to, once again, express my gratitude for
the support that has been provided by you and the Security Council to the AU’s
efforts. The adoption of resolution 2046 (2012) was a further testimony to the close
partnership between the AU and the United Nations and the ways in which the two
organizations can optimize their respective comparative advantages. In this respect,
let me assure you once again of the AU’s determination to ensure the full
implementation of all aspects of the Roadmap.
(Signed) Jean Ping

12-35297

3
