A/57/PV.81

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-seventh session

81

st plenary meeting
Thursday, 13 March 2003, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kavan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Tribute to the memory of His Excellency Mr. Zoran
Djindjic, late Prime Minister of Serbia
The President: Before we proceed to the item on
our agenda, allow me to make a short statement. I
would like to express my deep shock and sadness upon
learning of the assassination of His Excellency Zoran
Djindjic, Prime Minister of Serbia. I would like to
extend my deepest sympathies to the Government and
people of Serbia and to Mr. Djindjic’s family in their
loss.
I personally feel very strongly about this and
share the pain caused by this cruel act, as Zoran was a
friend of mine and a former fellow human rights
dissident. I worked with him when we were both
dissidents, as well as when he continued in his
opposition to the Milosevic regime and I was Foreign
Minister and Deputy Prime Minister of the Czech
Republic, and lastly when we were both in top
Government positions and endeavoured to work for a
democratic Central Europe as our contribution to better
conditions in Europe and the world.
A violent act, deplorable as it is in itself, is
particularly
so when perpetrated
against
a
democratically elected head of Government. I firmly
believe that this act of political violence should in no
way stop the progress that Serbia has made in the
process of democratization, of reform and of
international cooperation. I perceive it also as a
challenge to us all and as a reminder that we have to

(Czech Republic)

continue to help to consolidate democratic forces
throughout the world.
Agenda item 117 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/57/705/Add.7
and 8)
The President: Before proceeding to the item on
the agenda. I should like to draw the attention of the
General Assembly to documents A/57/705/Addenda 7
and 8, by which the Secretary-General informs the
President of the General Assembly that, since the
issuance of his communications contained in
documents A/57/705 and Addenda 1 to 6, Belarus and
Mauritania have made the necessary payments to
reduce their arrears below the amount specified in
Article 19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly
takes note of the information contained in those
documents?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 53
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Draft resolution (A/57/L.75)
The President: Draft resolution A/57/L.75, now
before the Assembly, is the result of extensive
consultations, and it is a consensus text.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

03-27926 (E)

*0327926*

A/57/PV.81

The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution, which is entitled, “Amendment to rule
1 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly
and opening date and duration of the general debate”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/57/L.75?
Draft resolution
(resolution 57/301).

A/57/L.75

was

adopted

The President: By adopting this resolution, the
General Assembly has decided, inter alia, that the fiftyseventh regular session of the General Assembly will
close on Monday, 15 September 2003; that the fiftyeighth regular session will open on Tuesday, 16
September 2003; and that the general debate of the
fifty-eighth session will be held from Tuesday, 23
September to Friday, 3 October 2003.

2

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
facilitators on revitalization of the work of the General
Assembly — the Permanent Representatives of
Ecuador, Singapore, South Africa, Sweden and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia — for their
invaluable assistance in negotiating the resolution just
adopted. Of course, I would also like to thank Member
States for their cooperation.
As representatives are aware, it is my intention to
continue our discussions on the revitalization of the
General Assembly during this session.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 53.
The meeting rose at 10.25 a.m.
