UNITED

NATIONS

TWENTY-SlXTH

YEAR

rd
MEETING: 27 SEPTEMBER 1971
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 583) , , , . , . . . . . , , , . . . . , . . . . . , . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . , , . , , . . . . . . , , . . . . . . , . . .

1

The situation in Namibia:
fal Letter dated 17 September 1971 addressed to the President of the Security
Council from the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon,
the Central African-Republic, Chad, the Congo (Democratic Republic of),
Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya, Liberia,
the Libyan Arab Republic, Madagascar,Mall, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco,
the Niger, Nigeria, the People’s Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, the United Republic of
Tanzania, the Upper Volta and Zambia (S/10326);
(bl Report of the Ad Hoc Sub-Committee on Namibia (S/ 10330) . . . . I . . . . .

1

S/PV.1583

FIFTEEN HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-THIRD

MEETING

Held in New York on Monday, 27 September 1971, at 12 noon
&&dent:

Mr. Tom NAKAGAWA (Japan).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l583)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated I7 September 1971 addressed to the
President of the Security Council from the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Chad, the
Congo (Democratic Republic of), Egypt, Equatorial
Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya,
Liberia, the Libyan Arab Republic, Madagascar,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, the Niger,
Nigeria, the People’s Republic of the Congo,
Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan,
Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, the United Republic of
Tanzania, the Upper Volta and Zambia (S/10326);
Report of the Ad Hoc Sub-Committee on Namibia
(S/10330).
Adoptirjn of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Namibia:
(0) Letter dated 17 September 1971 addressed to the
President of the Security Council from the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, the
Central African Republic, Chad, the Congo (Democratic Republic of), Egypt, Equatorial Guinea,
Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya, Liberia, the
Libyan Arab Republic, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Morocco, the Niger, Nigeria, the People’s
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Somalia, Sudan, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, the United
Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta and Zambia
(S/l 0326);

0) Report of the Ad Hoc Sub-Committee on Namibia
(S/X 0330)

1. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council has just inscribed on its agenda the item entitled “The situation in
Namibia” and has done so in response to the request
submitted by 35 African Member States in their letter to

me dated 17 September 1971 (S/20326]. I am informed
that the representative of Swaziland has become a cosignatory of this letter.
2. The letter signed by the representatives of African
Member States contains a request that the Council be
convened today in order to enable His Excellency Moktar
Ould Daddah, current Chairman of the Organizatjon of
African Unity, to participate personally in the debate in the
Security Council. It is a pleasure for me, on behalf of the
Security Council, to invite the President of the Islamic
Republic of Mauritania, His Excellency Moktar Otid
Daddah, to take a seat at the Council table and to address
the Council on the subject before it in his capacity as the
Chairman of the eighth session of the Assembly of Heads of
State and Government of the Organization of African
Unity.
Mr. Moktar Uuld Daddah, President of the Islamic
Republic of Maun’tania and Chairmanof the eighth session
of the Assembly of Headsof State and Govcnwnent of thte
Organization of Afi-ican Urrip, wasescortedto the Security
Council table.

3. The PRESIDENT:
Daddah.

I call on President Moktar Ould

4. President OULD DADDAH (interpret&o!? from
French]: Taking the floor at this meeting of the Security
Council held at the request of the Organization of African
Unity-of
which I have the honour to be the Acting
President-on behalf of the Heads of State and Government
of members of the Organization of African Unity, I should
like to express my sincere thanks to this august body for
the speed with which it acceded to our request.
5. As the Security Council knows, our request concerned
examination of the grave situation obtaining in Namibia
because of the contumacious refusal by the authorities of
South Africa to implement the imperative resolutions of
the General Assembly and the decisions of the Security
Council to speed up the process of decolonisation in that
part of our continent.
6. I have, been charged by the eighth session of the
Conference of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity to head a delegation composed of the Foreign Ministers of Ethiopia, Liberia, Nigeria,
Sudan and Chad to discuss with the Security Council the
most appropriate means of implementing all the decisions
of the General Assembly and the Security Council, particularly in the light of the legal obligation incumbent. _..upon
.“,.“.I””
-L-“---.‘-.-- -.______I j__-__,,Ul”^..r. e”‘Y.----LCC~-~-‘-

/

.,,
_,

.

_/.

.,

.

.‘..

I.._.

8

the international community under the recent Advisory
Opinion of the International Court of Jusiicc.r
7, I should llkc to say at the outset that the Organization
of African Unity welcomed with satisfaction the concluslons of the Jntcmational Court of Justice declaring the
continued prescnCeof South Africa in Namibia to be illegal,
and according to which South Africa must immediately put
an end to itg administration and, consequently, to the
occupation of the Territory of Namibia,
8, I should like to recall here that Namibia is one of the
Territories lo which
the Declaration on the Granting Of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples adopted
by the United Nations in 1960 applies, That was why in
1966 the General Assembly, seriously concerned at the
evolution of the situation in Namibia, adopted resolution
2145 (XXI) ending South Africa’s Mandate over the Tcrritory because,according to paragraph 3:
“South Africa has failed to fulfil its obligations in
respect of the administration of the Mandated Territory
and to ensure the moral and material well-being and
security of the indigenous inhabitants of South West
Africa and has, in fact, disavowed the Mandate”.
9. The United Nations had then to fulfil the obligations
incumbent upon it by adopting the measures necessaryfor
the transfer of power to the indigenous population in
Namibia. To that end, on 19 May 1967 the General
Assembly adopted resolution 2248 (S-V], creating a United
Nations Council for Namibia composed of II members. In
the same resolution, the General Assembly requested the
Council for Namibia to proceed to South West Africa with
a view to taking over the administration of the Territory
and ensuring the withdrawal of South African police and
military forces and to legislate until a legislative assembly
wasestablished following elections conducted on the basis
of universal suffrage and to undertake consultations with
the people of the Territory in order to draw up a
constitution and to transfer all powers to the people of
Namibia upon the declaration of independence. The General Assembly further decided that Namibia should become
independent on a date to be fixed in accordance with the
wishes of the people. The Council for Namibia was also
invited to do all in its power to ensure that Namibia
acceded to independence by June 1968 and therefore to
undertake measures that would permit that Council to fulfil
its responsibilities.
10. On 16 December 1967, in its resolution 2325 (XXII),
the General Assembly condemned the refusal of South
Africa to comply with the terms of those resolutions and
declared that the continued presence of South African
authorities in South West Africa was a flagrant violation of
its territorial integrity and international status. The Assembly once again urged the South African Government to
withdraw from the Territory unconditionally and immediately, and invited all Member States, particularly the main

trading partners of South Africa and those having economic
and other interests in Namibia, to take such measures asit
felt necessary in order to put an end to the illegal
administration of South Africa in the Territory. The
General Assembly also requested the Security Council to
take effective steps to enable the Council for Namibia to
fulfil all its functions and responsibilities.
11. Previously, in its resolution 2324 (XXII), the General
Assembly had condemned the South African Government
for the arrest, deportation and illegal trial in Pretoria of 37
Namibians in flagrant violation of their rights, of the
international status of the Territory and of resolutions of
the United Nations. However, the South African Govemment, ignoring that resolution, tried the prisoners under the
terms of the so-called Terrorism Act of 1967 and the
Suppression of Communism Act of 1960.
12, Jn 1968 the Security Council met several times to
study the consequences of the illegal trial of 37 Namibians.
It was in the course of those meetings that resolutions
245 (1968) and 246 (1968) were adopted condemning the
refusal of the Government of South Africa to comply with
the provisions of the above-mentioned General Assembly
resolutions. The Council further invited that Government
immediately to stop the illegal trials, to release the
prisoners and to ensure their repatriation. The Council also
requested Members of the United Nations to co-operate
with it in accordance with the obligations incumbent upon
them under the Charter, to ensure compliance by the
Government of South Africa with the provisions of the
various pertinent resolutions.
13. Unfortunately, despite the resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council the South African
authorities continued their illegal trials and condemned 33
of the prisoners to various terms of imprisonment,
14. Having studied the report of the Council for Namibia,
and particularly South Africa’s decision to impose apartheid and so-called bantustans on the Namibian people, the
General Assembly declared that the continued occupation
of Namibia by South Africa despite United Nations
decisions was a serious threat to international peace and
security. The Assembly also condemned the actions of
certain Member States which by maintaining their political,
military and economic co-operation with South Africa
encouraged it to defy the authority of the United Nations
and to hinder Namibia’s accession to independence.
15. Following the promulgation by the South African
Government of the South West Africa Affairs Act of 1969,
which assured the de facto transfer of administrative,
legislative and financial powers to the Government of
Pretoria, thus reducing the status of the Territory to that of
a simple South African province, the Security Council, on
12 August 1969, adopted its resolution 269 (1969), in
which it decided that “the continued occupation of the
Territory of Namibia by the South African authorities
constitutes an aggressive encroachment on the authority of
the United Nations”. The Council therefore set the deadline
of 4 October 1969 for the withdrawal of South Africa from
the international Territory of Namibia.

~~nsaquorces
for States of the Continrred Presence of
South Africa in Nan~ibia (Soufk West Africa) trotwitltstandb~g
Security Council resolution 276 (1970), Advisory Opbrion, I.C.J.
Reports 1971, p, 16.

2

Document

symbol:

q p- \re

copy
available
Best

16. On 30 January 1970, long after the expiration of that
deadline, the Security Council created a sub-committee to
study, with the Secretary-General, means of implementing
the Security Council resolutions on Namibia. The Sub.
Committee, comprising the 15 members of the Security
Council, drafted a report (S/9863/ proposing possible
means of action. At its meeting of 29 July 1970, the
Security Council then adopted resolution 283 (1970) calling upon all States to undertake a series of measures to
suspend all diplomatic and economic relations with South
Africa and to address to that country a formal declaration
indicating their belief that the continued presence of South
Africa in the Territory of Namibia was illegal.
17. Thus far, I have endeavoured to draw the Security
Council’s attention to the fact that since 1960 the South
African Government has constantly violated all the pertinent resolutions of both the General Assembly and the
Security Council. Now that the ,.Interna#o.nal. Court ofJustice has handed ?lZw~an‘Ad,vis&y Opinion, as requested
in,- resolution 284 (1970);.‘categorically stating that the
continued presence of South Africa in Namibia is illegal and
that it must immediately withdraw its administration and
end its occupation of that Territory, the Organization of
African Unity is asking the Security Council to apply the
pertinent provisions of Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter against the Government of South Africa for its
persistent refusal to turn the administration of Namibia
over to the United Nations. In other words, the Security
Council should insist upon and secure the immediate and
.unconditiona,l withdrawal of South Africa’s illegal adminis‘tration from the international Territory of Namibia. When
$he Security Council has unhesitatingly and without delay
resolved to take this necessary step against the Government
of South Africa, then the United Nations, in consultation
with the Namibian people and the Organization of African
Unity, should undertake to create the conditions necessary
for the declaration of Namibia’s independence as a sovereign State in which the Namibians and they alone will be
basters of their destiny.
18. The Organization of African Unity is asking the
tecurity Council to go beyond mere declarations of
[nnciplc, that have little influence on the facts of the
irtuation: it wants practical action on the spot to put an
[nd to the occupation of this internationa1 Territory by a
“oreign Power.
.
@+ We are fully aware of the difficulties in implementing
terms of Chapter VII of the Charter, but South Africa’s
today to the international community may
the very basis of our Charter and be a real threat to
peace and security. There should therefore be
about studying the ways and means available
end to the illegal occupation of Namibia by
b racist regime of Pretoria.
D. With the assistance of the Secretary-General,
l;Thant-and I wish once again to assure him of Africa’s
I&lute confidence in his courage, his far-sighted genernd his exemplary devotion to the cause of the United
of justice and peace in the world, as evidenced by
tanding service he has rendered the international
ity over the past ten years-the Security Council

should immediately take the necessarY stoPa to create
conditions allowing the Namibian people freely to exerclSe
their right to self-determination.
21. The international community should be onlIed upon to
strictly apply whatever political, economic
and m*tay
sanctions may be dictated by the circnmstarloos
given the rll
will of the racists of Pretoria,
22. I could not make this contribution
to Your debate
without stressing how greatly the general responsibility
for
justice and peace in the world rests especial@ on the great
Powers, particularly the permanent members
of the Security Council: For we know that if South Africa continues to
defy the decisions of the international
community
with
impunity, that if Portugal 1s carrying on a series of colonial
wars that call for means well beyond its own potontinl, and
that if Israel, finally, continues to mock the United Nations
and world opinion, we know
that this is possible OnIY
because they are all supported by the great PowersAfter
all, it is obvious that if the great Powers were to agree on a
solution, they do possess the effective means of ensuring its
full implementation. But if they are willing to agree to help
us only in so far as such help does not in the end disturb
what they consider to be their interests, then we shd know
full well that the great and noble principles
everyone is
happy to affirm will long remain but vain ideals.
23. Of course, it might be said in repIy that everything
does not depend solely on the will of the great Powers, far
from it. No question, and we are the first to concede the
point. We are the first to admit that no viable and lasting
settlement can be imposed from without. But we also know
that the great Powers are in a far better position
than
anyone else to pursue the search for constructive
solutions
to the many difficult problems of the world.
More, we feel
they would have a far nobler role to play in the concert of
nations if they would place their full weight on the side of
justice and peace in the world.
24. And, to revert to the crucial problem which
concerns
us today and that we havejust brought before the Security
Council, we believethat the great Powers have a particular
responsibilityin the settlementof the question of Namibia.
Not only because,when all is said and done,
this falls
squarelywithin the purviewof the United Nations,
but also
becauseno one except those who cling to injustice
and
oppression,can urgedifferencesin Africa as justifying
any
reservationswhatsoeveras to the objective pursued
or the
means appropriate to securing the restoration
to the
Namibianpeopleof their inalienablerights to self-determination, independence
andnationalsovereignty. Be that asit
may, for all the reasonsthat I have adduced, the African
peoplesand their Governments,whose eyes today are
turned to this meetingof the Security Council, make a
pressingand anguishedappeal to each member of this
Council individually andto the Council as a whole, as the
supremeorgan of the United Nations, that it employ all
necessarymeansof compellingthe South African Government to bow to the unanimouswill of the international
community and immediatelywithdraw its administration
from Namibia.

25. For the Africansand their friends all over the world
j ust asfor all peace-andjustice-lovingmen who respect t&
3

---

principles of’ human equality and dignity, the debate
beginning today is a prime test of the political and moral
authority of the United Nations as a whole, and the wj.ll of
the great Powers in particular, in the matter of decolomzation. Never before has SO clear a situation, in the crucial
fteld of decolonization, been brought before the conscience
of the members of this Council; for the entire g&nut of the
competent organs’ of the United Nations, the General
Assembly, the Security Council and the International Court
of Justice, having unequivocally spoken, you today have
the overwhelming and historic responsibility of turning to
deeds and telling the world whether this Council is or is not,
desirous and capable of ensuring that the principles, the
objectives and the decisions of the United Nations are
respected.
26. The question of Namibia, which has been on the
agenda of various United Nations bodies since 1946, is
today in its final phase. The international community
therefore stands with its back to the wall and can withdraw
no further. Any efforts to reopen the debate must be
rejected. Now is the time for courageous and concrete
action.
27. It is the duty of the Security Council to assume its
responsibilities without the least procrastination. But it is
above aI the permanent members of the Security Councilthe United States of America, the Soviet Union, France and
the United Kingdom-on which Africa today calls to put an
immediate end to the martyrdom of the Namibian people
and, beyond Namibia, to find a peaceful, just and lasting
solution to the explosive situation threatening not only the
stability, dignity and progress of southern Africa, but
international peace and security as well.
28. We hope that this special responsibility will remain
uppermost in the mind of each member of the Council
throughout these decisive deliberations, the conclusions of
which, whatever they be, will mark a turning point in the
life of the United Nations.

29. In any event, the Organization of African Unity,
which intends to assume its full responsibilities in this
matter, is beginning by placing its trust in the wisdom and
in the spirit of justice and equity of your Council, as the
supreme instrument for the safeguarding of international
peace and security. It is within this context that the
Foreign Ministers of Sudan, Liberia, Nigeria, Ethiopia and
Chad will, on behalf of Africa, undertake this vital debate
to defend-with sincerity and courtesy, to be sure, but also
with the determination dictated by the justice of our cause
and by our profound conviction that the time has come to,
act once and for all-to defend, I say, the African case for
Namibia, In fultiIling the noble mission thus entrusted to
them by the Organization of African Unity, they will be
defending not only the sacred cause of freedom, dignity,
and the higher interests of the Namibian people, but also
the principles, objectives, and the political and moral
authority of the United Nations. In that noble mission, may
they benefit from the unanimous understanding and sup
port of the members of the Security Council so that a new
page may be turned in the process of banishing from the
continent of Africa the train of humiliations, sufferingsand
injustices inherent in colonial occupation and racial oppression.
30. In any event, Mr. President, Mr. Secretary-General,
Excellencies, it is my most fervent wish, which I addressto
you with trust and hope on behalf of the Heads of State
and Government, members of the Organization of African
Unity, that the historic debate now beginning may be
crowned with total successin the single and indivisible
interest of Africa and the international community, of
which the United Nations, in our eyes, constitutes at one
and the same time the supreme conscience and guarantee.
31. The PRESIDENT: I thank President Moktar Ould
Daddah for his statement.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.
