S/PV.7368

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7368th meeting

Monday, 26 January 2015, 1 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Barros Melet .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Chile)

Members:

Angola .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Haniff
Mr. McLay
Mr. Laro
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2014/136)

15-02222 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1502222*

S/PV.7368

Ukraine

The meeting was called to order at 1.40 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the
Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2014/136)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Ukraine to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Mr. Feltman.
Mr. Feltman: Throughout the conflict in Ukraine,
and repeatedly in recent weeks, the Secretary-General
has called for de-escalation, restraint and the protection
of civilians. We deeply regret that these calls appear to
have fallen on deaf ears.
In just five days since we last met on 21 January
(see S/PV.7365), close to 50 civilians have been killed
and nearly 150 have been seriously wounded. On
22 January, over a dozen civilians died when rockets
hit their trolleybus in Donetsk city. The same day, at
least 10 civilians were killed amid heavy fighting in the
city of Horlivka. On Saturday, 24 January, a barrage of
attacks with multiple rocket launcher systems hit the
city of Mariupol, destroying buildings and impacting
a market filled with civilians. Dozens of people lost
their lives, including women and children, and over 100
were wounded. The Special Monitoring Mission of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
reported, based on crater analysis, that the rockets
originated from territory controlled by the so-called
“Donetsk People’s Republic”.
Mariupol lies outside of the immediate conflict
zone. The conclusion can thus be drawn that the
entity that fired these rockets knowingly targeted a
civilian population. This would constitute a violation
of international humanitarian law. We must send an

2/19

26/01/2015

unequivocal message — the perpetrators must be held
accountable and brought to justice.
On 23 January, the leader of the so-called Donetsk
People’s Republic announced a boycott of future
consultations with the trilateral contact group, a
unilateral withdrawal from the ceasefire and threatened
to seize further territory, with a plan that includes
pushing the front line all the way to the borders of
Donetsk oblast. As the Secretary-General stated on
24 January (SG/SM/16485), this constitutes a violation
of their commitments under the Minsk accords. We
call directly on the rebels to immediately cease their
provocative and violent actions, to abide by international
law and to make good on their commitments. We also
urge the leadership of the Russian Federation to use
its influence to call on the rebels to cease hostilities
immediately. This will be a critical step in stopping the
bloodshed.
The Ukrainian leadership has been vocal about its
commitment to the Minsk accords and has asserted that
it remains in a defensive position. However, we note
the recent emergency measures adopted by the National
Security and Defence Council, particularly those in
relation to “strengthening counter-terrorism measures”,
and appeal for the application of maximum restraint.
In light of the just-declared state of emergency in
Donbas, it has never been more important to guarantee
humanitarian workers and goods full and unhindered
access. Bureaucratic hurdles on both sides of the
conflict line are impeding humanitarian access and
must be eased. We also call on the Government of
Ukraine to ensure that humanitarian operations are free
from taxation.
We recognize the difficulty of diplomatic discussions
aimed at finding a peaceful resolution to this conflict,
given entrenched positions. Nonetheless, efforts to find
a political solution must urgently be redoubled. President
Poroshenko’s announcement that an agreement has been
reached on the necessity of holding negotiations in the
Geneva format, with the participation of the European
Union, the United States, Ukraine and Russia, is
welcome.
Before I close, let me share our assessment of the
way forward, with an emphasis on reviving the Minsk
accords. As agreed at Minsk, all sides must immediately
cease hostilities, with the onus particularly on the rebels
to recommit to the ceasefire and back down from their
offensive. We sincerely hope that the trilateral contact

15-02222

26/01/2015

Ukraine

group will reconvene in consultations with rebel
leadership, as envisaged this week, to work towards
a sustainable ceasefire and the implementation of the
broader Minsk accords. Most importantly, all sides
must commit to the protection of civilians and letting
assistance reach those in need.
Finally, there must be full political recommitment
to a peaceful and lasting solution to this conflict
at the highest levels. I reiterate our encouragement
of a convening of the Geneva format at the earliest
opportunity. The United Nations also remains ready to
support the consolidation of a sustainable and lasting
peace process, as may be required. Over 5,000 lives
have already been lost in this conflict. We must find a
way to stop it, and we must do so now.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Feltman
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I would like to
thank you, Sir, for convening this urgent meeting on
the situation in Ukraine. Let me also thank UnderSecretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for his briefing and
insights into the current situation.
Lithuania condemns in the strongest terms the
attacks on Mariupol and extends its sincere condolences
to the families of those who have lost their lives or have
been injured during these attacks.
The bloodiest conflict in Europe since the Balkan
wars is taking place as we speak. Last Wednesday in
this Chamber (see S/PV.7365), the Security Council
members once again expressed concern at the situation
and urged all parties to the conflict, including Russia,
to return to the Minsk agreements and ensure their
prompt and full implementation in order to prevent
even more destruction and bloodshed. Alas, what
we saw over the weekend was more deadly shelling,
more destruction, and more human tragedy caused by
the Kremlin’s unbridled mercenaries, including the
deadly attack on Mariupol, which this Council failed
to condemn because Russia put protecting the militants
above condemning the perpetrators.
After 29 open briefings and no progress on the
ground, it is hard not to sound repetitive here. However,
we cannot let Ukraine fall through the cracks of
international attention. More than 5,000 dead, some

S/PV.7368

11,000 injured and about 1.5 million displaced — such
is the cost of Russia’s continued aggression against
Ukraine. Almost 50,000 people have fled their homes
since 14 January; at least 262 people were killed
between 13 and 21 January alone. Last week again,
from 75 to 115 shelling attacks on Ukrainian positions
took place every day. The Donetsk airport, which the
Kremlin-sponsored militants captured last week, has
been pounded to rubble by months of attacks, causing
destruction seen only in the worst of wars. Some 550
square kilometres of land have been captured by the
illegal militants since the beginning of the ceasefire.
Such are the realities of what we continue to call a
ceasefire.
Just like the breaches of the 1991 Alma Ata
Declaration, the 1994 Budapest Memorandum on
Security Assurances, the 1997 Black Sea Fleet
Agreement Between the Russian Federation and
Ukraine and various other documents, including the
more recent the Geneva statement and the Berlin joint
declaration, the Minsk agreements are just another
casualty of Russia’s aggression against neighbouring
Ukraine.
One does not seek peace by arming illegal fighters
in a neighbouring country with advanced artillery
systems, multiple rocket launchers, truckloads of arms
and ammunition, and tanks. One does not seek peace by
sending one’s own troops and commandos to fight on
the soil of one’s neighbour. One does not seek peace by
issuing continuous threats and intimidations vis-à-vis
one’s neighbour, or by annexing parts of the neighbour’s
territory. One does not seek peace by unleashing a
continuous barrage of hate-mongering propaganda
and lies aimed at dehumanizing and demonizing one’s
neighbour. As long as Russia persists on this course, let
us be frank, peace in Ukraine has no chance.
Last Saturday, Ukraine suffered the second
deadliest single incident on its soil since the downing
of flight MH-17 in July 2014. Some 30 people were
killed and about 90 wounded during the shelling of the
city of Mariupol. The Under-Secretary-General spoke
of the militants withdrawing unilaterally from the
ceasefire. In the days preceding the attack, Alexander
Zakharchenko, the self-proclaimed boss of the socalled Donetsk People’s Republic, repeatedly stated his
disdain for the ceasefire. “There is no ceasefire. We
will fight. I promise,” he said.

15-022223/19

S/PV.7368

Ukraine

“There will be no more ceasefires or rotations ...
There will be no attempts to talk about ceasefire
from our side. Kyiv does not understand that we are
now able to attack on three fronts at once.”
And then hours before the tragedy, he said: “Today
the offensive against Mariupol begins. In a few days
we will swallow the Debaltsevo kettle”. Notably, a day
before the deadly attacks, Russia’s Ambassador to the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) anticipated Mariupol’s “liberation” in an
interview with CNN’s Christiane Amanpour.
And yet, in spite of the obvious, Russia continues
to blame Ukraine for ceasefire violations, including
the Mariupol attack. Anti-Ukrainian rhetoric is not
abating. Last week in this Chamber, we heard the longdebunked myths of “the junta”, “the coup”, “fascist
Ukraine”, and “oppression of Russian speakers” being
once again resuscitated and put into use. For a year now,
aggressive anti-Ukrainian propaganda has been used to
brainwash, confuse, distract and obfuscate.
The international community should not and must
not give in to these obfuscations. Therefore, let me ask
again: How can a bunch of illegal militants expand their
offensive, continue capturing territory and threaten to
carry out attacks on three fronts against the State of
Ukraine? How can a bunch of illegal militants without
external trade ties, income or budget amass hundreds
of armored combat vehicles, artillery systems and
rocket launchers — all those Tochka-U tactical missile
launch systems, Grad rockets, Uragan and Buratino
rocket launchers? How can they afford modern tanks,
each of which costs at least $4 million? How can they
claim their own air fleet? How can hundreds of Russian
soldiers be dying on Ukraine’s soil if they are not even
there?
How come hundreds of Russian mothers receive
the dead bodies of their sons in Cargo 200 boxes from
a conflict to which Russia claims it is not a party?
How come, in spite of the devastating lawlessness and
countless crimes committed by the separatist militants
and registered in the reports of the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Russia has not even
once, not even mildly, condemned the perpetrators?
All of this, as well as Russia’s persistent protectiveness
of the illegal militants, speak to Russia’s direct
involvement in and support for the war in Ukraine.
That involvement has been confirmed by certain
militant leaders. Back in August last year, the same

4/19

26/01/2015

Alexander Zakharchenko said that thousands of
Russian citizens, including many professional soldiers,
were fighting alongside the separatists. And then he
suddenly withdrew his statement, just as he retracted
his boasting about the attack on Mariupol on Saturday.
Another notorious character, the Russian commando
Igor Girkin — who is also known as Strelkov and who
played a big role in stoking war in eastern Ukraine —
recently boasted to the press about having started the
war by crossing the border with his squad, saying that
if it had not been for them, there would have been no
separatism in eastern Ukraine. A few days ago, he
also said the Crimea referendum was carried out at
gunpoint — something many of us have been repeating
since the bogus plebiscite was held.
Life in eastern Ukraine may have been far from
perfect due, to long years of neglect by successive
Governments, yet the local inhabitants, many of them
Russian speakers, had homes to return to after work,
had their daily lives and had their daily bread. Thanks
to the Kremlin’s decision to “protect” Russian speakers,
they now have no homes, no jobs and no income and may
have lost dear ones or may be dead themselves. Russia’s
war, Russia’s proxies and the abysmal lawlessness they
imposed have brought destruction, displacement and
death to the region.
In spite of all the ceasefire violations and military
attacks, the Ukrainian leadership firmly maintains
that the Minsk agreements are the only way forward
towards peace. However, the Minsk agreements must be
implemented by all the parties to the conflict — Russia
included — in full and without arbitrary revisions or
manipulation. The onus is on Russia to put an end to
this senseless war by ending support to illegal armed
groups, accepting international monitoring of the
Ukrainian-Russian border, withdrawing its troops and
weaponry from eastern Ukraine, ensuring the release
by the illegal militants of all illegally detained persons,
including Nadiya Savchenko — who is being held
illegally on Russian territory — ending the manipulation
of humanitarian assistance and reaffirming its respect
for Ukraine’s sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity. International observers, including
the United Nations and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe monitoring missions, must
be provided full and unconditional access to the entire
territory of Ukraine, including Crimea. Their reporting
is indispensable to get the facts straight.

15-02222

26/01/2015

Ukraine

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation is seriously concerned
about the escalation of the situation in Ukraine.
Cities in south-east Ukraine have been subjected
to indiscriminate shelling by heavy weaponry for
countless days, resulting in hundreds of civilian
casualties. We resolutely condemn such actions against
the civilian population. Of course, we sympathize with
all those who have suffered, regardless of which city or
village the tragedy occurred.
Since the beginning of January, the armed forces
of Ukraine have fired virtually non-stop on the largest
city in Dombas — Donetsk. Just over the past week,
at least 27 civilians have died and 71 people have
been injured, and 105 residences and 3 hospitals, as
well as 2 kindergartens and 3 schools, have also been
destroyed. Overall, 2,367 residential buildings have
been destroyed. There has also been intensive shelling
against Horlivka — something that the Western media
seem not to refer to. That is also something not raised
here in the Chamber by either our Western colleagues
or by the representatives of the Kyiv authorities. The
last week was the most difficult for Horlivka since
last summer: 107 people died, including 9 children.
Three hundred and seventeen people have been injured.
Hospitals, 15 schools and dozens of preschools have
been damaged. On 21 January approximately 10
civilians died as a result of the shelling of the city of
Stakhanov, Luhansk oblast, using Uragan multiple
rocket launcher systems. On 21 January approximately
10 civilians died.
That is far from a comprehensive list of all the
cities under the control of self-defence formations in
which civilians are dying every day. Yet the news cycles
over the past few days have focused on two incidents
alone: the shelling of a bus in Volnovakha and that of a
residential neighbourhood in Mariupol. It is quite clear
why: both cities are controlled by Kyiv’s forces. A similar
tragedy in Donetsk in which a bus stop was shelled did
not lead to mourning in Kyiv or to the convening of
emergency meetings of the Security Council. It was not
even worthy of a statement by the Secretary-General. Is
it that in the areas and cities controlled by the Donetsk
and Luhansk People’s Republics we have second class
citizens?
It is impossible not to look at the fact that Kyiv has
used the tragedies of recent days to fan the flames of
hysteria. Accusations against self-defence formations
are voiced immediately after events occur — almost

S/PV.7368

as if they have been prepared in advance. Calls
immediately emanate from Kyiv to Western capitals
for financial and military assistance and for exerting
pressure on the Russian Federation. However, as soon
as the propaganda value ends, interest falls away very
quickly in using the situation further and continuing
investigation — all the more so given that, once some
time has passed, one finds that the facts sometimes fall
quite short of what was said initially. That is why we
call for objective investigation of the January tragedies
in Volnovakha, Donetsk and Mariupol, as well as
earlier tragedies, including in the Maidan, Odesa and
Mariupol.
On Saturday, the members of the Security Council
were not able to agree on a statement to the press with
regard to the tragedy in Mariupol. The need to issue a
statement was as evident to us as it was in the cases of
Volnovakha and Donetsk, and we were ready to back
a similar text. Why has it not been possible this time?
The answer is simple: the delegations of the United
States, the United Kingdom and Lithuania insisted on
including in the text condemnation of one statement
by the leader of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s
Republic, taken out of context of recent events and the
entire crisis in Ukraine. That is something that has
been pushed here at this meeting as well. But what is
the full picture of what has taken place?
First, the leaders of the self-defence formations
made different statements the day before yesterday.
One cannot cite them selectively or take them out of
context. Secondly, we have never heard anything
from our Western colleagues in condemnation of the
leaders of Ukraine, who have no shame when it comes
to their statements and actions. There are threats
that Dombas is going to be punched in the mouth,
that it will be taken back by force and that it will be
Ukrainized — and that the population has to prepare for
“a major continental war”, to which there is allegedly
no alternative. Almost a week ago, no one other than
Ukrainian President Poroshenko publicly declared the
resumption of military activities. That took place just
a few days after the meeting in Berlin of the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of Germany, Russia, Ukraine and
France, at which they backed the idea of a speedy
beginning to the withdrawal of heavy weapons from the
line of contact as set out in the Minsk memorandum of
19 September 2014.
We should also remind our colleagues that Russian
Security Council draft documents on very important

15-022225/19

S/PV.7368

Ukraine

issues — putting an end to the blood-letting, the
humanitarian situation in Dombas — were repeatedly
unsuccessful. Take, for instance, a press statement
in support of the Minsk agreements blocked by
Lithuania and the United States of America, which
was immediately submitted after they were made
public, on 22 September. Following the shelling of a
public transport stop in Donetsk, which was clearly
carried out by Ukrainian forces, for a day we had to
swat away unconstructive amendments by a number of
delegations. It was by exerting pressure that we were
able to agree to a text at the end of the day. In the case of
Volnovakha, we agreed with the text that was proposed
by the sponsors within one minute.
What is unfortunate is that throughout this entire
conflict our Western colleagues have spent all their
time accusing the self-defence formations of inhuman
crimes, while they fully justify the actions of the Kyiv
authorities. We have seen no constructive attempts
to discuss the real reasons for the Ukrainian internal
conflict and try to find a way out of the current
situation. The escalation of the situation in Dombas
was the result of the Kyiv authorities consistently
rejecting direct dialogue with Donetsk and Luhansk on
the issue of the practical implementation of the Minsk
agreements. During all of last September, we noticed
the steps taken by the Kyiv forces to strengthen their
military positions in the south-east. They deployed
forces, equipment and heavy weaponry along the line
of contact, as well as calling for new mobilizations and
putting in new factory orders for defence equipment.
Measures for the economic reconstruction of
Dombas were replaced by attempts to suppress the
regions beyond their control. First they stopped paying
pensions and social benefits, and then imposed a
blockade on humanitarian assistance. All the while,
Kyiv was preparing for war — something they did not
hide in any way. History knows no “if”. But everything
could have been quite different if the Minsk ceasefire
memorandum had been implemented in a timely
manner, including the handing over of heavy weaponry
and handing over the Donetsk airport to the self-defence
formations. We would have avoided a new cycle of
confrontation had the Ukrainian authorities accepted
the 15 January proposal of Russian President Vladimir
Putin on the immediate withdrawal of heavy weaponry.
It is quite clear that peace in Dombas is something that
is undesirable to the “war party” in Kyiv.

6/19

26/01/2015

The Kyiv authorities have been sabotaging the
holding of a regular meeting of the contact group in
Minsk, unjustifiably conditioning it on high-level
representation by the self-defence formations. The main
thing now is to hold this meeting and not to quibble
over the level of the participants. We are trying, as far
as possible, to identify contacts for the meeting over the
next few days. We will continue to prompt the parties
towards direct dialogue, as we have done during the
whole course of the internal Ukrainian crisis.
In that respect, we urge the representatives of States
that possess some form of influence with Ukraine’s
leadership, especially Washington, D.C., to stop egging
on the Ukrainian hawks, covering and justifying their
inhumane actions, and pushing them towards a military
solution to the conflict. That will only lead to an even
greater catastrophe and create another hotbed of tension
in Europe.
All responsible members of the international
community must strive to attain from Kyiv not words
but actions in the interest of launching a full-fledged
political settlement process. Until the Kyiv party of
war understands that force alone cannot resolve the
conflict, and that multiple-launch rocket systems,
tactical ballistic missiles, phosphorous and cluster
munitions, and renewed mobilizations will not help it,
such incidents will occur over and over again. The Kyiv
authorities must be forced to sit down at negotiation
table with the self-defence formations.
It is important that everyone understand that real
results can be achieved only through direct dialogue
between Kyiv and Donetsk and Luhansk, which the
Ukrainian authorities have shirked thus far, having
chosen a course of suppressing south-eastern Ukraine
by military means. Without inclusive, direct political
dialogue, which should allow us to properly negotiate
the parameters for constitutional reform as required by
the Geneva communiqué and the Minsk agreements,
the national reconciliation of Ukraine and a sustainable
settlement in the south-east will not occur.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing this afternoon.
This weekend, we saw the biggest single loss
of civilian life in the Ukrainian crisis since the
commitments made at Minsk on 5 September last year.
Thirty civilians were killed and over 100 wounded
following what the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) termed “an extremely

15-02222

26/01/2015

Ukraine

heavy barrage” of rockets fired indiscriminately into
the crowded streets of Mariupol.
Only three days earlier, the Council had met to raise
our serious concerns at the escalation in fighting along
the agreed ceasefire line (see S/PV.7365). All of us
called for de-escalation and a resumption of dialogue.
That attack, many kilometres over the agreed ceasefire
line, has taken the scope and threat of the conflict
to a substantially new level. The attack was just not
another refusal of the separatist leadership to abide by
the commitments made at Minsk; it was a provocative
and reckless escalation that, as the Secretary-General
has made clear, could constitute a violation of
international humanitarian law. Those responsible for
the attack must be held accountable for their actions.
It is deeply regrettable that the Council failed to agree
on a press statement that would have condemned
the announcement of a separatist offensive against
Mariupol and the subsequent attack on Mariupol.
No one in the Council can deny the fact that the
attack on Mariupol, like last week’s on a bus near
Volnovakha, came from the Russian-backed separatists.
The OSCE Special Monitoring Mission analysis of
both attacks indicates clearly that in both incidents the
rockets were fired from separatist-held territory. The
attack would not have been possible without the military
support of Russia and its supply of multiple-launch
Grad and Uragan rocket systems to the separatists.
In the past few weeks, Russia has transferred to the
separatists hundreds of additional heavy weapons, not
just rocket systems but also heavy artillery, tanks and
armoured vehicles. Hundreds of Russian regular forces
and special forces continue to operate on Ukrainian
territory, in clear violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity. These soldiers are backed by
Russian command-and-control elements, air defence
systems, drones and electronic warfare systems.
There is no doubt that the flow of heavy weapons
across those borders, in violation of the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine, has given the
separatists the fire power and the confidence to escalate
the conflict. Since the Minsk agreement in September,
which included an immediate ceasefire, the separatists
have taken control of an additional 550 square
kilometres of territory. Despite the commitments made
at Minsk to securing continuous monitoring of the
border with verification from the OSCE, hundreds of
kilometres of border remain free for the flow of these
deadly weapons, often under the guise of humanitarian

S/PV.7368

convoys. Russia’s persistent blocking of the proposed
expansion of the OSCE border monitoring reveals its
true intentions.
Russia arms the separatists, it finances them, it
advises them, and it fights covertly alongside them.
What it has not managed to do is to get its separatist
proxies to stick to Russia’s deceitful narrative. The selfproclaimed leader of the Donetsk People’s Republic,
Alexander Zakharchenko, proudly announced on
24 January that “Today an offensive was launched on
Mariupol. This will be the best possible monument
to all of our dead”. That statement, and others like it,
cannot be glibly ignored, as the Russian representative
encourages us to do. It is the reality. While Russia
professes adherence to the Minsk agreement and the
Normandy format meetings, and while it accuses the
Ukrainian Government of provocations, the separatist
forces that it supports are bent on undermining those
agreements, attacking civilians and creating new
realities on the ground. That approach, as we have seen
in Mariupol this weekend, will only lead us closer to the
precipice. It will lead to more deaths, more destruction
and more people displaced from their homes.
On each occasion that the Council has met to
discuss Ukraine, the vast majority of its members have
underlined their commitment to Ukraine’s sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity. We assert quite rightly
that these are fundamental principles of the Charter
of the United Nations. They provide the foundation
for an international system that is based on rules and
respect and the preservation of international peace and
security. We all defend these principles because we do
not want a world where borders are redrawn by force,
where States are threatened and destabilized by their
neighbours, and where innocent civilian populations
live in fear of battle orders issued in far-off capitals.
The Security Council has to make very clear where
it stands against the profoundly dangerous path that
Russia is pursuing in east Ukraine. That is why I urge
all Council members to be clear in their messaging
today. Russia must withdraw its equipment and troops.
It must cease its support for the separatists, and it must
effectively control its borders. It must use its influence
over the separatists to stabilize the situation and prevent
further dangerous escalation. It must play its full part
in ensuring the immediate implementation of the Minsk
protocol. Once again today, the representative of the
Russian Federation has claimed that his country wants
a peaceful resolution to the conflict, but such words

15-022227/19

S/PV.7368

Ukraine

are worthless in themselves. We need to see Russian
actions to put a stop to this widening and increasingly
deadly conflict.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s urgent meeting.
We are grateful for Under-Secretary-General Feltman’s
thorough briefing on such short notice.
Just five days ago (see S/PV.7365), we met in the
Council and denounced the devastating consequences
of attacks by Russian-backed separatists on civilians
in eastern Ukraine, and we appealed to Russia to stop
supporting, training and fighting alongside separatist
forces. Members of the Council pressed Russia and
the separatists not only to recommit themselves to
the agreements they had made at Minsk, but actually
to honour those commitments in their actions.
Unfortunately, we are back in the Chamber today
because Russia and the separatists have once again
flouted those commitments. The targets are fresh ones,
but Russia’s end goal remains the same — to seize
more territory and move the line of Russian-controlled
territory deeper and deeper into Ukraine.
This time, however, statements by the separatists are
complicating Russia’s strategy. On Friday 23 January,
the de facto leader of the Russian-backed separatists
in Donetsk, Alexander Zakharchenko, said “today the
offensive on Mariupol begins”. He also said “there
will be no more ceasefires”. He said the separatists
would not stop their attacks until they had “reached
the borders of the former Donetsk region”, bragging
that separatist forces were now “able to attack in three
directions simultaneously”.
The representative of the Russian Federation
today said that these are statements we have taken out
of context. What context possibly justifies a massive
offensive against a civilian-populated town? I would
note also that attacking in three directions, as the
separatist leader said his forces had the capability to
do, takes a lot of weapons and forces. This capability
reflects the difference made by the substantial monthslong influx of Russian personnel and heavy weapons.
We know that Zakharchenko said these things because
he was filmed when he said them and quoted by the
official Russian news agency, Tass. On Saturday,
Zakharchenko told people at a rally in Donetsk “today
the attack on Mariupol began”. He added that “in a
few days we will encircle Debaltsevo”, a city that is
12 kilometres outside the ceasefire line established at
Minsk.
8/19

26/01/2015

If only the separatists’ words had been empty
bravado. Unfortunately, on Saturday the world witnessed
the horrors that resulted from the separatist attack on
Mariupol, a city 25 kilometres outside of the Minsk line.
On Saturday alone, more than 100 people were injured
in rocket attacks on the city. Approximately 30 people
were killed, including women, elderly and children, one
of whom was a four-year old boy. Some 40 rounds of
rockets struck the city, hitting a market, homes and a
school, among other civilian structures. The impartial
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine examined blast
craters and concluded that they had been caused by
Grad rockets fired from multi-rocket launcher systems
in separatist-controlled areas.
Why do these locations matter to the Russians
and the separatists? Mariupol is a port city that would
provide Russia with another means of supplying
separatists. And controlling the city would be another
step toward creating a land-bridge to illegally occupied
Crimea. Debaltsevo is a strategic rail and road hub and
serves as a key link between the Donetsk and Luhansk
regions. It is no accident that these strategic cities are
in Russia’s sights. When on Saturday members of the
Council tried to issue a joint statement denouncing the
civilian casualties and expressing concern about the
separatist statements, Russia blocked it, as we have
heard — no wonder, given that less than a day earlier
Russia had been perfectly content to disseminate
Zakharchenko’s statements in its State-run media. It
would be strange to be concerned about statements one
had encouraged and publicized, but when your State
news agency circulates announcements relishing a new
offensive and your diplomats refuse to express concern
about them, you own not only the statements but also
the offensives.
Now sometimes, perhaps given the fog of this
bloody war, the separatists are too explicit about their
objectives. Indeed, after initially blasting around the
separatists’ Mariupol ambitions in the news service,
Russia began to see the same ghastly images and reports
of the carnage that the rest of us saw. At that point,
perhaps knowing the source of the weaponry used,
Russia tried to deny any tie between the separatists
and the attacks. The Russian news service Tass even
tried to erase from official news stories all quotes from
Zakharchenko speaking about the separatists’ attacks.
It is not hard to understand why Russia does not want
the world to hear separatist statements. Last Wednesday,

15-02222

26/01/2015

Ukraine

the representative of the Russian Federation told the
Council that “the Russian Federation is ensuring full
compliance with the Minsk accords” (S/PV.7365, p. 7).
On Saturday, however, Zakharchenko openly admitted
that his forces were violating those same accords. He
appeared not to have gotten the Russian memo, which
clearly calls for violating the accords while pretending
you are not. Despite Zakharchenko’s statements, Russia
continues to try to play the international community
for the fool and blame the violence on the Ukrainians.
As recently as yesterday, Foreign Minister Lavrov
said “the worsening situation in Ukraine was the
result of constant attacks conducted by the Ukrainian
Government troops, which breached the Minsk
agreements”. We heard the same here today from the
representative of the Russian Federation.
Zakharchenko’s statements are a problem for Russia
because they are too straightforward. As members
of the Council know — and as, increasingly, all the
world can see — the separatists he claims to lead are
trained and equipped by Russia and fight with Russian
forces by their side. So when Zakharchenko brags
about seizing territory beyond the Minsk ceasefire
line; when he announces at rallies that separatists will
strike Ukrainian forces without provocation; and when
he says that he is not interested in negotiating, he is
not only speaking about the separatists’ intentions but
also about Russia’s intentions. This offensive is made in
Moscow. It is waged by Russian-trained and Russianfunded separatists who use Russian missiles and
Russian tanks, who are backed up by Russian troops,
and whose operations receive direct Russian assistance.
Since December, Russia has transferred hundreds
of pieces of military equipment to pro-Russian
separatists in eastern Ukraine, including tanks,
armored vehicles, rocket systems, heavy artillery
and other military equipment. And in recent weeks,
Russia has resupplied the separatists with hundreds
of pieces of advanced weaponry, including additional
rocket systems, heavy artillery, tanks and armoured
vehicles. In mid to late January, notwithstanding the
shootdown of flight MH-17, Russia even deployed
into eastern Ukraine advanced surface-to-air missile
and anti-aircraft systems, marking the highest level of
Russian air-defence presence in Eastern Ukraine since
September 2014. There is a direct correlation between
the movement of heavy weapons and the surge in that
movement across the border, and attempts by separatists
to take more ground.

S/PV.7368

The horror wrought by this arsenal has been deadly.
According to the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, the period from 13 to 21 January was
the deadliest on record since the 5 September agreement
was signed in Minsk. During this time, an average of
29 people were killed each day. More than 5,000 people
have been killed and almost 11,000 maimed since the
conflict began in April 2014. And today, this very day,
the attacks continue on the civilian-populated areas
over the Minsk ceasefire lines, not only in Mariupol and
Debaltsevo, but also in Pisky and Stanichno-Luhansk.
To the Russians, Mariupol and Debaltsevo may just be
strategic chess pieces in their effort to move the line of
territory that they control, but these cities are also home
to hundreds of thousands of Ukrainian civilians. Nearly
500,000 people live in Mariupol, the second biggest
city in the Donetsk region, and more than 25,000 live in
Debaltsevo. Mariupol is home to 92 preschools attended
by 13,000 children.
We continue to believe that the only solution to this
situation is a political solution, not a military solution.
To that end, we continue to support the efforts of the
trilateral contact group, as well as the Normandy
group of foreign ministers. We welcome the Normandy
group’s agreement in Berlin, which recognizes the need
for the full, immediate implementation of the Minsk
agreement.
If Russia is serious about peace, why does it not
condemn the statements by separatists that they will
attack Ukrainians first and accept no more ceasefires,
instead of trying to erase those statements from its
State-run news services? If Russia is serious about
peace, why does it not pull its tanks and Grad missiles
out of eastern Ukraine instead of sending in more? If
Russia is serious about peace, why does it not withdraw
its forces at least to the lines agreed upon at Minsk,
rather than send in a huge infusion of Russian heavy
weapons so as to carve out new lines? Only if Russia
takes these steps will there be a chance for the political
solution that is so desperately needed.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Feltman for his briefing. We would have all wished
to see 2015 begin under better auspices for Ukraine and
its stability. The year has barely started, and twice in
less than a week the situation on the ground has forced
us to meet here.
The spiral of chaos, which started two weeks ago
after several months of relative calm, could not be halted

15-022229/19

S/PV.7368

Ukraine

these past few days — quite the contrary. The deaths of
13 civilians in Volnovakha on 13 January, as well as
the shelling of a trolleybus in Donetsk last week, which
claimed at least eight civilian victims, were already a
source of concern, even as the previous day the Russian,
Ukrainian, French and German Foreign Ministers had
been able to reach an agreement on the withdrawal of
heavy weaponry.
On Saturday and Sunday in Mariupol, separatist
groups attacked residential neighbourhoods with
rockets, killing nearly 30 civilians and instilling terror
among the population. All reports from the ground, in
particular those of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe observers, confirm this. More
than a further violation of the ceasefire, this is also a
serious violation of the international humanitarian law
that protects civilians. These acts are unacceptable as
they indiscriminately target civilians. The offensive
against Mariupol, which was provocatively welcomed
by Alexander Zakharchenko last Saturday, violated the
commitments undertaken by the parties last September
in Minsk and is entirely unacceptable.
Let us not mince words. By supporting the Ukrainian
separatists and their actions, Russia bears a significant
share of responsibility for the violence. We must now
turn to dialogue and seriously discuss the future of
Ukraine and how to restore peace. We also call on
Russia to stop supporting the separatists, who are hellbent on destabilizing the situation. We call for a longoverdue end to the transfer of weapons and manpower
across the Russian-Ukrainian border, which is fuelling
the war and violates the territorial integrity of Ukraine
and the most fundamental principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, and which undermines diplomatic
efforts seeking to settle the conflict in accordance
with international law and the fundamental rights and
freedoms of all Ukrainians, including its minorities. We
urge Russia to use all its influence on the separatists in
the east of the country so that they fully respect the
ceasefire.
The statements made by Mr. Lavrov today,
announcing the facilitation of contacts between
the warring parties, are a positive sign but they are
not enough. We also call on Ukraine to begin the
institutional reform as per its commitments. President
Poroshenko has spoken publicly of the prospects
for national dialogue and institutional reform. That
statement was a further step towards the comprehensive
implementation of the Minsk accords, which are the

10/19

26/01/2015

only way to achieve a negotiated solution to this crisis.
The international community will judge the good faith
of the parties not on mere statements but on concrete and
verifiable actions that prove their genuine commitment
to de-escalation.
We must also call on all parties to refrain from
attacking the civilian population, to respect international
humanitarian law and to ensure humanitarian access to
the wounded and to civilians in need of assistance. We
must underscore that there can be no military solution
to this conflict. Only by all parties fully implementing
the Minsk accords and resuming serious diplomatic
discussions, in the context of the trilateral contact
group, can there be a positive outcome to this crisis.
Every efforts must be made to that end.
In this difficult context, we cannot afford to let
down our guard. France remains and will remain
fully mobilized to achieving a peaceful settlement.
Our goals are clear and consistent: respect for the
ceasefire, the withdrawal of heavy weaponry on each
side of the contact line, a resumption of prisoner
exchanges, the resolution of humanitarian issues and
the implementation by the parties of all measures under
the Minsk accords.
France will pursue its efforts, in close contact with
our German partners and the Russian and Ukrainian
authorities, under the so-called Normandy format.
We have no time to waste. This is not the time for
prevarication or hypocrisy. Today we must urgently
end this conflict, which has already claimed more than
5,000 lives and exacted too high a price from Ukraine,
from Russia, from the European Union and from the
international system as a whole.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Sir, for having convened this meeting. I
also thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his
briefing.
Ukraine has a democratic Constitution and is
implementing a process of reform. Ukraine made
a decisive contribution to nuclear non-proliferation
when it decided in 1994 to renounce nuclear weapons.
Ukraine is a crucial player in the international order.
We unreservedly support its territorial integrity. Given
these facts, there should be no violence in Ukraine.
However, today we are meeting once again due to an
extremely serious deterioration in the situation.
Spain would have liked the Council to adopt a
statement. Unfortunately, this was not the case. I
15-02222

26/01/2015

Ukraine

therefore vigorously and unreservedly condemn the
bombing of urban areas in the city of Mariupol, which
claimed tens of civilian victims and injured more than
100. I express the condolences of my country and my
delegation to the families of the victims and to the
people and Government of Ukraine. They can count on
Spain’s solidarity.
According to the information provided yesterday
by the Mission of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), as related
by Mr. Feltman, the rockets were launched from
locations under the control of rebel groups of the selfproclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic. The command
responsibility for these attacks must be investigated and
the perpetrators held responsible and brought to justice.
Like other delegations, we deplore the statement made
by Alexander Zakharchenko shortly before the attack
on Mariupol. The statements constitute a clear violation
of the ceasefire and of the Minsk accords. The attacks
against civilians are a flagrant violation of international
law. International law puts obligations not only on the
parties but also on those within whose capacity it is to
act to prevent any further violation of international law.
Furthermore, the High Commissioner for Human
Rights warned on Friday of the continued presence
of foreign fighters in eastern Ukraine. According to
reports, in keeping with that of the High Commissioner,
they are troops of the Russian Federation. The same
source confirmed the presence of sophisticated heavy
weaponry in populated areas, under the control of
armed rebel groups, and reported repeated violations
of the human rights of the civilians trapped there and a
lack of the rule of law in those areas.
The Security Council cannot remain silent. It
must make itself heard clearly given this situation.
We call once again for the full implementation of
the Minsk memorandum and protocol, and for the
immediate restoration of the ceasefire. We appeal to
all those in a position to influence those responsible
for their horrendous acts, in particular to Russia, to,
in accordance with its status as a signatory to the
Minsk accords and to the joint Berlin declaration of
21 January, as well as a member of the OSCE trilateral
contact group, and in exercise of its responsibility of the
Security Council, contribute to de-escalate the tensions
and compel the rebel groups to renounce violence and
accept the peaceful and lawful path to pursue their
claims.

S/PV.7368

The violence and horrific acts of this weekend
sought to derail dialogue and undermine the negotiated
settlement of the crisis provided for in the Minsk
accords. We must not allow this to happen.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to sincerely thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, for his
informative briefing.
Jordan regrets certain parties’ disregard of the
several calls made for a ceasefire either by the Security
Council or the international community as a whole. We
also regret the continued escalation of the crisis and
the violation of the Minsk peace agreement. Jordan
expresses its deep concern at this serious escalation
of violence and fighting, which could have grave
consequences and lead to the further deterioration of
the situation in eastern Ukraine and the region.
Jordan strongly condemns the targeting and
intimidation of civilians as well as the shelling of
residential areas, regardless of the source, and calls for
the conduct of a thorough and transparent investigation
into the incident involving the shelling of a bus stop
in Donetsk and the appalling incident that took place
in Mariupol two years ago, which is considered to be
the bloodiest incident since last July’s peace agreement.
We also call for the bringing to justice of all of the
perpetrators of these criminals acts.
This serious setback in the situation in eastern
Ukraine and the spread of the fighting to other cities
makes it incumbent on all parties to hold an emergency
meeting to continue the negotiations based on previous
agreements and with a view to speedily reaching a
comprehensive ceasefire. A political and peaceful
solution will not be possible in the context of resort to
military means or unilateral measures that undermine
regional and international efforts and bring the
negotiations back to square one. Rather, the solution
lies in the effective measures that lead to peace and
calm.
Jordan calls on all States with influence on the
separatists to urge them to refrain from the use of
force and to cease all violations, which can lead only to
further instability in Ukraine.
We call once again on all parties involved in
this conflict to shoulder their responsibilities, to
immediately implement a ceasefire and to stop all
escalatory measures, including provocative and
irresponsible speech by any party. We in the Council

15-0222211/19

S/PV.7368

Ukraine

and at the international level as a whole should redouble
our efforts and do our utmost to prevent the collapse
of all the progress that has been achieved over the past
year, so as to achieve a comprehensive agreement that
takes into account all of the interests of the different
parties.
We would conclude by stressing the importance of
preserving the country’s unity, territorial integrity and
sovereignty, of non-interference in its internal affairs,
of the proper control of its borders and of the cessation
of flows of separatists and foreign fighters and weapons
into Ukrainian territory. We also stress the importance
of the full implementation, in letter and in spirit, of the
Minsk peace agreement and of the memorandum issued
later, as well as of the joint statement by the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of France, Germany, Russia and
Ukraine on the establishment of a communication line.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his briefing.
In recent days, we have witnessed a drastic
deterioration in the situation in eastern Ukraine, with
frequent clashes and attacks that have caused heavy
casualties among civilians, including women and
children. China condemns all violent attacks aimed at
civilians and expresses its condolences to the victims
and its sympathy to their families.
We support the conduct of an objective investigation
of the relevant attacks to determine the truth and bring
the perpetrators to justice. Last week, the Security
Council held a public meeting on the question of
Ukraine (see S/PV.7365). The relevant Member States
called on the parties to the conflict to take effective
measures to as to avoid any escalation of the conflict
or confrontation. However, much to our distress, the
situation in eastern Ukraine has not improved but, on
the contrary, escalated, resulting in a considerable loss
of civilian life and property. China is deeply concerned
at the recent developments in the situation.
The deterioration of the situation in eastern
Ukraine is not in the interest of any party. What is most
urgent now is for all parties to be calm and exercise
restraint so as to avoid any further escalation of the
conflict or confrontation, to bring about a ceasefire and
stop the violence in eastern Ukraine and to implement
comprehensively the Minsk agreement reached in
September. All of the parties concerned must make
effective efforts to achieve the aforementioned
objectives.

12/19

26/01/2015

Current developments in the situation clearly
demonstrate that in dealing with the situation in
Ukraine, it is necessary to abide by the overall objective
of seeking a political settlement; to fully consider
the complex historical factors and the reality of the
issue relating to Ukraine; to take into full account the
legitimate rights, interests and demands of all regions
and ethnic communities in Ukraine; and to attach great
importance to addressing the legitimate concerns of
all parties and ensure that the interests of all sides are
accommodated in a balanced manner, so as to arrive at
a fundamental and enduring solution to the question of
Ukraine.
The international community must make greater
diplomatic efforts to promote the quest for a political
settlement of the issue. Discussions held by the Security
Council must play a constructive role in helping to ease
the situation in Ukraine. China has consistently held that
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries
should be respected. Chinas has adopted an objective
and fair position concerning the question of Ukraine.
We support the relevant parties of the international
community in their efforts to seek a political settlement
of the question of Ukraine.
China calls on all parties to make greater efforts
and to bring into full play the role of the Normandy and
Minsk mediation mechanisms. We hope that through
an inclusive political dialogue, and on the basis of
accommodating the legitimate interests and concerns
of all parties, it will be possible soon to reach a
comprehensive balanced and lasting political settlement
to achieve peace, security stability and development in
Ukraine and the region as a whole. China will continue
to play an active and constructive role in the quest for a
political settlement of the question of Ukraine.
Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I, too, should
like to thank Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs Jeffrey Feltman for his briefing.
Chad is deeply concerned at the deterioration of
the security situation in Ukraine, especially in the
region of Donetsk and Luhansk. Despite the untiring
calls made by the international community for restraint
and calm, a violent attack on the port of Mariupol in
the Donetsk region took place on Saturday, 24 January,
resulting in at least 30 civilians killed and more than
100 injured. On 13 January, we saw the shelling of a bus
near Volnovakha that claimed the lives of 12 civilians,
the majority of whom were women.

15-02222

26/01/2015

Ukraine

The situation is a serious one. Given the lack of
political will when it comes to putting an end to the
violence, and the significant increase in the number
of civilian victims, Chad is fearful of a resumption of
the fighting, whose primary victims will, as always, be
civilians.
Developments in terms of the violence in
Ukraine very often lead to violations of international
humanitarian law, and the international community
cannot remain impassively on the sidelines. Those who
are responsible must be brought to justice.
With more than 5,000 deaths, 10,300 injured and
more than 1 million displaced persons, the Ukrainian
tragedy has gone on long enough. In that regard, Chad
calls on all the parties to remain calm and show restraint
and urges the Government and separatists to engage in
a direct and inclusive national dialogue with a view
to national reconciliation. Moreover, Chad believes
that the solution to the Ukrainian crisis is political,
and that it will largely depend upon the willingness of
the parties concerned to commit to a true negotiations
process to achieve lasting peace. Chad encourages the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
to pursue its investigations with a view to assigning
responsibility for the Ukrainian crisis, which has lasted
far too long and caused many victims.
In line with the Normandy format and Milan
meetings and the mediation provided by the trilateral
contact group, Chad urges on the countries involved
and the Secretary-General, through his good offices, to
relaunch the peace process in Ukraine.
To conclude, we urge friendly countries with
influence on the parties to bring the necessary pressure
to bear with a view to achieving a lasting solution to
the crisis on the basis of the Minsk agreements and
declaration, with full respect for the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of Ukraine.

S/PV.7368

no military purpose, they violate international law and
they are unacceptable.
We call on both sides to immediately de-escalate
the fighting and respect the terms of the ceasefire
agreement reached at the Minsk peace talks. We stress
that there can be no military solution to the conflict
in Ukraine. The parties should seek a political solution
through dialogue. It is important that the concerns of
the separatists be addressed within the framework of
a negotiated political settlement. That should be done
without compromising the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela thanks you,
Mr. President, for convening this Security Council
briefing on Ukraine. We also welcome Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
and we appreciate the information he has provided to us
on the political situation in Ukraine.
Our country expresses its grave concern about the
recent escalation of armed conflict in eastern Ukraine,
which has caused loss of civilian lives and untold
numbers of injuries. Venezuela reiterates its call on
the parties to promote a peaceful, negotiated, political
solution to the crisis. We stress that any violent incident
on the ground should be investigated independently,
and that the investigation’s conclusions should be based
on irrefutable evidence. Venezuela rejects any act of
violence or terrorism, in particular attacks against
civilians, from wherever they originate.
The intensification of the armed conflict in eastern
Ukraine makes it imperative that the parties put an end
to their hostilities in the area. The ceasefire is therefore
a crucial step.

Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Feltman for his briefing.

It is necessary to continue on the path of seeking a
political and diplomatic solution to the Ukrainian crisis,
in which the conflicting parties commit to working on
achieving a firm and lasting peace.

Since the Council’s meeting last week on the
situation in Ukraine (see S/PV.7365), the conflict in the
country has intensified, and civilians continue to suffer
the consequences. The rocket attacks on Mariupol,
which left 30 people dead and more than 100 injured,
including women and children, serve to illustrate
this point. Nigeria condemns in the strongest terms
indiscriminate attacks on residential areas. They serve

The mediation efforts by regional organizations
is, in our view, particularly important in the process of
finding a negotiated settlement to the conflict. In that
regard, we reiterate our support for the efforts of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
Germany and France to promote dialogue among
Ukraine, Russia and the representatives of the Donbas
region.

15-0222213/19

S/PV.7368

Ukraine

We also welcome the joint communiqué issued
on 21 January in Berlin by the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of France, Germany, Russia and Ukraine,
and we encourage the parties to work together for its
implementation.
The Minsk agreements are the basis on which
lasting peace can be achieved in the region. We reiterate
that any intervention by outside elements that violate
the Minsk agreements and regional efforts to reach an
agreement between the parties should be avoided.
Venezuela stresses that the parties must act with a
sense of restraint in order to prevent the dialogue from
being undermined by unilateral actions that jeopardize
the peace process. The cycle of violence must be
broken. Building the foundation for peace involves
putting an end to hate speech, ethnic persecution and
war propaganda. The historic and root causes of the
conflict must be addressed and a political agreement
between the parties must be sought.
The escalation in hostilities requires strict
compliance by the belligerent parties with obligations
concerning the protection of civilians in the areas
affected by violence, including the need to ensure
humanitarian access to internally displaced persons,
refugees and others residents in areas affected by the
conflict.
Finally, we again call on all parties to redouble
their efforts in the search for a just and lasting political
solution, which is in their own interests and those of the
entire region.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate, and all the
more so because of the failure of the Security Council
over the weekend to agree to a simple and clear press
statement that would have condemned the events in
Mariupol. I also thank the Under-Secretary-General for
his briefing, which has been very helpful to the Council.
New Zealand condemns the killing of approximately
30 people and the injuring of more than 90 civilians on
24 January in Mariupol. The reports of indiscriminate
shelling of civilian populations and residential areas are
deeply concerning, as indeed are the other incidents that
were outlined by Under-Secretary-General Feltman.
We voiced our concerns last week that the violence was
escalating at an alarming rate. The Mariupol incident
confirms that the situation in eastern Ukraine is now
on a disastrous downward spiral. We do not take this
incident in isolation. Its occurrence, magnitude and
14/19

26/01/2015

the claims made about it by the separatist leadership
speak for themselves. It was a major assault on a
civilian population with the sole purpose of taking and
controlling the area as a result.
The most recent civilian casualties from the conflict
in eastern Ukraine are completely unacceptable. We
call on all sides to respect international humanitarian
law and to refrain from any indiscriminate attacks. In
that regard, we note that rockets have been launched
indiscriminately into civilian areas — a violation
of international humanitarian law. There can be no
impunity for such reckless acts. Those responsible must
be held accountable for their actions.
Russia’s provision of troops and materiel to
the separatists is irresponsible. The threat of “a
major Ukrainian war” is both chilling and wholly
inappropriate, and it may now be close to a reality.
Against the mounting body of evidence, Russia
is unapologetic for the role it is playing in supporting
the separatists. Russia speaks about the facts. What we
know for a fact is that Russia is playing a role in this
conflict.
We support the promotion of a fully inclusive
political dialogue. We call on Russia, instead of
blaming others, to use the diplomatic and other tools
it has available to ensure that the separatists respect a
ceasefire. That ceasefire, as already agreed on in the
Minsk accords, must be implemented immediately.
The Council must also live up to its responsibilities
under the Charter of the United Nations. We must put
politics aside, difficult although that may be, and use
our collective influence to stop the killing of civilians
in eastern Ukraine. That must be the priority. Although
this is perhaps not for today’s meeting, in future we
would like to see the Council seriously consider how it
can put pressure on all the belligerents to implement the
ceasefire. Words may no longer be enough; more action
may still be required.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting. We
are grateful to Under-Secretary-General Feltman for
briefing us at such short notice.
Malaysia is alarmed at the escalating violence in
eastern Ukraine since the last Security Council meeting
on the subject (see S/PV.7365), less than a week ago.
Since then we have seen a repeat of indiscriminate
attacks on civilians. On 22 January a public transport
stop in the city of Donetsk was shelled, with as many
15-02222

26/01/2015

Ukraine

as 15 people killed and more than 20 civilians injured.
Two days later, at least 30 people, including two
children, were killed in the city of Mariupol, and more
than 100 civilians injured. Malaysia condemns such
indiscriminate attacks in the strongest terms. It is most
unfortunate that the latest violence in Mariupol did not
even merit the Security Council’s condemnation, owing
to a lack of consensus among Council members on the
draft press statement. Malaysia calls for an independent
investigation into the incidents. The perpetrators of
such heinous crimes against civilians must be held
accountable. We would like to remind the parties to the
conflict that they should adhere to international humanrights and humanitarian law. Attacks on humanitarian
convoys must also cease immediately.
The recent events have seriously undermined the
ceasefire agreement reached in September of last year
between the conflicting parties. Malaysia strongly urges
the relevant parties to comply with their commitments
as outlined in the Minsk protocol of 5 September and the
memorandum of 9 September. The latest developments
in eastern Ukraine prove that a diplomatic and political
solution is more urgent than ever. In that regard,
Malaysia welcomes all efforts that could facilitate a
de-escalation of the crisis and contribute to ending the
conflict, including the possibility of resuming Genevaformat negotiations. As Malaysia stated last week (see
S/PV.7365), a military solution would be in no one’s
interests in the long run and would not be suitable.
Seventy years after the establishment of the United
Nations, we still see blatant disregard today for the
core principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
particularly respect for countries’ sovereignty and
territorial integrity. Malaysia urges the relevant parties
to reflect on the consequences of such actions for their
long-term interests and international standing. We
reiterate our call to the relevant parties to explore all
possible avenues for finding a peaceful solution. We are
committed to playing a constructive role in the Council
in order to de-escalate the crisis and see talks resume so
as to restore Ukraine’s stability and territorial integrity.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): I am grateful to you for
convening this meeting, Mr. President, and would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman for
his briefing on the outbreak of hostilities in eastern
Ukraine.
In our meeting on Wednesday, 21 January
(see S/PV. 7365), the Angolan delegation expressed its

S/PV.7368

position on the issue in the wake of the attack on a bus in
the Donetsk region that resulted in a number of civilian
casualties. We would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate our position, while condemning the recent
attack on Mariupol and the loss of life and extensive
destruction of property. I will be brief.
We regret the loss of lives in the recent outbreak
of hostilities in eastern Ukraine and emphasize the
urgent need to protect civilians. We condemn the
violations of the ceasefire and urge all the parties to
observe it. We believe that the Minsk accords constitute
a framework for a peaceful solution to the conflict,
and we urge all parties to abide by them. We stress the
importance of respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine. Finally, we believe it is crucial
that humanitarian assistance be provided to the victims
of the conflict and that efforts stepped up to help the
thousands in need.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Chile.
We would like to thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman for his
briefing on the recent events in Ukraine.
We join in the condemnation of the indiscriminate
shelling of residential areas in the city of Mariupol,
an attack that constitutes a significant and worrying
escalation of the level of violence in eastern Ukraine.
Those responsible for such deplorable acts against
the civilian population must be held accountable, and
we emphasize the absolute necessity for an objective
investigation of the facts that will see that those
responsible are brought to justice.
The violence must end so that Ukrainians can
rebuild their lives in a stable and secure country,
while maintaining its sovereignty and territorial
integrity in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations. We urge the parties to fully implement the
Minsk agreements, which, along with the ceasefire
memorandum of 19 September, have laid the foundations
and established the criteria for a negotiated solution to
the crisis.
We furthermore recall that in Minsk all parties
agreed to allow the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to monitor and verify
the ceasefire. We emphasize our support for the OSCE’s
Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine and urge the
parties to cooperate with its mandate, particularly
through support for the delivery of humanitarian aid.

15-0222215/19

S/PV.7368

Ukraine

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): Thank you for convening
today’s urgent meeting, Mr. President. I would also
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his
briefing, and all those here whose statements supported
Ukraine and expressed sympathy with my people.
Unfortunately, since the previous Security Council
meeting on Ukraine on 21 January, (see S/PV.7365)
the situation there has deteriorated significantly. On
24 January, Russian-backed terrorists committed
another heinous crime against humanity. As a result of
the shelling of residential areas in Mariupol, in eastern
Ukraine, 30 civilians were killed and more than 100
wounded. According to the 24 January spot report
of the Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the bombardment was carried out using multiple Grad
and Uragan rockets launched from inside terroristcontrolled territory. The shelling of Mariupol began
just after statements by one of the terrorist leaders
about imminent attacks on Ukrainian cities, as well as a
significant increase in inflows of Russian armed forces
and weapons into the Donetsk and Luhansk regions. As
the President of Ukraine stated,
“The bloody murder of dozens of civilians
and injuries to almost 100 people by pro-Russian
terrorists in Mariupol not only constitute a terrorist
attack, they are a crime against humanity, and thus
an issue to be considered by the tribunal in The
Hague”.
Yesterday was yet another day of mourning
in Ukraine. We express our gratitude to the whole
civilized world for its strong solidarity with Ukraine
in the wake of this horrible tragedy, for the deepest
sympathy and condolences to the families of the victims
and for the wishes for a swift recovery of those injured.
Ukraine appreciates the Secretary-General’s clear and
unambiguous statement denouncing the unilateral
withdrawal from the ceasefire by the so-called rebel
leadership.
In that respect, it is highly regretful that one of the
permanent members of the Security Council, bestowed
by the Charter of the United Nations with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, has once again showed its utter
disrespect, not only of the Charter but of human values,
16/19

26/01/2015

by blocking the Council’s condemnation of the heinous
crimes against humanity committed by terrorists in
Mariupol.
Today’s statement delivered by the Russian
delegation made it sound as if it were not Russia that
invaded, occupied and annexed a part of the Ukrainian
sovereign territory of Crimea last spring. The Russian
delegation’s statement today made it sound as if regular
Russian troops were not in Ukrainian sovereign
territory. At the last meeting of the Security Council
(see S/PV.7365), I demanded an explanation as to what
16 Russian battalions and a huge number of tanks and
artillery were doing in my country without an invitation.
The civilized world is waiting for an explanation from
the Russian side. On can find additional evidence on
my Mission’s website, which we will try to send to
Council members as well.
If militants and Russia had complied with the
Minsk agreements, this tragedy — the most dreadful
since the beginning of the Russian aggression — would
not have happened. Radio and telephone conversations
intercepted by the Security Service of Ukraine
irrefutably indicate that the attack was organized by
terrorists supported by Russia. Further evidence of
that is Russia’s blocking of a draft statement by the
Security Council condemning this horrible event, as
well as its complete silence — not a single word of
reproach — about the terrorists’ other barbaric acts in
the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, such as the attack
on Volnovakha, the shameful behaviour with regard
to Ukrainian hostages, the tragedy at the trolleybus
stop in Donetsk and many other cases. Therefore, the
Russian Federation, which continues to support terrorist
activities and whose troops are directly involved in
hostilities against Ukraine, is solely responsible for
the murders in recent weeks of innocent civilians in
Volnovakha, Debaltsevo, Donetsk, Mariupol and many
other towns and villages in Ukraine.
We seek international support so that Russia is
finally compelled to keep its promises, rein in its
proxies and stop sending troops and weaponry into
Ukraine. We demand that Russia fully implement the
Minsk agreements, which it has thus far supported in
words only, including the immediate withdrawal of
all its armed forces from the territory of Ukraine, the
stabilization of the Ukrainian-Russian border and the
establishment of international monitoring. It should
also free without any further delay Ukrainian pilot
Nadiya Savchenko — who is still on a hunger strike

15-02222

26/01/2015

Ukraine

that is endangering her life — as well as Oleg Sentsov,
Alexander Kolchenko and the other Ukrainian citizens
who are being held in Russia illegally.
We call on the international community to respond
resolutely to the crimes of terrorists and to increase all
forms of pressure on those who sponsor and support
them. Our position remains constant: the so-called
Donetsk People’s Republic and the Luhansk People’s
Republic must be recognized as terrorist organizations.
Time and again, we have called on the Security
Council to finally exercise its responsibilities under the
Charter of the United Nations so as to prevent these
terrorist groups from committing their crimes. The only
way to do that is to put an end to the Russian aggression
against Ukraine. Today, as never before, we need joint
decisive actions by the international community against
terrorist organizations and those who control them.
Let me summarize my statement with the words of
our President:
“We stand for peace, but we accept the enemy’s
challenge. We will defend our homeland as true
patriots. We will do everything to stop the pain
and suffering, to return peace to each Ukrainian
family — from Lviv to Luhansk, from Chernihiv
to Kerch. Having united our efforts, we will defend
our freedom.”
In this struggle for Ukraine, for Europe and,
ultimately, for the Charter of the United Nations, we
count on the Council’s solidarity and actions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to make a number of substantive
comments. However, by way of introduction, I would
like to again revisit the topic of what took place in
Mariupol and the fact that the Security Council was not
in a position to condemn or speak to that tragedy.
A number of my colleagues have referred to
this, including my Ukrainian colleague. Even when
compared to his usual standards, he has really misstated
the position of the Russian Federation. First, we always
condemn all attacks on all civilians, and we mourn the
deaths of all civilians. This is quite different from the
authorities in Kyiv, who say they mourn the deaths of
civilians but clearly indicate which civilians and from
which regions. The fact that hundreds of individuals

S/PV.7368

are dying from Ukrainian rockets and snipers does
not interest them. They continue to view Donbas as
Ukrainian territory. If one does not consider it to be
Ukrainian territory anymore, one should just say so
clearly. That would simplify things.
Secondly, we always condemn the deaths of
innocent people, and we stood ready to do so in the case
of Mariupol as well. The fact that we were not able to
do so was the result of the sloppy diplomacy conducted
by a number of our colleagues using methods they have
resorted to in the past with respect to the Ukrainian
crisis, when they have come up with wording that
is quite clearly unacceptable to one member of the
Security Council. Have they ever condemned the
inhumane statements that we hear from the authorities
in Kyiv? Not once. Why is it that they all fixate on the
statements of one leader of the self-defence formations
and insist that we have to condemn them? It is quite clear
that we are not acting fairly here, because a statement
condemning what happened in Mariupol would have
been adopted in just a few minutes, just as we adopted a
statement condemning what took place in Volnovakha,
which we immediately agreed to.
Thirdly, we have always been in favour of objective
investigations in such cases. Of course, one does not
want to bring to the Security Council the work of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring Mission. In this
case, however, it seems to us that the members of the
Monitoring Mission did not act appropriately. The
members of the Mission, which included individuals
from the United States, took a look the site of the
tragedy in a very cursory way and then immediately
came up with a statement. That runs counter to the
traditional and agreed methods of work of the OSCE.
Again, in this situation we see a case in which tragic
events have clearly been exploited for political ends.
Allow me to now move on to the more substantive
part of our discussion. Regrettably, our meeting here
today reminds us of a great many previous meetings,
although the focus is perhaps a little different than
before. Many colleagues today have focused on the
statements made by the self-proclaimed Donetsk
People’s Republic. I remind Council members that
Donbas has been shelled for months by Ukrainian
rockets and artillery. Therefore, it is quite clear that we
cannot expect conciliatory statements from the leaders
of the Donetsk People’s Republic. They have been
trying for month to push the rockets and artillery of the

15-0222217/19

S/PV.7368

Ukraine

Ukrainian forces back far enough so that they could not
threaten Donetsk and Luhansk. That, too, is a goal of
the Minsk agreements and underscores the importance
of implementing them.
We have received much information here today, but
we need to look at the roots of the problem. We need to
understand what is meant by the thesis that the conflict
in eastern Ukraine cannot be resolved by military
means. We referred to this in the Security Council
during the early phase of the conflict. Ukrainian tanks
cannot simply move into Donbas. Unfortunately, that
was part of the Poroshenko peace plan, which, in
essence, demanded the capitulation of the self-defence
formations. That was the first step towards escalating
the conflict into a catastrophe. That is unacceptable, but
unfortunately we have recently seen it being pushed by
certain members of the Security Council. Some Council
members today have said that the insurgents and Russia
need to do this, that and the other, and then we could
begin the political settlement. That is the entirely
wrong approach. Serious political efforts need to be
undertaken right now. Direct dialogue between Kyiv
and the east need to be set up. It is necessary to put an
end to the game of hide-and-seek with the Constitution,
which needs to be discussed at a all-Ukraine level.
Today, Mr. Feltman said that Mr. Poroshenko had
agreed to a return to the Geneva format. Frankly, I am
not familiar with the fact that Russia had agreed to a
change in the format, but as far as I know Moscow is
very flexible when it comes to the format. We stand
ready to work in any format that would have a chance
of yielding genuine progress in favour of a settlement.
I wish to underscore, however, no discussion regarding
one format or another should serve as a pretext to
move away from direct dialogue between Kyiv and the
representatives of the regions, first and foremost the
east.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The representative
of Ukraine has requested the floor for a further
statement. I give him the floor.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): My country has been
mentioned once again. Ukraine has always presented
facts and figures, confirmed not only by other national
competent authorities, but also by many independent
observers and missions of international organizations
on the ground. Today, we also have a list of questions
on the 16 battalions and other groups. I urge the Council
to compare the figures. At the last Council meeting

18/19

26/01/2015

(see S/PV.7365), 9,000 Russian troops were mentioned.
Today, we have calculated that there are around 12,000
troops, 235 tanks, 720 armoured combat vehicles and
263 artillery systems. It would be much easier for us
if we received any explanation from the Russian side
about what they are doing in the sovereign territory of
Ukraine. It would be much easier for all of us to solve
the problem if they immediately withdrew those forces
and their presence in Ukraine, pursuant to the Minsk
agreement.
What we have heard instead from the Russian
representative in the Council today is nothing but the old,
arid and constantly repeated magic mantra — fictions
about coup d’etats, Bandera and Shukhevych fascists,
anti-Semites, oppression of the Russian language,
ignoring the rights of the Donbas population, and so on.
But not even once have Ukraine and the world received
even a brief and meaningful message of condolence from
Russia for the victims killed by its own mercenaries in
Mariupol or Volnovakha. Instead, we see how Russia
helps the Russian-speaking population of Donbas: by
exterminating it with Grad shelling.
I call again on the Russian Federation not to
play with words or to turn Council deliberations into
theatre. We have a lot of proof of its direct and indirect
aggression in Ukraine. We are still restrained in calling
for the Council’s full recognition that Russia is the
aggressor, but that cannot last long. Russia is a sponsor
of terrorism in Ukraine. We advise Russia to stop and
to do what was agreed in Minsk.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The representative
of the Russian Federation has requested the floor to
make a further statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I am a little surprised at our Ukrainian
colleague has begun to argue using concepts that I did
not voice during my comments in the Council today.
But it is good that he he has remembered them and that
he deems it necessary to continue to argue about things
that are simply not subject to argument, concerning
Stepan Bandera and other related matters.
I am, however, puzzled by something else. I am
gratified by the fact that our Ukrainian colleague has
assimilated the English language and that he speaks it
so well, but I am just stunned by the fact that he has
forgotten his Russian, because only a few moments ago
I explained the thrust of the problem facing the east.
Instead of simply accepting that and building a political

15-02222

26/01/2015

Ukraine

position based on it, we hear the same old propaganda.
That is quite regrettable.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. The

S/PV.7368

Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 3.15 p.m.

15-0222219/19
