UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1994/1039
9 September 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

REPORT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL MISSION TO BURUNDI
ON 13 AND 14 AUGUST 1994
Letter of transmittal
Letter dated 7 September 1994 from the members of the Security
Council Mission to Burundi addressed to the President of the
Security Council

We have the honour to transmit herewith the report of the Security
Council’s fact-finding mission to Burundi, which took place on 13 and
14 August 1994. The report is submitted to the Security Council in accordance
with a decision taken by the Council during informal consultations on
11 August 1994.

94-35666 (E)

130994

(Signed)

Karel KOVANDA (Czech Republic)

(Signed)

Ibrahim A. GAMBARI (Nigeria)
(Chairman)

(Signed)

Vasiliy S. SIDOROV (Russian Federation)

(Signed)

Karl F. INDERFURTH (United States
of America)

/...

S/1994/1039
English
Page 2

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
On 11 August 1994, the Security Council, in informal consultations, decided
that members of its mission to Mozambique should proceed to Burundi for a twoday fact-finding mission. The mission arrived at Bujumbura in the morning of
13 August 1994.
2.
The mission was led by Mr. Ibrahim A. Gambari, Permanent Representative of
Nigeria to the United Nations. Members of the mission were Mr. Karel Kovanda
(Czech Republic), Mr. Vasiliy S. Sidorov (Russian Federation) and
Mr. Karl F. Inderfurth (United States of America).
3.
The mission held very useful meetings with most of the important leaders of
the country, as well as with heads of political parties and members of the
diplomatic corps. Meetings were also held with representatives of
non-governmental organizations and with other dignitaries (see annex I).
Members of the mission remained in close contact and consultation with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Burundi,
Mr. Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah.
4.
The members of the mission would like to express their appreciation and
gratitude to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and his staff
for the valuable assistance rendered to them during the visit to Bujumbura, as
well as to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Mozambique,
Mr. Aldo Ajello, for having provided an aircraft for travel to and from Burundi.

II.

BACKGROUND TO THE CRISIS

5.
Since independence on 1 July 1962, Burundi has witnessed a series of
political and ethnic upheavals which have resulted in hundreds of thousands of
deaths and very large numbers of refugees. In October 1966, King Ntare V was
overthrown, ending the monarchy and the King’s system of appointing alternately
Hutu and Tutsi prime ministers. Colonel Michel Micombero took power and
consolidated Tutsi control over the Government and the army. An estimated
100,000 people, mainly Hutu, were killed in massacres in 1972. In
November 1976, Micombero was ousted by Colonel Jean-Baptiste Bagaza, whose 1977
land reforms considerably weakened the traditional Tutsi-dominated feudal
structure. In September 1987, Colonel Bagaza was overthrown in a bloodless
coup d’état led by Major Pierre Buyoya. A year later, a Hutu revolt broke out
in the north of the country leaving about 20,000 people dead by the time the
army restored calm.
6.
In the early 1990s, a process of democratization began in Burundi. The
first multi-party elections took place on 1 June 1993. Mr. Melchior Ndadaye, a
Hutu and President of the Front pour la démocratie au Burundi (FRODEBU),
obtained some 65 per cent of the vote and thus became the first democratically
elected president of the country. On 21 October 1993, President Ndadaye was
killed by renegade troops of the Tutsi-dominated army during a failed
coup d’état. Other public figures were also murdered. It is estimated that

/...

S/1994/1039
English
Page 3

during the coup attempt and its aftermath at least 50,000 persons, Hutu and
Tutsi, were killed.
7.
President Cyprien Ntaryamira, his successor, was elected by the Parliament
of Burundi in January 1994. He was killed on 6 April 1994, together with the
President of Rwanda, Juvénal Habyarimana, when the plane they were travelling in
crashed after a rocket attack near Kigali airport. Both were returning from a
regional peace conference held in the United Republic of Tanzania. Following
the tragic events, the Constitutional Court of Burundi declared Mr. Ntaryamira’s
election unconstitutional because he was not elected by popular vote. In
accordance with the Constitution, the speaker of the Parliament of Burundi,
Sylvestre Ntibantunganya, became Interim President.
8.
The constitutional problem facing Burundi’s leadership was to protect the
results of the June 1993 elections without having to organize new popular
elections, which would have been not only very costly but also ill-timed taking
into consideration the turmoil that followed the October 1993 coup attempt.
Negotiations to resolve the issue of the presidential succession and to
introduce institutional reform started on 30 May 1994. On 11 July 1994, a day
before the official deadline and with no hope for an agreement on the
presidential succession, the Constitutional Court of Burundi extended for three
months the interim period.
9.
The long history of political turmoil in Burundi has been characterized by
large-scale ethnic strife between the Hutu majority, comprising some 85 per cent
of the population, and the Tutsi minority, traditionally holding most of the
senior positions in the State administration, the army, education and business.
Even today, it is estimated that between 90 and 95 per cent of the security
forces is composed of Tutsi. Mr. Ndadaye was the first Hutu president in the
history of Burundi.

III.

ACTION BY THE SECURITY COUNCIL

10. On 25 October 1993, the Security Council deeply regretted and strongly
condemned the acts of violence and the loss of life caused by the perpetrators
of the military coup. It demanded that they desist forthwith from taking any
action that would exacerbate tension and plunge the country into more violence
and bloodshed, which could have serious implications for peace and stability in
the region. The Council demanded, among other things, that all acts of violence
be ceased, the whereabouts and fate of government officials be revealed, and all
prisoners released, with a view to immediately reinstituting democracy and
constitutional rule in Burundi. It was the view of the Council that those
responsible for the violent death of the President and of members of the
Government of Burundi, and for other acts of violence, should be brought to
justice (S/26631).
11. The Security Council requested the Secretary-General to monitor and closely
follow the situation in Burundi, in association with the Organization of African
Unity (OAU). Appreciation was expressed for the dispatch of his Special Envoy,
Mr. James Jonah, who visited Burundi from 27 to 29 October 1993. The Council
was briefed on the outcome of the Special Envoy’s mission during informal
/...

S/1994/1039
English
Page 4

consultations and by a letter from the Secretary-General dated 2 November 1993
(S/26745).
12. On 16 November 1993, the Security Council reiterated its condemnation of
the abrupt and violent interruption of the democratic process initiated in
Burundi and demanded the immediate cessation of acts of violence. It welcomed
the appointment by the Secretary-General of a Special Representative for
Burundi, and authorized the dispatch of a small United Nations team to Burundi
for fact-finding and advice with a view to facilitating the efforts of the
Government of Burundi and OAU to restore democratic institutions, rebuild
confidence and stabilize the situation (S/26757).
13. Following the relative stabilization of the political situation in the
country, including the resumption of the work of the legislature and the
appointment of President Ntaryamira in January 1994, the Secretary-General
initiated action to establish a fact-finding team which, inter alia, was also
expected to conduct an investigation of the attempted October 1993 coup d’état
and the subsequent massacres. The preparatory fact-finding mission, composed of
Mr. Siméon Aké (Côte d’Ivoire) and Mr. Martin Huslid (Norway), took place from
22 March to 20 April 1994. The report of the mission was transmitted to the
Secretary-General on 24 May 1994, but, to date, has not been made public or
shared with the Security Council.
14. The tragic events in Rwanda did not fail to have a negative impact in
neighbouring Burundi. Following reports that the situation in the country was
rapidly deteriorating, the Security Council, on 29 July 1994, supported the
political dialogue in Burundi aimed at reaching an early agreement on the
presidential succession. It called on all parties to reach rapidly a settlement
based on democratic principles, and condemned those extremist elements who
continued to reject negotiations and sought to block progress towards a peaceful
solution. The Council demanded that all parties cease immediately any
incitement to violence or ethnic hatred (S/PRST/1994/38).

IV.

OBSERVATIONS OF THE MISSION

15. The fact-finding mission of the Security Council to Burundi focused its
attention on three major issues: the political, security and humanitarian
situations.

A.

Political situation

16. There is an urgent need to resolve the question of the nomination of a
definitive president. On 12 August 1994, an agreement was reached between the
political parties supporting the Interim President (the Majority) and the
political parties united in the mainly Tutsi opposition to the Majority (the
Opposition), according to which the negotiations on the presidential succession
would be completed by 26 August 1994 or shortly thereafter. The selection of a
president would become an essential stabilizing factor in Burundi. However,
while the Majority preferred an executive with strong powers, the Opposition
sought to limit the prerogatives of the head of State. One of the main points
/...

S/1994/1039
English
Page 5

of disagreement remains, indeed, the procedure of reaching decisions at the
State level, since the Opposition insists that it should be given a virtual veto
power on all major decisions.
17. At present, extremist elements within the Majority and the Opposition are
playing a destabilizing and negative role. As a result of their influence and
action, serious civil unrest situations have developed, resulting in death and
destruction of property. Various campaigns carried out by extremists, the
latest being known as the "dead city" campaign, have not only contributed to a
deterioration of the situation in Burundi, but also to the further delay of the
negotiations.
18. The extremists’ counter-productive actions are causing serious concern
among moderates within the Majority and the Opposition who favour isolating
them. Although the Majority does not feel that extremist elements compose the
bulk of the Opposition, it is allegedly these who would occupy leading posts in
it. On the other hand, the Opposition accuses prominent figures of the Majority
of not being able to solve the problems of the country and of preparing for war
against the Tutsi minority.
19. The absence of a democratic tradition in Burundi and the unwillingness to
seek compromises has also rendered more difficult the task of those who are
actively seeking a successful conclusion to the negotiations. There is indeed
the urgent need to strengthen the democratic institutions in the country in
order to enable a sound and stable Burundi to weather any future political
crisis.
20. Government administration in Burundi virtually collapsed after the
October 1993 coup d’état. Although some kind of power-sharing agreement had
been reached at the beginning of July 1994 in the negotiations on the
territorial administration of Burundi, there is basically none existent outside
Bujumbura in the countryside. It remains divided along ethnic lines.
Currently, the Opposition is supposed to administer Bujumbura and six other
provinces, while the Majority kept nine provinces under their administrative
control. Repeated killings of or violence against administrators and their
structures remain a major obstacle to the reconciliation and democratization
process.
21. Military leaders of Burundi maintain that the army is the most stable, and
a "positively neutral", institution in the current political environment in the
country. They are ready to give advice to politicians if needed. The military
is aware that within their rank and file certain elements favour extremist
political views. Almost 70 per cent of the military personnel had relatives who
were killed during periods of ethnic strife.
22. While the military and the Opposition expressed the view that the army was
able to ensure the security of the country, the Majority argued that the army is
inextricably associated with the Tutsi ethnic minority. Therefore, it favoured
a basic military reform and reorganization of the armed forces so that they
would acquire a true national character. According to government officials and
foreign diplomats, the reform of the armed forces is an extremely sensitive

/...

S/1994/1039
English
Page 6

issue. Any attempts to promote rapid and radical reform within the armed forces
could have destabilizing effects and ominous consequences.
23. The Majority and the Opposition felt positive about the United Nations and
OAU presence in the country; however, different perceptions continue to exist
regarding the scope of their operations. While some members of the current
Government indicated the need to strengthen urgently the OAU presence in Burundi
with additional military observers who could monitor the armed forces, the
military leaders, including Burundi’s Minister of National Defence, emphasized
that the current size of the OAU mission in the country was sufficient.
24. At the time of the mission’s visit, imprecise news agency reports indicated
the possibility of a United Nations military presence in Burundi. These reports
provoked different reactions from the Majority and the Opposition.
Representatives of the Opposition expressed strong sentiment against it and
stated that a deployment of foreign troops in Burundi would be regarded as an
aggression by the country’s military and receive the appropriate response.
Therefore, any international presence in Burundi should be limited to a
humanitarian role. Representatives of the Majority, cognizant of the
Opposition’s probable reaction, were cautious on the military presence but open
to a larger involvement of the international community in Burundi. Some of
their leaders clearly favoured military personnel involvement in the defence of
Burundi’s democratic institutions.

B.

Security conditions

25. Insecurity and a general breakdown of law and order characterize the
security situation throughout the country. Rumours of impending coups have
circulated in Bujumbura on a regular basis. As a consequence, Burundi’s capital
has remained tense and many foreign residents have chosen to leave the country.
Repeatedly, the military has been called in to resolve security problems. The
Interim President has invested time and energy in calling for calm, and has
encouraged displaced persons to return to their homes. Transborder broadcasts
from Rwanda inciting ethnic hatred have had dire consequences for the security
situation in Burundi. In addition, ethnically-motivated crime and other serious
violations of the law often remain unpunished. Criminal activities have
increased and there are a number of organized criminal groups operating in the
country.
26. In this context, it was stressed that impunity from justice is one of the
most serious problems Burundi is facing. The judicial system has virtually
ceased to exist in most of the country. The absence of a functioning judicial
system is a serious impediment to progress in political negotiations and to
easing political and ethnic tensions. The delay in efforts to bring to justice
the perpetrators of the violence during the October 1993 coup d’état and its
aftermath and the virtual state of impunity for criminal acts are lowering the
barriers to criminal conduct, including that of political extremists, and
affecting both ethnic communities. The general feeling that might is right and
that power is exerted through the barrel of a gun has to be countered by
measures aimed at strengthening law and order and reviving the appropriate

/...

S/1994/1039
English
Page 7

judicial institutions in the country. The international community has been
requested to assist in reforming the collapsed judicial system in Burundi.
27. A matter of serious concern was the transborder refugee flow and the
existence of large numbers of internally displaced persons. These include
thousands of refugees from Burundi who had fled to Rwanda in the aftermath of
the October 1993 events and have now returned to Burundi because of the crisis
in Rwanda. They also include those Rwandese who were fleeing either the
massacres or the advancing Rwandese Patriotic Front (RPF) forces, and those
currently fleeing from the former humanitarian protected zone into northern
Burundi after the withdrawal of "Operation Turquoise". It includes further
long-term refugees returning to Rwanda from Burundi. These massive population
movements have a clearly negative impact on the prevailing security situation in
the country.
28. Occasional clashes between refugees, displaced persons and residents have
been reported, particularly in the northern provinces of Burundi. The presence
of armed elements of the interhamwe militia and former soldiers of the Rwandese
government forces among the refugees and along the Burundi border, as well as in
camps located in the territory of Zaire, has further aggravated the security
situation. Burundi’s military leaders insist that the Government of Zaire
should disarm elements of the former Rwandese government forces in its territory
and move them away from the border with Burundi.
29. The existence of armed activist groups, some of them heavily politicized,
some anarchist, independent or just criminal, and some opposed to the national
army, which is perceived as a Tutsi army, also affects the security situation.
While armed Hutu groups were perceived by the Tutsi minority as a threat to
their very survival, Hutu extremists saw them as a way to protect themselves
from the army. Although the Government undertook some successful initiatives to
disarm such groups, suspicion and mistrust remain. In addition, the Opposition
still alleges that the presidential coalition is supplying arms to pro-Majority,
paramilitary units operating inside the country, while the Majority suspects
that the Opposition is obtaining weapons from RPF in Rwanda.
30. For the first time in many years, foreigners have become the target of
attacks. On 13 August 1994, a field worker of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) was killed in the northern part of the
country. The diplomatic community and their properties in Bujumbura have become
the target of attacks by extremists and their followers. Representatives of the
humanitarian relief organizations and of non-governmental organizations have
expressed concern regarding the security of their personnel, particularly the
concern that, following the assassination of a UNHCR field worker, renewed
attacks against United Nations and other expatriate personnel may be committed.

C.

Humanitarian crisis

31. The dimension of the humanitarian crisis facing Burundi is daunting.
According to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, there are
approximately 550,000 persons in need of humanitarian assistance in addition to
some 250,000 Hutu refugees from Rwanda, as well as 270,000 refugees on the
/...

S/1994/1039
English
Page 8

Zairian side of the border and about another 270,000 persons from Burundi in
southern Rwanda; amounting to a total of over 1.3 million persons in need of
assistance in Burundi and its vicinity.
32. Representatives of the Majority and the Opposition welcomed an expanded
role of the United Nations in diffusing Burundi’s humanitarian crisis. In this
context, it was noted that the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
supported the establishment of an operational airlift capability at Bujumbura
for humanitarian relief efforts. This operational base would greatly assist
efforts to prevent a repetition of the tragic events that engulfed Rwanda. It
would also testify to the readiness of the international community to act
responsively in a humanitarian emergency situation. The base would be located
at Bujumbura airport and serve as a delivery and distribution centre of
humanitarian relief to Burundi, eastern Zaire and southern Rwanda.

V.

CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS

33. The situation in Burundi demands urgent attention by the international
community. The Security Council has a particular responsibility to follow
developments in Burundi closely and to recommend measures promoting
reconciliation and stabilization of the situation in the country. The two major
political forces in Burundi are aware that international attention, as
manifested in the mission of the Council, has already had a positive impact on
political developments in Burundi and could be a continuing restraining factor
for extremists on all sides of the political spectrum.
34. Since the need to sustain and enhance international humanitarian efforts in
Burundi and to promote national reconciliation there remains high on the
international agenda, the following is recommended:
(a) Continuation by the international community to encourage the
establishment of stable democratic institutions in Burundi, including the
nomination of a definitive president;
(b) Establishment of an operational airlift capability located at
Bujumbura airport for the distribution of humanitarian relief assistance to
Burundi, eastern Zaire and southern Rwanda;
(c) Preparation for and convening of an international conference dealing
with the crisis and the problems of the subregion;
(d) Provision of immediate assistance to restore the collapsing judicial
system of Burundi;
(e) Periodic high-level and high-visibility visits by international
officials and representatives to Burundi;
(f) Efforts to induce Zairian authorities to disarm the militia elements
and soldiers of the former Rwandese government forces in their territory, and to
move them away from the border with Burundi;

/...

S/1994/1039
English
Page 9

(g) Deployment of human rights observers throughout the country, provided
there is an improvement in the security situation in Burundi;
(h) Bringing to justice perpetrators of the October 1993 attempted
coup d’état and the subsequent massacres, and investigation of violations of
international humanitarian law in Burundi as appropriate (possibly by an
International Tribunal to be established);
(i) Strengthening of the office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Burundi.

/...

S/1994/1039
English
Page 10

Annex I
Programme of the fact-finding mission of the Security Council
to Burundi

Saturday, 13 August 1994
1100 hrs

Briefing by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah

1130 hrs

Meeting with the Minister of External Relations and Cooperation,
Mr. Jean-Marie Ngendahayo

1300 hrs

Working lunch

1500 hrs

Meeting with Minister of National Defence, Colonel Gedeon Fyiroko

1600 hrs

Meeting with the Prime Minister, Mr. Anatole Kanyenkiko

1700 hrs

Meeting with the Army Chief of Staff, Colonel Jean Bikomagu

1800 hrs

Meeting with the Interim President, Mr. Sylvestre Ntibantunganya

1930 hrs

Cocktail hosted by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral

Sunday, 14 August 1994
0900 hrs

Meeting with representatives of the Majority

1100 hrs

Meeting with representatives of the Opposition

1300 hrs

Working lunch with representatives of non-governmental
organizations

1500 hrs

Meeting with members of the Forum of the Negotiations

1600 hrs

Meeting with members of the diplomatic corps

1700 hrs

Press conference

/...

S/1994/1039
English
Page 11

Annex II
List of official contacts

1.

Government of Burundi
Mr. Sylvestre Ntibantunganya, Interim President
Mr. Anatole Kanyenkiko, Prime Minister
Mr. Jean-Marie Ngendahayo, Minister of External Relations and Cooperation
Col. Gedeon Fyiroko, Minister of National Defence
Col. Jean Bikomagu, Chief of Staff (Army)

2.

Political parties and organizations
Mr. Shadrack Niyonkuru, President, Parti du peuple (PP)
Mr. Ernest Kabusnemeye, President, Rassemblement du peuple burundais (RPB)
Mr. Jean-Marie Ngendahayo, President, Front pour la démocratie au Burundi
(FRODEBU)
Mr. Charles Mukasi, President, Union pour le progrès national (UPRONA)
Mr. Cyrille Sigejeje, President, Ralliement pour la démocratie et le
développement économique et social (RADDES)
Mr. Vital Kanjoli, Secretary-General, Parti pour le redressement national
(PARENA)
Mr. Terence Nsanze, President, Alliance burundo-africaine pour le salut
(ABASA)
Mr. Vincent Ndikumasabo, President, Parti social démocrate (PSD)
Mr. Antoine Nijembazi, President, Forum of the Negotiations
Archbishop Simon Namwana, Co-President, Bureau of the Forum of the
Negotiations
Mr. Vincent Kubwimana, Co-President, Bureau of the Forum of the
Negotiations

/...

S/1994/1039
English
Page 12

3.

Diplomatic corps

The mission of the Security Council met with the ambassadors of the
following United Nations Member States:
Belgium
China
Egypt
France
Germany
Rwanda
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
United States of America
Zaire
The mission met also with the representatives of the Holy See and of the
European Union.
4.

Non-governmental organizations
Mr. Steven Shepelwich, Action-Aid
Ms. Dominique Raffray, International Action against Hunger
Ms. Graziella Godain, ASF France
Mr. Luc Boydens, Belgian Red Cross
Mr. Steve Loegering, Catholic Relief Services
Mr. Charles Bernimolin, International Federation of Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies
Mr. Jacques Godon, International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies
Ms. Suen Lampell, International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies
Mr. Patrick Girault, Handicap International
Mr. Javier Gabaldon, Médecins sans frontières (Belgium)
Mr. Jerome Delorry, Médecins sans frontières (France)
/...

S/1994/1039
English
Page 13

Mr. Alain Pierre, Médecins sans frontières (France)
Mr. Patrice Richard, Médecins sans frontières (France)
F. Tholly, Médecins sans frontières (France)
Ms. Brenda Hickey, OXFAM (United Kingdom)

-----
