140

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

of international protection by considering accessions
to relevant instruments for the benefit of refugees, the
effective implementation of these instruments and the
scrupulous observance of humanitarian principles with
respect to the granting of asylum and the non-refoulement of refugees;
7. Commends the increasing number of contributors to the High Commissioner's programmes and, emphasizing the need for a wider sharing of the financial
burden, calls upon Governments to provide him with
necessary funds to attain the objectives of his humanitarian programme.
63rd plenary meeting
29 November 1978

33/47.

National experience in promoting the eooperative movement

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2459 (XXIII) of 20 December 1968, 3273 (XXIX) of 10 December 1974 and
31/37 of 30 November 1976, and Economic and
Social Council resolution 1668 (LII) of 1 June 1972,
Bearing in mind that the establishment and growth
of co-operatives is one of the important instruments
for the full economic, social and cultural development
of all members of society,
Recognizing the necessity of training and educational
programmes at various levels for the growth, diversification and professionalization of the management of
co-operatives,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on national experience in promoting the co-operative movement; 22
2. Reiterates the necessity of an international exchange of experience as a contribution to the growth
and diversification of the co-operative movement;
3. Stresses the role of co-operatives in the development of weaker sections of the community and in
over-all social and economic advancement, particularly
in developing countries;
4. Recognizes that co-operatives are an important
means of increasing employment opportunities for
women and integrating them, as active members of
society, into the development process;
5. Stresses also the important social role of cooperatives in involving people at the grass-roots level
in the planning and decision-making which affect their
daily lives;
6. Invites Member States, relevant specialized
agencies and other United Nations organs to pay special attention to the training and education aspects of
the co-operative movement at the local, national and
international levels;
7. Also invites Member States, relevant specialized
agencies and other United Nations organs to submit
follow-up reports on their experience in promoting
the co-operative movement, referring especially to
the participation of women in the co-operative movement and to the role of co-operatives in achieving
over-all social and economic development;
22 E/1978/15

and Corr.2.

8. Invites those Member States which have not
already done so to submit reports on national experience in promoting the co-operative movement;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session, through
the Economic and Social Council, a follow-up report
on national experience in promoting the co-operative
movement, referring especially to the participation of
women in the co-operative movement and to the
role of co-operatives in achieving over-all social and
economic development, based on data already available
and on additional contributions from Member States
and relevant specialized agencies;
I 0. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-sixth session the item entitled "National
experience in achieving far-reaching social and economic changes for the purpose of social progress"
and to consider under this item the follow-up report
of the Secretary-General on national experience in
promoting the co-operative movement.
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978
33/48.

World social development

The General Assembly,

I
Recalling its resolutions 2542 (XXIV) of 11 December 1969 containing the Declaration on Social
Progress and Development and 2771 (XXVI) of
22 November 1971 and 31/84 of 13 December 1976
on the world social situation,
Recalling also its resolutions 2626 (XXV) of 24 October 1970 containing the International Development
Strategy for the Second United Nations Development
Decade, 3201 (S-Vl) and 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May
1974 containing the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974 containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States and 3362 (S-VII) of
16 September 1975 on development and international
economic co-operation,
Convinced that the improvement of the living conditions of peoples, particularly in the developing countries, depends on their rapid economic and social
progress,
Considering, however, that the desired pace of socioeconomic progress in the developing countries is
hindered because of the magnitude of their economic
difficulties arising from the unjust international economic order which has existed hitherto,
Considering also that the world socio-economic
situation is characterized by the deterioration of the
economic situation in the developing countries and
the continually widening gap between the developing
countries and the developed countries,
Considering further that the objective of increasing
the real national income of the developing countries
and their social progress necessitates far-reaching
changes in the structure of the existing world economic system as provided in the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order,

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committ-

------------~

Desiring to achieve the rapid and complete elimination of the obstacles to the economic and social progress of peoples, particularly colonialism, neo-colonialism, racism, racial discrimination, apartheid, aggression, occupation and foreign domination and all
other forms of inequality and exploitation of peoples,
Mindful of the social aspects of the elaboration
of the new international development strategy,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 23
prepared on the basis of information provided by
Governments, on national experience in achieving farreaching social and economic changes for the purpose
of social progress,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of all nations
to pursue freely their economic and social development and to exercise full and complete sovereignty
over all their natural resources;
2. Welcomes the active and growing participation
of all members of society in economic and social development programmes;
3. Reaffirms also that the elimination of all forms
of dependence and oppression such as aggression,
foreign occupation, colonialism, apartheid and racial
discrimination constitutes a prerequisite for world social and economic progress;
4. Urges the developed countries to make the
structural changes included in the resolutions on the
new international economic order aimed at eliminating
the inequities and imbalances characterizing international economic relations which are necessary for the
progress of the developing countries;
5. Requests the Economic and Social Council, the
Commission for Social Development, the Committee
for Development Planning and the regional commissions to pay particular attention to studies and analyses
concerning national experience in achieving far-reaching social and economic changes for the purpose of
social progress;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to bear in mind,
in preparing the reports on the world social situation,
the close relationship between economic development
and social development, and the over-all situation of
the developing countries in international economic
relations;
7. Considers that the new international development strategy should duly stress the need for each
country to define within the context of its development
plans and priorities an appropriate social development
policy taking account of its socio-economic structure
and its degree of development;
8. Requests the Commission for Social Development to consider at its twenty-sixth session the report
on the world social situation in the context of the
work on the new international development strategy
and to transmit its recommendations to the body entrusted with the preparation of that strategy;
9. Requests the Committee for Development Planning and the regional commissions, in their contribution to the work of the body entrusted with the preparation of the new international development strategy,
to ensure that social development objectives are integrated in the strategy in accordance with the relevant United Nations resolutions;
2a E/1978/19

and Add.I.

-------~----

141

II
Recalling resolution 3273 (XXIX) of 10 December 1974, in which the General Assembly reaffirmed
the right of every State to carry out social and economic changes for the purpose of social progress and
the need to continue the study of national experience
in that field, and Economic and Social Council resolution 2074 (LXII) of 13 May 1977, in which the
Council requested the Secretary-General to submit a
report on the findings of various specialized agencies
and organs of the United Nations system relating to
the distribution of national income,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General24 on the equitable distribution of national income,
l. Affirms that the social progress of all countries
implies, among other things, a just and equitable distribution of income at the national and international
levels;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session, through
the Economic and Social Council, a report on the
conclusions of the study requested in Council resolution I 086 (XXXIX) of 30 July 1965.
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978
33/49.

Preservation and further development of
cultural values

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3026 A (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, 3148 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973
and 31 /39 of 30 November 1976,
Noting the resolutions adopted by the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization at its nineteenth session,
held at Nairobi from 26 October to 30 November
1976, in particular its resolutions 4.12 on preservation
and presentation of the cultural heritage of mankind
and 4.13 on cultural development,25
Taking into account the results of the meeting of
the Committee of Experts on the Preservation and
Further Development of Cultural Values, convened
by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization at Warsaw from 24 to 28 October 1977,26
Noting with appreciation the report of the DirectorGeneral of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization on the preservation and
further development of cultural values,27
Noting with satisfaction that, since the adoption of
General Assembly resolution 3148 (XXVIII), the attention of Governments and international organizations, in particular the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, has been focused
on the importance of the preservation, renewal and
continuous creation of cultural values and that cooperation between States has been developing to
this end,
2 4 F/1978/29 .
2

~ United Nations Educational, Scientific and Ctbltural Organ1zat1on, Records of the General Conference, Nineteenth Session, vol. I, Resolutions, pp. 46-53.
2 6 See the final report of the Committee of Experts (CC'-77/
CONF.614/COL.9).
21 See A/33/157.
•
