S/2014/946

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 December 2014
English
Original: French

Letter dated 16 December 2014 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
In its resolution 2154 (2014), adopted on 8 May 2014, the Security Council
noted with deep appreciation how Captain Mbaye Diagne of the Unit ed Nations
Assistance Mission for Rwanda and of Senegal, saved, unarmed and in the face of
extreme danger, hundreds, or perhaps even a thousand Rwandans from death during
the 1994 genocide. Recognizing with deep regret how the family of Captain Diagne
never received any expressions of appreciation from the United Nations
Headquarters for the sacrifices he made, the Council decided to create “the Captain
Mbaye Diagne Medal for Exceptional Courage”, to be awarded to those military,
police, civilian United Nations personnel and associated personnel who demonstrate
exceptional courage, in the face of extreme danger, while fulfilling the mandate of
their missions or their functions, in the service of humanity and the United Nations.
In the resolution, the Security Council also requested that I establish the
design of the Medal and submit in due course to the Council the modalities for
determining how the recipients of the Medal shall be nominated and chosen, based
on the criteria set forth in the resolution. I am submitting herewith the design of the
Medal (see annex).
It is my intention to apply the following criteria of eligibility for determining
the recipients of the Medal. Pursuant to resolution 2154 (2014), the Medal shall be
awarded to uniformed and civilian personnel in United Nations peace operations
who have demonstrated exceptional courage after 8 May 2014. The Medal may be
awarded posthumously.
The acts demonstrating exceptional courage must be undertaken while
fulfilling the mandate of a mission or while performing official functions, in the
service of humanity and the United Nations, and in the face of extreme danger
(armed or unarmed violence, natural disaster or health or medical emergency). The
individual must have acted well beyond the call of duty and in such a remarkable
and exceptional manner as to clearly stand out from other United Nations personnel
in similar circumstances. The Medal will be awarded without prejudice to the award
of other distinctions, including the Dag Hammarskjöld Medal.
The Medal may not be awarded to persons facing credible allegations of
serious misconduct or criminal acts, including violations of international human
rights law and international humanitarian law.
Any United Nations uniformed or civilian personnel, or any person or entity
outside the Organization may submit a nomination to the head of the relevant
14-67948 (E)

311214

*1467948*

311214

S/2014/946

United Nations peace operation. The head of mission shall appoint a panel —
representing various components of the mission — to assess the nomination based
on the above-mentioned criteria and to submit a recommendation to him or her. If
the head of mission determines that the nominee has met the criteria, he or she shall
submit a recommendation to the Under-Secretaries-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Political Affairs and Field Support, with details as to the exceptional
nature of the act, indicating whether the individual was wounded or killed, and
stating the outcome of the act. If possible, the recommendation should be
accompanied by witness statements, official records, photographs and other relevant
documentation.
The relevant departments will assess the nominations and provide me with
their recommendations, on the basis of which I will award the Medal.
In the event that a Medal is awarded, I will present it in a formal ceremony to
be held on International Day of United Nations Peacekeepers. The representatives of
all States Members of the United Nations and relatives of the recipient will be
invited to the ceremony.
A uniformed recipient may wear the Medal in accordance with the applicable
regulations of his or her national Government. Civilian recipients may wear the
Medal with appropriate civilian clothing. In the event of a posthumous award, the
relatives may display the Medal at events commemorating the recipient or members
of United Nations peace operations.
The Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations will be responsible
for the administrative aspects of the award.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

2/4

14-67948

S/2014/946

Annex to the letter dated 16 December 2014 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council

14-67948

3/4

S/2014/946

4/4

14-67948
