V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

assistance to Cape Verde as envisaged in the reports of the
Secretary-General, 194
Noting that Cape Verde, one of the least developed as
well as the most seriously affected island country, and a
member of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought
Control in the Sahe!, is in need of substantially increased
assistance to overcome its economic backwardness.
Stressing the urgent need to implement the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly. in which the programme
of assistance to Cape Verde was endorsed,
Recognizing the strenuous efforts deployed by the Government and the people of Cape Verde in the process of
their socio-economic development, despite existing
constraints,
Recognizing also the essential role of both short-term and
long-term international assistance in the process of development of Cape Verde,
Gravely concerned that the expected harvest for 1982 has
been lost as a result of the failure of the seasonal rains and
the recurrence of drought,
Taking into account the results of the United Nations
Conference on the Least Developed Countries, in particular
the Substantial New Programme of Action for the 1980s for
the Least Developed Countries, adopted on 14 September
1981, 195
Taking into account also the country programme of Cape
Verde presented to the Conference, in which a five-year
plan as well as long-term planning were delineated,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General, 196
to which was annexed the report of the review mission
which visited Cape Verde in implementation of General
Assembly resolution 35/104,
I. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the efforts deployed in the process of mobilizing resources for the implementation of the programme of assistance to Cape Verde;
2. Expresses Its gratitude to States, international, regional and interregional organizations and other intergovernmental organizations for their contribution to the
programme of assistance to Cape Verde;
3. Calls the attention of the international community
to table 10 in the annex to the report of the SecretaryGeneral, which contains a statement of projects that have
not yet been financed;
4. Urges States, international, regional and interregio!lal organizations ~nd o~her intergovernmental organizations to extend and mtens1fy substantially their assistance
with a view to implementing the programme of assistance
to Cape Verde as soon as possible;
5. Invites the international community, in particular
donor countries, to take appropriate and urgent measures
to supp?rt the realizati~m of the Five-Year Plan of Cape
Verde, m accordance with the Substantial New Programme
of Action for the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries;
6. Requests the organizations, organs and bodies of the
United Nations system to continue and to increase their
assistanc~ to _Cape Verde, to co_-operate with the SecretaryGener~l m his efforts to mobilize resources for the impleme~tat_10n of the programme of assistance and to report
penod1cally to the Secretary-General on the measures they

194

N33/167 and Corr. I. A/34/372 and Corr. I, A/35/332 and Corr. I.

N36!265.
195
Report of the United Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries, Pans, 1-/4 September /98/ I United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.82.1.8), part one, sect. A.
196
A/36/265.

143

have taken and the resources they have made available for
assistance to that country;
7. Calls upon the international community to continue
to contribute generously to all appeals for food and fodder
assistance made by the Government of Cape Verde or on
its behalf by the specialized agencies and the other competent organizations of the United Nations system to help
it cope with the critical situation in the country;
8. Draws once again the attention of the international
community to the special account which was established at
United Nations Headquarters by the Secretary-General, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 32/99, for the
purpose of facilitating the channelling of contributions to
Cape Verde;
9. Invites the United Nations Development Programme,
the United Nations Children's Fund, the World Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World Bank
and the International Fund for Agricultural Development to
continue, through their governing bodies, to consider the
special needs of Cape Verde and to report the decisions of
those bodies to the Secretary-General by 15 July 1982;
10. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for implementing the programme of development
assistance to Cape Verde;
(b) To keep the situation in Cape Verde under constant
review, to maintain close contact with Member States, the
specialized agencies, regional and other intergovernmental
organizations and the international financial institutions concerned, and to apprise the Economic and Social Council,
at its second regular session of 1982, of the current status
of the special programme of economic assistance for Cape
Verde;
(c) To arrange for a review of the economic situation
?f Cape V:erde and t~e progress made in organizing and
1mplementmg the special programme of economic assistance
for that country and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 198/

36/212. Assistance to the Comoros
The General Assembly.
Recalling its previous resolutions on assistance to the
Comoros, particularly resolution 31/42 of 1 December 1976,
in which it urgently appealed to the international community
to assist the Comoros in an effective and continuous manner
so as to enable it to face successfully the critical situation
resulting from the economic difficulties experienced by that
newly independent country,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General, 197
to which was annexed the report of the review mission
which he sent to the Comoros,
Taking note of the special problems confronting the Comoros as a developing island country and as one of the least
developed countries,
Noting the priority which the Government of the Comoros
has assigned to the questions of infrastructure, transport and
telecommunications,
Noting further the grave budgetary and balance-of-payments problems facing the Comoros.
"'' A136/268 and Corr I

144

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

Recalling its resolution 35/97 of 5 December 1980, in
which it reiterated its appeal to the international community
to assist the Comoros in overcoming its financial and economic difficulties,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the steps he has taken to mobilize assistance for the
Comoros;
2. Notes with satisfaction the response by various Member States and organizations to its appeal and that of the
Secretary-General for assistance to finance, in whole or in
part, a number of projects identified in the annex to the
report of the Secretary-General of 3 November 1977 198 and
in subsequent reports; 199
3. Notes with concern, however, that the assistance thus
far provided continues to fall short of the country's urgent
requirements and that a substantial amount of assistance is
still urgently required to carry out the projects identified in
the annexes to the reports of the Secretary-General;
4. Reiterates its appeal to Member States, regional and
interregional organizations and other intergovernmental
bodies to provide effective and continuous financial, material and technical assistance to the Comoros to help it
overcome its financial and economic difficulties, in particular its budgetary and balance-of-payments deficits;
5. Urges Member States to give special consideration
to the inclusion of the Comoros in their bilateral and multilateral programmes of development assistance and, in
cases where assistance programmes for the Comoros are
already in force, to expand them, wherever possible;
6. Also urges the international community to take fully
into account, in providing assistance, the priority which the
Comoros gives to projects in the fields of infrastructure,
transport and telecommunications;
7. Invites the United Nations Development Programme,
the United Nations Children's Fund, the World Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World Bank
and the International Fund for Agricultural Development to
bring to the attention of their governing bodies, for their
consideration, the special needs of the Comoros and to report
the decisions of those bodies to the Secretary-General by
15July 1982;
8. Appeals to the international community to contribute
to the special account which was established at United Nations Headquarters by the Secretary-General, in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 32/92 of 13 December
1977, for the purpose of facilitating the channelling of contributions to the Comoros;
9. Requests the appropriate organizations and programmes of the United Nations system to increase their
current programmes of assistance to the Comoros, to cooperate closely with the Secretary-General in organizing an
effective international programme of assistance and to report
periodically to him on the steps they have taken and the
resources they have made available to assist that country:
10. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to the Comoros;
(b) To keep the situation in the Comoros under constant
review, to maintain close contact with Member States, the
specialized agencies, regional and other intergovernmental
organizations and international financial institutions con-

1
••
199

A/32/208 and Add. I and 2.
A/33/170, A/34/361 and Corr. I, A/35/394, A/36/268 and Corr. I

cerned, and to apprise the Economic and Social Council.
at its second regular session of I982, of the current status
of the special programme of economic assistance for the
Comoros;
(c) To arrange for a review of the economic situation
of the Comoros and the progress made in organizing and
implementing the special programme of economic assistance
for that country in time for the matter to be considered by
the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session.
/03rd plenary meeting
17 December 1981

36/213. Assistance to Nicaragua
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 34/8 of 25 October 1979 and 35/
84 of 5 December 1980 concerning assistance for the reconstruction of Nicaragua,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
assistance to Nicaragua,200
Noting with satisfaction the support which Member
States, the specialized agencies and other organizations of
the United Nations system have given to the efforts of the
Government of Nicaragua for the reconstruction of the
country,
Considering that, despite the efforts of the Government,
the economic situation of Nicaragua has not yet returned
to normal and continues to require the assistance of the
international community,
I. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his efforts regarding assistance to Nicaragua;
2. Urges all Governments to continue contributing to
the reconstruction and development of Nicaragua;
3. Requests the bodies of the United Nations system to
continue and increase their assistance in this sphere;
4. Recommends that Nicaragua should continue to receive treatment appropriate to the special needs of the country until the economic situation returns to normal;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session on the progress
made in the implementation of the present resolution.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1981
36/214. Assistance to Zambia
The General Assembly,
Recalling previous United Nations resolutions concerning
the question of assistance to Zambia, in particular Security
Council resolution 329 (1973) of 10 March 1973 and Economic and Social Council resolutions 2012 (LXI) of 3 August I976 and 2093 (LXIII) of 26 July 1977, which
commended the decision of the Government of Zambia in
1968 to implement progressively United Nations mandatory
sanctions against Southern Rhodesia in accordance with
Security Council resolution 253 (1968) of 29 May 1968,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 455 ( 1979) of
23 November 1979 and General Assembly resolution 33/
131 of 19 December 1978, in which the Assembly strongly
endorsed the appeals made by the Council and the SecretaryGeneral for international assistance to Zambia,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General, 201
to which was annexed the report of the review mission
"" A/36/280.
·'"' A/36/270-S/1467.s and Corr. I.
